The rest of this paper is organized as follows; Section 2 pre- sents the related work. The proposed hash function is pre- sented in Section 3. Section 4 contains the security analysis of MNF-256. The performance analysis of MNF-256 is pre- sented in Section 5. The paper is concluded in Section 6.

which leads to 2k colliding messages after only k trials of the collision search. If a hash function has an iterative struc- ture, the attack can be always maintained. The actual com- plexity, however, depends on the size of the internal state.

256 and RIPEMD-320 respectively. In 1998, MD4 was completely broken by Dobbertin [18]. In 2004, a team of researchers led by Wang, announced collisions in MD5 as well as collisions in other hash functions including MD4, RI- PEMD, and HAVAL-128 [19]. In 2005, they presented attacks against SHA-0 and SHA-1 [20].

The bit variance test consists of measuring the impact on the digest bits by changing input message bits. Bits of an input message are changed and the corresponding message digests (for each changed input) are calculated. Finally from all the di- gests produced, the probability Pi for each digest bit to take on the value of 1 and 0 is measured. If Pi(1) = Pi(0) = 1/2, for all digest bits i 1 6 i 6 n, where n is the digest length, then the hash function under consideration has attained maximum per- formance in terms of the bit variance test. Therefore, the bit variance test actually measures the uniformity of each bit of the digest. Since it is computationally difficult to consider all input message bit changes, we have evaluated the results for only up to 513 files and found the following results:

In order to hide message redundancy, Shannon introduced dif- fusion and confusion. Diffusion means spreading out of the influence of a single plaintext bit so as to hide the statistical struc- ture of the plaintext. Confusion means the use of transforma- tions that complicate dependence of the statistics of ciphertext on the statistics of plaintext. They are two general principles to guide the design of practical cipher, including hash function. For the hash value in binary format, each bit is only 1 or 0. So the ideal diffusion effect should be that any tiny changes in initial conditions lead to the 50% changing probability of each bit.

We have performed the following diffusion and confusion test. A message is randomly chosen and hash value is gener- ated, then a bit in the message is randomly selected and toggled and a new hash value is generated. Two hash values are com- pared with each other and the number of changed bit is counted as Bi.

Moreover, in order to investigate the collision resistance capability of the hashing approach, we have performed two collision tests. In the first experiment, the hash value for a randomly chosen message is generated and stored in ASCII format. Then a bit in the message is selected randomly and tog- gled and thus a new hash value is then generated and stored in the same format. Two hash values are compared with each other and the number of character in this format with the same value at the same location in hash value is counted. The abso- lute difference of the two hash result is calculated by using the following formula:

