Although the development of machine intelligence is far from simulating all the cognitive competence of our brains, still it is absolutely possible to peel the driving activity from people's cognitive activities and then make the machine finish some low-level, complicated and lasting driving cognition by simulating our brains. The goal of driving is to replace drivers and free them from boring driving activities. Based on some studies on unmanned driving, this paper summarizes and analyzes the background, significance, research status and key technology of unmanned driving and the research group also introduces some research on brain cognition of driving and sensor placement of intelligent vehicles, which offers more meaningful reference to push the study of unmanned driving.

In recent years, the rapid development of artificial intelli- gence, cognitive science, automatic control, ground mapping, sensor technology and other fields promotes the essential change of automobile industry. The symbol of wheeled mobile robots in the subversive creation of cars is ready to go ahead. The wheeled mobile robots would rather realize the goal of intelligent driving and free human drivers from low-level, complicated and lasting driving activities and change the interactive mode between cars and drivers fundamentally not emphasize the change of vehicle dynamics properties. Thus, cars will become personal mobile sharing tools.

In 2013, Mckinsey Company listed twelve subversive tech- nologies that can decide the future economy, among which advanced robot technologies and unmanned driving technologies are included [3]. The research and development of unmanned cars rely on the newest research results of artificial intelligence, cognitive science, automatic control, sensor technology and other research fields, which is the best stage for tests. Unmanned driving technologies have become a research hotspot that attracts the attention of governments both at home and abroad, scientific research institutions and enterprises because of its great signifi- cance in civil use, military use and research fields.

Europe began to research unmanned driving cars in the middle of the 1980s. Its research emphasized the unmanned driving cars as independent individuals and its normal travel in the traffic steam instead of the cooperation of cars and roads. Since 1987 Europe has carried out a program called PRO- METHEUS (Programme for a European Traffic of Highest Efficiency and Unprecedented Safety) [12]. In 1994, un- manned driving cars called VaMP and VITA-2 joined the normal traffic steam on highways and the max speed has reached to 130 km/h [13].

Since 2006, Europe began to hold European Land-Robot Trials (ELROB) to test the properties of land robots including unmanned driving cars under real situations. It has held three tests of military scenes and two ones of civil scenes. The military themes included reconnaissance and surveillance, autonomous navigation, fleet transport and so on while civil scenes included safety, fire protection, and disaster control and so on. In the later tests, the autonomous cars and its task completion advanced year after year [8]. ELROB has played an active part in promoting the research of unmanned driving technologies in Europe [9].

In 2008, National Natural Science Foundation put forward a great research plan of cognitive computing of the audio-visual information which raised a great mass fervor of unmanned driving research [13e16]. Since 2009, NNSF has held six future challenge matches of intelligent vehicles. The match contained basic ability tests and autonomous driving tests. Basic ability tests included testing mechanical properties and recognizing static traffic lights, traffic signs and traffic markings. And the autonomous driving tests demanded the cars to finish stipulated movements along the given lines, which included urban road tests, country road tests and unique road tests.

Our research group also carried out some experimental verification on the problem of cars' sneaking into the actual traffic flow. In 2011, the Red Flag HQ3 unmanned vehicles of National University of Defense Technology completed a 286 km unmanned driving test on highways from Changsha to Wuhan, in which its average speed was 87 km/h with manual intervention of 2.24 km [17]. In 2012, the Lion N0.3 of Institute of military traffic finished a 114 km unmanned driving test on highways from Tai lake toll station in Beijing to Dongli toll station in Tianjin, in which it completed 12 autonomous over- taking and 36 changing tracks. Its total unmanned driving time was 85 min without manual intervention. The average speed was 79.06 km/h and the max speed was 105 km/h [18].

Compared with the advanced development of unmanned driving technologies in foreign countries, China still has some deficiencies. First, these motor enterprises lack passion and commitment on unmanned driving technologies. The cooper- ation between the motor enterprises and scientific research institutions ends with providing cars platforms and cooperat- ing mechanical reformation, which lacks deep involvement. Second, the unmanned driving tests to actual traffic flows are limited to normal highways and short of unmanned driving experimental verification under complicated situations.

Although the development of machine intelligence is far from simulating all the cognitive competence of our brains, still it is absolutely possible to peel the driving activity from people's cognitive activities and then make the machine finish some low-level, complicated and lasting driving cognition by simulating our brains. By navigating our brains to finish the formalization of driving cognition and making sure the accu- racy and completeness of driving cognition, people feel hopeful to get the approaching or even better human driving abilities with the help of the machines' characteristics of not being absent-minded and never feeling tired. In the process of the formalization of brain cognition of driving, our brains should take the responsibility of audio-visual cognition, attention, memory, thinking, and decision-making, interaction and other tasks during driving. The driving coordination skills are assigned to automation and vehicle dynamics which are like cerebella so they carry on the results of automatic and intelligent control of cars.

Some important experience, knowledge and scenes are stored in our long-term memory. This function corresponds to the driving map and driving operation model. The driving map records precisely all the geographic information related to driving which includes lane width, traffic signs, static obsta- cles and so on. The driving operation model contains line tracking model, car following model and lane-changing model, which is the operating standards of unmanned driving cars. The driving map and the driving operation model form priori knowledge of the unmanned driving system together. The contents related to the current activities in the long-term memory are extracted by computing center and thinking and then delivered to our working memory. This process corresponds to the mapping module of driving map of unmanned driving cars.

Our working memory stores some important information related to the current activities temporarily. Some of the in- formation comes from the real-time information extracted from our sensory memory and some comes from the priori knowledge extracted from our long-term memory. The real- time information and the priori knowledge are integrated with each other and then provide an information pool for the computing center and thinking to analyze and make decisions. And at the same time, the unmanned driving system has a public data pool which shows the expression of the formal- ization of driving cognition. Multiple, heterogeneous and real- time driving information provided by sensor information processing modules and driving priori knowledge from driving maps are expressed together in a formal language of driving state, which shows the driving state beyond the unmanned driving cars entirely.

Besides, our brains also have character and emotion and other functional regions. Character shows the drivers' driving style at different times and in different places. As for un- manned driving, the driving style is decided by parameters of driving operation modules. Emotion is creatures' unique attribute. Anxiety and fear will affect people's driving behav- iors and hinder safe driving. The realization of driving brains does not include emotion and cannot guarantee the safety of driving behaviors.

The types, quantities and its installation sites of the sensors are different on different unmanned driving test platforms and its information processing modules are also various. The granularity of the information provided by different driving maps does not have a stipulated standard. Thus the quantities and ports of the modules which constitute the unmanned driving system are different. We consider driving brains as the core and make the driving cognition formalized and also use the formalized language of driving cognition then we can design universal software framework of unmanned driving. In

We are devoted to researching and experimenting the un- manned driving all the year round and we have finished 20 times of unmanned driving experiments on highways from Beijing to Tianjin, the total mileage of which reaches to 20,000 km. It is the first time to realize the unmanned driving successfully on domestic inter-city highways and also accept the third party's test from some authorities. We are among the best candidates in the third, fourth and fifth China's intelligent vehicles' future challenge matches. In August 2015, we completed an unmanned driving test of passenger cars on inter-city highways of Zhengzhou-Kaifeng city expressway in Zhengzhou, Henan province, the length of which was 32 km. The passenger car reached to the end successfully without manual intervention and accepted the third party's test of authorities.

