nodes directly [1,2]. Hence, these applications are categorized as internet of thing (IOT) systems where the communication between the GWN of service providers, users and sensor nodes take place through the internet during the access data process. Although only the legitimate user that proves his/her identity can be accessed the WSNs resources, the large number of sensor nodes within an unse- cure and unattended environment leads to open the door to a set of security weaknesses. Therefore, an adversary can exploit the exist- ing weaknesses to break the sensor nodes privacy and control the communication channel between the network components during the data capturing and access process.

(1) Lu et al. [19] scheme; (2) Jung et al. [20] scheme; and (3) Xiong et al. [21] scheme. The reason to choose these schemes is that they are exemplifying the last proposed authentication schemes for WSNs in the reported investigation with the following design spec- ifications: (1) the symmetric encryption methods and hash func- tions are used as basic operations for verification process; and

The performance analysis of the Lu et al. [19] and Jung et al. [20] schemes observes that both schemes contain impractical GWN search operations (the GWN entity has to perform the exhaustive search operations to determine the random user identity that gen- erated by the GWN entity itself including the time of decryption operations). Besides, the performance analysis of Xiong et al. [21] scheme detects that the scheme cannot avoid the unnecessary computation costs in case that the GWN entity received wrong pseudonym identity, the timestamp that is sent within the login

In addition, the security analysis finds that the Lu et al. [19], Jung et al. [20] and Xiong et al. [21] schemes are vulnerable to the smart card loss attack since the user identity and password are not strength with low entropy [22,23,25]. Also all of these schemes cannot support the sensor node anonymity which natu- rally will lead in future to loss the user anonymity feature also. In addition to, theses authentication schemes cannot support the real-time communication between the user entity and the sensor node, where all the authentication sessions between them must be through the GWN entity.

The AAA-WSN scheme is presented under a set of valid and widely accepted assumptions that will be used in the security ana- lyzing section: (1) an adversary can retrieve the smart card informa- tion based on the power-consumption methods that have presented in Refs. [26,27]; (2) all authentication messages that are generated by the communication entities throughout the scheme execution are transmitted through unsecure communication channels. There- fore, an adversary can intercept, delete, capture, and retransmit the authentication messages over these channels; (3) an adversary can act as a legitimate communication entities where an adversary knowns how the AAA-WSN scheme can be performed; (4) the user registration stage is accomplished though secure channels between the user and the GWN where the GWN is considered as trusted node for the service provider; (5) the sensor node activation stage is accomplished though secure channels between the Sj and the GWN; and (6) the symmetric encryption and decryption functions use high entropy parameters. Thus, its hard an adversary to guess these parameters in polynomial time.

asks the Ui to execute the login authentication stage; (5) computes XV4i = h (r4||SKi||T4); (6) checks whether the XV4i matches with the V4i that has received from the Ui. If not satisfied, the Sj termi- nates the authentication session. Otherwise, the verification stage passes successfully and the Sj considers the Ui is a legitimate user. Then, the Sj performs the following steps: (1) generates random

the authentication session; (3); computes XV3j = h (r5||SKj||T5); (4) checks whether the XV3j matches with the V3j that has received from the Sj. If not satisfied, the Ui terminates the authentication session. Otherwise, updates the Ci = Ci + 1, the verification stage is passed successfully and the Ui considers the Sj is a legitimate sensor node.

The AAA-WSN scheme executes a set of one-way hash functions to generate new virtual identities [IDip, IDis, IDi, and IDj] whether instead of the UIDi or SIDj. The values of the virtual identities are changed in each time the login authentication stage is executed. Therefore, it is impossible for unauthorized entity to get or retrieve the real identity from authentication messages that are exchanged between the authentication entities.

Most of the proposed authentication schemes that support the anonymity and perfect forward secrecy features always susceptible to de-synchronization attack. These schemes create new identities for the authentication entities to be used within the next authen- tication session using different methods such as pseudonym iden- tity, cryptographic methods and hash functions, etc. Therefore, the synchronization of these new identities between the authentica- tion entities sides is crucial to successful the execution of their next authentication session. So the adversary always looking to break this synchronization by somehow method to prevent the autho- rized entities to login ever since.

Scenario 3: assume the adversary prevents the response authentication message {M3} flow. In this scenario, although the adversary has stopped the current authentication session, but will not affect completely on the synchronization between the GWN and the Sj entities. The values of SNj, Kj, SS0j, SS1j, and IDj already have been updating in both side.

The Xiong et al. [21] scheme is based on two-factors authentica- tion method, where the scheme is adopted to check the validity of user identity (IDi) and the password (PWi) information. In this scheme, the user Ui chooses the IDi and PWi then generates bi as a random number through the user registration stage. Then the Ui calculates the Ci = h0 (IDi||PWi||bi) to transmit the values of Ui and Ci through a secure channel to GWN. After that, the GWN executes the following steps: (1) generates ui, a, b as random num- bers; (2) computes Ki = h1(IDi||x||ui) where x is a secret key of

The replay attack means that the adversary attempts to eaves- drop on the authentication messages and retransmit them to the authentication entities without doing any modification. In general, the methods that are used to resist this type of attack: (1) the ran- dom numbers; and (2) the current timestamps. The main idea of these methods is to maintain the synchronization between the authentication entities and guarantee the freshness of the authen- tication messages.

In first scenario, the AAA-WSN scheme has used timestamp method where validity of T0 is verified before computing any other terms. While in the second scenario, the validity of SSj + 1 are ver- ified before computing any other terms. In addition to, all other authentication messages of login authentication stage are used the challenge-response verification method. Therefore, AAA-WSN scheme is resistant to replay attack.

In the first scenario, an adversary cannot compute the CT0, and V1i. An adversary cannot compute the CT1, and V1j in second sce- nario. While in the third scenario, an adversary cannot compute the V2j. So, an adversary not be able to impersonate any of the authentication entities.

In the AAA-WSN scheme, all authentication messages that are exchanged between the UI, GWN and Sj entities are protected by a set of secret values such as Ki, SKi, SKj, and SNi. However, the adversary cannot forge the authentication message without knowns these secret values. Therefore, AAA-WSN scheme is resis- tant to Man-in-the-middle attack.

Besides, the AAA-WSN scheme is the only scheme that can resist all the related popular attacks, while the other authentica- tion schemes suffer from the smart card Loss attack. In addition to, the Lu et al. [19] and Jung et al. [20] schemes are vulnerable to the de-synchronization attack. Therefore, the AAA-WSN scheme is a fully secure against security attacks and can satisfy all security features.

