of negative arc variables under the inclusion compared to other prime implicants. Theorem 5.1 (In Appendix) proves the correctness, a core is always deduced from a prime implicant, and the completeness, for any core we can find a prime implicant, of the core. For the example, two prime implicants exist:

The rational of targeted therapies is to specifically kill cancerous cells while pre- serving normal cells by the identification of drug targets that are essential for the viability of cancer cells. Synthetic lethality illustrates the problem of identification of drug targets based on network dynamics: two genes are said synthetic lethal if a mutation leading to the loss of either gene alone is compatible with viability but mutations in both genes lead to cell death [13]. Therefore, the inhibition of a syn- thetic lethal gene specifically kills the cancer cell carrying the mutation in the other gene [8]. The discovery of drug targets based on the synthetic lethality concept is mainly driven by the functionality of the cancerous cell. More specifically, the

In breast cancer, the synthetic lethal partners are the BRCA/PARP pair. During cell division, when errors occur while the DNA is replicated, the cell triggers DNA repair processes. BRCA and PARP are essential molecules activated in response to DNA damage and involved in two complementary DNA repair pathways. In cancer cell with BRCA-deficiency, the use of PARP inhibitors prevents any possibility of DNA-repair resulting in permanent DNA damage inducing apoptosis [8,15].

The necessary presence of arcs seems interesting to relate to drug resistance mechanisms. Indeed, one possible resistance mechanism is the acquisition of in- sensitivity to drug-induced apoptosis [10] meaning here that the marking of the apoptosis is never attained which is the case when one of these two arcs is deleted. Interestingly, it has been found that pharmacological inhibition of GSK3 attenuates DNA damage-induced apoptosis by PARP inhibitors thus forbidding the synthetic lethality mechanism [23]. However, no facts were found confirming that p53 muta- tion would provide resistance to PARP inhibitors. This indicates that the results proposed by the abductive inference would go further the concept of cores, notably by providing insights for the prediction of acquired resistance to drugs from the necessary present arcs.

