Euler diagrams have been used for many years and appear in applications in many areas, such as data storage and representation [1,2]. In order to formalize Euler diagrams it is useful to give them an abstract syntax which abstracts the essential diagram properties from non-essential concrete syntax details. The distinction between essential and non-essential depends upon the intended use of the diagram. A suitably chosen abstract syntax enables discussion of some diagram properties (such as nestedness, semantics, inference) without having to concern ourselves with irrelevant geometric and topological details (such as thickness of lines or the shape of contours).

A concrete Euler diagram is a certain type of drawing in the plane. Given such a drawing, one can capture its essential properties in various ways. One such abstract syntax which has been widely used encompasses information about which zones [8] (or minimal regions [7,13,15]) are present in the dia- gram. In this paper we suggest alternative abstract syntax and consider their advantages and drawbacks in the areas of diagrammatic properties (such as nestedness and drawability), semantic interpretation of diagrams, and diagram layout.

A concrete Euler diagram consists of a collection of (labelled) simple closed curves in the plane, called contours. A concrete region in a concrete diagram is a set of points in the plane. It is defined inductively, starting with the basic region of the diagram (the set of points in the plane) and the basic region of each contour (the interior of each of the contours). Then the complement, union and intersection operations enable the generation of all of the regions of the diagram.

This zone-wise description of an Euler diagram is given explicitly in [8,10] and is a streamlined version of the abstraction used in [14,15]. Note that here we give a more general theory, not imposing conditions such as the existence of a zone inside each contour. The decision of imposing such conditions can then be deferred until the application domain is chosen.

Using the zone-wise abstraction, algorithms for drawing concrete diagrams given abstract ones have been investigated [6,12,16]. The difficulties in draw- ing will depend upon the well-formedness conditions imposed (not allowing concurrent lines or triple points for example). Using different abstractions may allow us to identify when a certain condition is essential is order to draw a diagram.

