Abstract The World Wide Web has become the largest library through the history of the human- ity. Having such a huge library made the search process more complex as the syntactic search engines offer an overwhelming amount of search results. Vocabulary problems like polysemy and synonymy can make the search results of traditional search engines irrelevant to users. Such prob- lems trigger a strong need for personalizing the web search results based on user preferences. In this paper, we propose a new multi-agent system based approach for personalizing the web search results. The proposed approach introduces a model to build a user profile from initial and basic information, and maintain it through implicit user feedback to establish a complete, dynamic and up-to-date user profile. In the web search process, the model semantically optimizes the user query in two steps: query optimization using user profile preferences and query optimization using the WordNet ontology. The model builds on the advantages of the current search engines by uti- lizing them for retrieving the web search results. We present a detailed case study and simulation results evaluation to illustrate how the proposed model works and its expected value in increasing the precision of the traditional search engines and solving the vocabulary problems.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 re- views some related work. Section 3 describes the proposed model conceptual view, while Section 4 presents the model architecture in details. Section 5 presents a detailed case study and its simulation results evaluation. Finally, the research work presented in this paper is concluded in Section 6.

Finally, the most famous and effective approaches build a robust user profile from different resources. This profile con- tains all user preferences, and hence it is used in web search personalization [2,4]. The main disadvantages of these works are either they ignore the vocabulary problems or involve the user in enhancing and maintaining his profile.

To generate the final personalized search results, the three agents are interacting together through well-defined interfaces by exploiting one of the standard Agent Communication Lan- guages such as the Knowledge Query Manipulation Language (KQML) [16]. The user interacts with the Interface Agent by providing the search query and retrieving the personalized search results. In order to optimize the user query semantically to be sent to the Meta-Search agent, the Interface agent acces- ses the user profile to retrieve the user query-elated preferences and the WordNet to retrieve the related synonyms. Once the Meta-Search agent receives the optimized query, it interacts

with a set of syntactic search engines such as Google, Bing and Yahoo to retrieve and defuse the search results, and then it sends them back to the Interface agent. The final personal- ized search results are displayed to user by the Interface agent, which senses the user clicks to extract the user feedback implic- itly. Finally, the Interface agent sends the implicit feedback to the User Profiler agent to update the user profile. The follow- ing sections illustrate the internal components of each agent and show how they interact together.

After the personalized search results list comes from the Meta-Search Agent, they are passed to the Results Viewer component that displays them to the user. During viewing the results, the user may do some actions on the same docu- ment such as clicking one of the displayed links, bookmarking some page, and copying some text. These actions are sensed by the Feedback Extractor component, which translates them into a set of pairs {(Document D, {Action A})}, and then sends it to the Profiler Agent.

a set of term stems {T0, T1, T2,.. ., Tn}, and the query context domain D(Q(Ui)). As shown in formula (1), the corresponding optimized query Qe(Ui) is the union of the user query Q(Ui), the query-related preferences PPi, the query context domain D(Q(Ui)), and the WordNet synonyms of the query term stems WS(Q(Ui)).

The User Profiler Agent consists of two components namely Profile Builder and Profile Updater. The Profile Builder component is responsible for building the basic user profile through two steps. Firstly, it creates an initial user pro- file from the user basic information, which is provided by the user such as his name, gender, and location. Secondly, it asks the user to determine a list of domains to be ordered according to his interests. These domains represent the basic domains, which may be augmented gradually later during the search ses- sions according to the extracted implicit feedback. Then for each stem, the domain is obtained from the WordNet ontology.

the stem exists under its associated domain, the algo- rithm updates the stem weight. In case that the domain exists only, the algorithm adds the stem under this domain. In case that neither the domain nor the stem exist, the algorithm adds both of them.

In this paper, we presented a model for web search personali- zation based on multi-agent system technique. The model builds and maintains the user profile dynamically to keep it up-to-date. During the web search process, the query is opti- mized semantically using the user profile preferences and the WordNet ontology. Also, a detailed case study was presented to show how the proposed model increased the precision of both Google and Bing search engines when they were used by two users to search the web using the same query, but with different profiles. Besides, in the case study, both polysemy and synonymy problems were overcome by exploiting user prefer- ences and WordNet ontology respectively.

Kovacikova T, Petersen F, Pluke M, Alonso Alvarez V, Bartol- omeo G, Frisiello A, et al. Personalization and user profile standardization. European Telecommunications Standards Insti- tute (ETSI) workshop on personalization and user profile stan- dardization, at the ETSI Headquartes in Sophia Antipolis, France; 2009.

