Over the last two decades, advancements in the agricultural industry has been made through the application of data analytic tools and decision support systems (DSS), with noticeable impact in irrigation management, precision agriculture and optimal farm- ing [3]. Though these systems are very useful in offering structured analysis and information to the farmers in a step by step manner, difficulty in usage due to their sophisticated nature, especially for farmers with low literacy in developing countries is often times a challenge. Several systems exist, including related informal forums [4], social networks [5], and interactive voice response systems [6] where peers and experts interact with each other and exchange suggestions and opinions on issues raised by farmers. Govern-

Recently, an unprecedented growth of Data Force Analytics enabled utilisation of big data technologies and digital sensors to manage data efficiently. Adopting such an approach in the field of agriculture can bring many benefits to support decisions. Never- theless, data analytics still faces many challenges of handling extensive data and diverse data sets like semi-structured, unstruc- tured, and streaming data. Therefore, in such Data Force Analytics developments there will be a strong need to effectively utilise datasets to facilitate users in finding their needs efficiently and effectively e.g. a qualitative study in [28] points out a co-evolving tool to understand such needs/skills.

solution, enabling real-time monitoring and collection of sensor data in a seaport infrastructure. It is a web-based GIS application, which uses an open-source big data architecture to achieve its functionality. The system is deployed on the Puerto de La Luz sea- port and applied to data from two system sensors.

The Spatial Decision Support System (SDSS) is an extension of DSS application [31], which supports an improvement in decision-making compared to non-spatial data. In particular, SDSS in agriculture has a positive impact on improving decision making [32]. SDSS benefited from the greater public availability of spatial data and the more flexible software, which enables its integration/- modelling into the geographic information system [33]. In addi- tion, an open-source SDSS project known as MicroLEIS DSS [34] aids agriculture soil protection and land sustainability. It comprises valuable tools and techniques for decision-making in a wide range of agro-ecological schemes. This system builds on statistics, data- bases, neural networks, expert systems, Web technology, and GIS applications.

The SDSS for agricultural land management [35], helps in deci- sion making for the land management of food crops. It also aids in testing, validating and sensitivity checking of the decision models. The study revealed that SDSS is developed on Compromise Pro- gramming modules to produce spatial information integrated with fuzzy set and analytic hierarchy(AHP). SDSS utilises input informa- tion in operation, for instance, information from field experts and its applications.

I Application layer: This is the top most layer or tier present in the system. This tier provides presentation services; in simple terms, it is a layer that end users can access directly through a graphical user interface (GUI). This tier can be accessed through from various supported client devices e.g. desktop or mobile device. For the content to the displayed to the user, the relevant web-pages should be fetched by the web browser or other presentation component which is running in the client device. To present the content, it is essential for this tier to interact with the other preceding tiers.

(2) new user complaints; and (3) online weather datasets. Pro- viding direct access to these datasets is not ideal because a user who is maybe preparing to carry out an analysis may need to select the part of a dataset based on specific characteristics. Fil- tering giga-bytes of data at run-time is not a trivial task unless it is methodology indexed beforehand for analysis purposes. The persistency services carry out the necessary functions of importing, indexing, and storage of the datasets. This layer pro- vides enhanced scalability and performance to the data and storage tier.

	Data Integration and Storage layer: This is the third tier of the proposed architecture from the top and is majorly responsible for the storage, maintenance, and retrieval of application data. The application data is stored in a database and file server. Moreover, this layer supports data access logic and provides the necessary steps to ensure that only the data is exposed without providing any access to the data storage and retrieval mechanisms. This layer maintains data independent from the application server and the business logic. The data tier does this by providing an API to the System and Analysis Services layer. The provision of this API ensures complete transparency to the data operations, which are done in this tier without affect- ing the System and Analysis Services layer. For example, updates or upgrades to the components in this tier do not affect the System and Analysis Services layer.

Other datasets comprise User Profile and Login Info that includes the profile and login information of the users and user logs and activity history that contains the activities and logs of the Users. The layer also includes Agro Big Data Storage that con- tains the Historical Complain Dataset, the Online Farmer Complain and Expert Response Dataset. Search and Analytics Services in the Service layer interacts with this dataset in order to extract infor- mation from it.

The Information and Analysis Services layer contains back-end software components and provides authentication, persistency, and information services. The authentication is a RESTful web ser- vice that operates on top of the User Data Info dataset in the pri- vate cloud and authenticates the users. Depending on the authentication result, user access type, and privileges, the user is given access to the modules in the application layer.

Supervisor controls the overall system and has the option to create, edit and delete the argo-experts. The supervisor can create new argo-experts by adding their credentials and registration/ login information in the system. Upon registration system sends an automated email to the agro-expert.

This work has been supported by a Newton Institutional Links grant, ID 347762518, under the Newton-Mosharafa Fund ID 30812 partnership. The grant is funded by the UK Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy and Science and Tech- nology Development Fund (STDF) and delivered by the British Council. For further information, please visit www.newtonfund.ac. uk.

