Malaria is a global public health disease. Haematological and cytokine alterations are the major sources of its pathological conditions. Therefore, blood and serum of patients attending health centres were screened to investigate the effects of Plasmodium falciparum on the T-helper cell type 1 and blood cell parameters using Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay and automatic hematology analyzer respectively.

Malaria is still a life-threatening parasitic disease in many coun- tries worldwide, causing between 80 and90% morbidity and mor- tality in sub-Saharan Africa [1,2]. In this region, Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax are common human malaria parasites and the prognosis is severe [3]. The activities of their erythrocytic asex- ual stages in asymptomatic and symptomatic patients are impor- tant foci in the pathogenesis [4,5]. Infections in less immuned individuals, especially young children and pregnant women are always severe, resulting in anaemia, thrombocytopenia, leucopenia and other haematological disorders [4]. Most infected individuals are incapacitated for days due to recurrent clinical episodes attrib- uted to the release of malaria pigment (hemozoin) and other toxic factors such as glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) when the infected erythrocytes rupture [5].

P. falciparum was identified under oil immersion microscope. The estimation of parasitaemia was done by counting the number of parasites per 200 white blood cells (WBC) on blood films. Complete blood cell counts was conducted using an automatic hematology analyzer (Pentra ABX) and peripheral blood smears were per- formed for routine differential blood cellular quantification.

Cytokines are considered to act as double-edged swords in the pathogenesis of malaria, especially in P. falciparum infections [47,48]. The high levels of innate immune response in malaria infec- tion is driven by malarial pigment (hemozoin, Hz), and glycosylphos- phatidylinositols (GPIs) in the circulating monocytes and neutrophils, and resident macrophages [49,50,44]. In this study, plasma concen-

reticuloendothelial system that mediates stimulation of macrophage and intestinal iron absorption. This, however, decreases iron absorp- tion and enhances the release of hepcidin to the circulation, which its increased serum level is often associated with severe malaria anaemia [56,57]. Development of Th1 response can be antagonized indirectly by IL-10, which inhibits the production of proinflammatory cyto- kines. IL-10 induces B-cell proliferation. The inhibition of interferon

