Das et al. [8] described a method for extraction of features through binarization of images to enhance images retrieval and identification using content based image recognition. The authors tested their system using two public datasets with a sum of 3688 images. This method reduced the size of features to 12 regardless of the dimensions of image. The statistical measures (based on pre- cision and recall results) were adopted for the evaluation purpose. One disadvantage of this method is the misclassification of query images which would affect the performance of the retrieval com- pared to other existing approaches.

the textured image, while in the structured image, the shape is separated into various regions based on its nature. The first step of the foresaid test is applying F-ratio test and the passed images proceeded to the energy spectrum testing. Then if images suc- ceeded the two tests it was decided that these images are similar. Else, they are different. For validation and verification of the per- formance Mean Average Precision score was used.

Feng et al. [11] proposed an image descriptor (Global Correla- tion Descriptor) for texture and color feature extraction respec- tively so that they had the same influence on CBIR. Global Correlation Vector and Directional Global Correlation Vector were also proposed, they integrated the benefits of structure element correlation and statistics of histogram to describe texture and color features. Corel-10 K and Corel-5 K datasets were used for valida- tion, and the recall and precision were used for the efficiency evaluation.

In Zeng [12] a local structure descriptor is proposed for image retrieval. Local structure descriptor is created based on the local structures underlying colors; it has combined the color, shape and texture as a one unit for retrieval of images. In addi- tion, they proposed an algorithm for feature extraction which is able to extract local structure histogram using local structure descriptor.

Madhavi et al. [13] proposed an approach known as image retrieval using interactive genetic algorithm for calculating a high number of selective features then comparing of related images for these features. The approach was tested on a group of 10,000 general images to prove the efficiency of the proposed approach.

Ali et al. [14] Presented a CBIR approach using integration of Speeded-Up Robust Features (SURF) and Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT). The representations of these local features are used for retrieval because SIFT is robust to rotation and scale change, and SURF is more robust to illumination changes. The inte- gration of SURF and SIFT enhances the effectiveness of CBIR. The comparisons and evaluation were conducted on Corel-1500, Corel-2000, and Corel-1000.

One of the most commonly used meta-heuristics in optimiza- tion problems is the genetic algorithm. Genetic algorithm (GA) is a search algorithm which stimulates the heredity in the living things [15]. GA is very effective in finding the optimum solution from the search space [16].

[17] as a local search algorithm. The main idea of this algorithm came from the analogy that someone is climbing a hill and trying to move in any direction to find a way up for keeping his feet dry and the water level is raising through a great deluge. The great deluge algorithm when inserted in the genetic algorithm was an effective way to yield a good solution instead of using the genetic algorithm alone [18].

Color feature is an essential component for image retrieval. For huge image databases, image retrieval using the color feature is very successful and effective. Although color feature is not a persis- tent parameter, because it is subjected to many non-surface char- acteristics for example, the taking conditions such as illumination, characteristics of the device, the device view point [1,19,20]. The steps of the color feature extraction are shown below:

The shape feature extraction mainly aims to capture the proper- ties of the shape of the image items. This eases the process of shape storing, transmitting, comparing against, and recognizing. The shape features should be free of rotation, translation, and scaling [1,21,22].

grey level combined image. As a preprocessing step: noise reduced by using median filter. Median filter is beneficial to reduce salt and pepper noise and speckle noise [24]. Also, median filter has edge- preserving property it is used where blurring of edges is undesir- able [24]. Median filter with width w and length l algorithm is as follows:

Finally apply the canny algorithm to find the edges around the similar pixels (grouped pixels) [1]. In this work Canny edge detec- tion method was used for shape features extraction, edge based shape representation was used, which gives a numerical informa- tion about image, these information is constant, even the size, direction, and position of the objects in the image are changed. After applying canny edge detection method different shapes can be obtained which exists in the Ig image and then the shaped con- tent indices are extracted and stored in the database in form of fea- ture vector.

Generally, the GA starts by computing the fitness of each candi- date solution in the initial population. While stopping criterion is not met, the following processes are employed: (i) Select a solution for reproduction using some selection mechanisms (e.g. roulette wheel). (ii) Generate offsprings using crossover and mutation oper-

Before moving to the next generation, a local search algorithm is applied to improve a solution (chromosome) obtained from the genetic algorithm after the genetic operators are performed. This process makes the convergence of genetic algorithm faster. We then re-insert the resulted solution from the local search back to the genetic algorithm for the next generation. Then the process will proceed to the next generation and updates the population of chromosomes.

This work uses the Great Deluge Algorithm (GDA) for increasing the quality of solution (weight) through increasing the fitness number, which helps in enhancing the process of exploitation dur- ing the searching process. GDA is incorporated as a local search algorithm into the employed genetic search process to improve the exploitation process rather than the exploration process. A local search attempts to improve the quality of a solution while working as a perturbation operator.

