While epistemic games have been extensively studied in economics (in the so- called interactive epistemology area, see e.g. [3,2,8,5,9,11]) and while there have been few modal logic analyses of epistemic games both in strategic form and in extensive form (see, e.g., [22,10,8,18,26,14,23,24,4]), there exists no logic with a corresponding formal semantics for extensive form games which has been showed to be sufficiently general:

[10] a logic which enables to reason about the epistemic aspects of extensive games is presented. This logic deals with several game-theoretic concepts like the concepts of knowledge, rationality and backward induction. Nevertheless, all these notions are atomic propositions of the logic managed by an ad hoc axiomatization. Moreover, the logical approach to extensive form games proposed in [10] is purely syntactic: no model-theoretic analysis of extensive form games is proposed.

Ratend means that an agent i is rational at an end vertex (i.e. at some end vertex of the game) if and only if i chooses an action that maximizes his individual payoff. Note that in this case, rationality does not rely on any epistemic component.

According to constraint C6, agents will never forget their current uncertainty over strategies in every reachable vertex. In other words, C6 simply means that agents will always have a perfect recall of their past uncertainty throughout the game. According to constraint C7, agents are always aware of their future uncer- tainty over strategies in every reachable vertex. In other words, C7 means that agents will never be able to discard strategies and therefore learn as they advance through time.

We are not the first to provide a logical analysis of extensive games. Several logical systems have been proposed which support reasoning about this class of games. We here discuss some of these systems and compare them with our logic ELEG.

In addition to providing a complete axiomatization of our logic, we intend in future work to investigate some extensions of the logic ELEG. While the language of the logic presented here is restricted to reason about the future only, the current semantics can be extended to reason also about the past and every possible counter- factual situation. This represents another research direction that we also consider to study further.

