Abstract k-means algorithm is one of the basic clustering techniques that is used in many data mining applications. In this paper we present a novel pattern based clustering algorithm that extends the k-means algorithm for clustering moving object trajectory data. The proposed algo- rithm uses a key feature of moving object trajectories namely, its direction as a heuristic to deter- mine the different number of clusters for the k-means algorithm. In addition, we use the silhouette coefficient as a measure for the quality of our proposed approach. Finally, we present experimental results on both real and synthetic data that show the performance and accuracy of our proposed technique.

In this paper we propose a framework for clustering mov- ing objects that employ the famous k-means clustering algo- rithm [3]. The framework is composed of 4 phases; computation phase, selection phase, clustering phase, and analysis phase. In brief, in the computation phase, the moving object database (MOD) is reconstructed to represent new fea- tures in the data set by evaluating motion direction properties for each object. Then, in the selection phase we select distinct sets of similar patterns using the output features from compu- tation phase. Then, in the clustering phase we exploit the k- means algorithm. We use the output of the selection phase that is the number of dissimilar patterns to be the number of clus- ters for the k-means algorithm. In addition, inspired by the ef- fect of initial centroid choice on the clustering quality and its impact in creating dead centroids; we propose to initialize the centroids based on trajectory dissimilarity. We initialize each of the k clusters by a virtual segment; its coordinate is the average position of all segments of trajectories that belongs to this cluster (pattern), and its direction is the direction of the majority of the segments in the cluster. Then, to ensure quality of resulting clustering we use the silhouette coefficient [4]. The silhouette coefficient is a measure for the clustering quality that is rather independent of the number of clusters k. Our main contributions are:

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section2 pre- sents a literature survey of key related work. Section 3 defined the problem and presents our technical definitions. Section 4 presents our proposed clustering algorithm. Section 5 shows our experimental results. Finally, section 6 concludes the paper and proposes directions for future work.

There has been considerable research in the area of mining spatiotemporal data [5,6]. Clustering analysis has become an attractive research area and many successful approaches have been proposed. The generic definition of clustering is usually redefined depending on the type of data to be clustered and the clustering objective. Different and scalable clustering algo- rithms have been proposed in [7]. The k-means method is a widely used clustering technique; there have been a number

Definition. 3.1. A trajectory segment is a continuous directed line segment represented by the triple ((xi, yi, ti), (xj, yj, tj), dij), where (xi, yi, ti) and (xj, yj, tj) are the start and end positions , respectively, for the segment sij at time instances ti and tj, such that i 6 j, and dij is the direction of segment sij.

Selection Phase: After computing the direction list in the computation phase. We count the number of distinct directions traveled by our trajectory data set. We use this number as a heuristic initialization for the number of clus- ters in our algorithm. Note that at this stage the number of possible clusters is at most 8 representing the universe of D.

another similarity measure to refine our cluster members. This step will thus increase the accuracy obtained from our algorithm. In this refinement stage we start adding seg- ments to corresponding clusters based on the segment direction (orientation). We construct a cluster centroid as a virtual segment that has the same spatial orientation as

the performance experiment was conducted using synthetic data set generated by the Brinkoff generator which is com- monly used for generating realistic moving objects [17]. Using the generator, we simulated two dimensional trajectories of vehicles on the road network in the city of San Francisco. We measure the performance in terms of query processing time, and since all test datasets are relatively small in size, they fit into memory and no index structure is being considered. All

The second experiment studies the effect of changing seg- ment direction similarity percentage among trajectories on the clustering computation time for both the E-km and k- means algorithms. The goal of this experiment is to ensure that our approach performs well in all circumstances (large data sets, large k, different similarity percentages, and different number of movement patterns). The experiment shows that due to the decrease in the number of clusters as a result of increasing similarity percentage, k-means takes more time in clustering all objects. This is due to the fact that small number

Then, we measure the quality and accuracy of our proposed E-km algorithm through counting the number of dead cen- troids in the resulting clustering. In this test we use the silhou- ette coefficient [4] that tells if segments are well clustered or not. We compute the average silhouette coefficient of a cluster by simply taking the average silhouette coefficient of segments belonging to the cluster.

