The notion of the least fixed-point of an operator is widely applied in computer science as, for instance, in the context of query languages for relational databases. Some extensions of first-order classical logic (FOL) with fixed-point operators, as the least fixed-point logic (LFP ), were proposed to deal with problems related to the expressivity of FOL. LFP captures the complexity class PTIME over the class of finite ordered structures. The descriptive characterization of computational classes is a central issue within finite model

and also a normalization theorem for fragments of these systems. With this infinitary deductive system for LFPfin, we aim to present a proof theory for a logic traditionally investigated within the scope of FMT. It opens up an alternative way of proving results already obtained within FMT and also new results through a proof theoretical perspective.

In 1950, Trakhtenbrot proved a theorem that is considered the starting point of FMT. This theorem states that validity over finite models is not recursively enumerable, that is, completeness fails over finite models [17]. This result is based on an underlying assumption that any deductive system is of finite nature, that is, the notion of formal proofs is inherently finite, recursive. Such assumption is relaxed in the scope of proof theory for arithmetic.

to establish the consistency of first-order arithmetic through a proof-theoretical perspective. Inspired by this proof, here we will propose an infinitary natural de- duction system for FOL and LFP restricted to finite models, FOLfin and LFPfin, respectively, and we will prove soundness and completeness for them, and also a nor- malization theorem for fragments of these systems. With this infinitary deductive system for LFPfin, we aim to present a proof theory for a logic traditionally defined within the scope of FMT. It opens up an alternative way of proving results already obtained within FMT and also new results through a proof theoretical perspective. Moreover, with some restrictions, this deductive system can be used in a theorem prover to compute queries on relational databases.

In section 2, we will present a natural deduction system to FOLfin. Since FOLfin is an extension of FOL, all classical first-order inference rules are also part of our LFPfin infinitary natural deduction system. In FOLfin, we must also add a rule to deal with finite classical first-order models. In section 3, we will define LFP through its semantics and, in section 4, new rules to deal with the least fixed-point operator are introduced in order to define the LFPfin system. A normalization procedure for fragments of FOLfin and LFPfin will be showed in section 5. Conclusions will be at the end.

A normalization procedure is a rewriting process that transforms a derivation into another one through reduction steps. These reduction steps aim to eliminate all maximum segments, that is, formulas that represent some sort of redundancy. The endproduct of this process is a derivation in a normal form.

In this paper, we introduced an infinitary natural deduction system to the Least Fixed-Point logic restricted to finite models, LFPfin. This calculus is an extension of an infinitary system for the First-Order Logic restricted to finite models, FOLfin, that we also defined. We proved soundness and completeness of these systems, and a normalization theorem for fragments of them.

