genes in one experiment. Several genes provide inconsistent and noisy signals throughout the whole samples. Therefore, it is a time taking job to analyze all genes as a whole with a small sample size. As a result, a specific analysis is needed to identify the genes which indicate the patterns of expression interrelated with the disease state. So, an artificial intelligence-based diagnostic system has high significance in this genetic research. In the burgeoning of machine learning in various research areas, researchers take the help of var- ious classification techniques to classify the high dimensional microarray data [1]. Moreover, the gene expression datasets are high dimensional datasets having huge numbers of genes or fea- tures but with very fewer numbers of samples. This creates a great drawback in classifying these datasets. Thus, it is always a big chal- lenge for researchers to select the most significant genes in the high

dimensional microarray data that can help to reduce the computa- tional cost with classificational complexity [2]. Especially two methods are adopted by the researchers to select the significant genes i.e., feature selection and feature extraction. According to the feature extraction technique, the high dimensional feature set is transformed into a reduced lower dimensional feature set by using various linear and nonlinear methods [3]. In the case of the feature selection approach, a subset of the most significant attri- butes is picked up from the high dimensional microarray data by reducing the irrelevant features which have minimal impact on the performance of the learning model. The drawback of the feature extraction technique is the possibility of losing some useful data due to the total transformation of the actual data. Therefore, in this presented work both feature extraction and feature selection are considered for the betterment of the learning rate.

Additionally, the attribute selection [4], technique is divided of especially three types i.e., Filter, wrapper, and hybrid approach. According to the filter feature selection approach, each feature of the data set is evaluated by applying a statistic measure, then the subset of the most significant feature is selected. But in the wrapper approach, a classifier is used to select the most vital sub- set of features and here classification accuracy is considered to evaluate the most significant feature subset. Though a learning algorithm is considered to evaluate the best feature subset in the wrapper approach so the effectiveness of the wrapper approach is more than the filter approach but the filter approach is also widely accepted due to its less evaluation cost. In the case of the wrapper feature selection method, the combination of metaheuris- tic and machine learning approach is used to select the global best feature subset.

The rest of the work has the following alignments in terms of appearance. The provided model is analyzed in section 2. The back- ground approaches are covered in section 3. While the presented method is covered in section 4. Then the experimental setup is described in sections 5 and 6. Which include the experimentation

Initially, K-FS [48,49] approach is used to extract the most sig- nificant genes. In this method, each gene is associated with a rank. This technique selects up to 500 genes [50] among thousands of genes in the dataset. These preselected genes are forwarded to SC-MBO-BLS for getting the best gene subset.

