There is a significant advancement in the analysis of ultrasound imaging and now use of modern machine learning into the medical image analysis field, this art is more challenging for the researchers [1]. Computer Aided Diagnosis (CAD) has become one of the major research subjects in medical imaging and diagnostic radiology. In this research paper, the motivation and philosophy for early devel- opment of CAD are presented together with the current status and future potential of CAD. The general research framework proposed to further investigation and development. This framework is inspired by road sign detection and is being extended and applied

and has demonstrated that the estimations made by the proposed strategy are reliable and in great concurrence with the manual technique for estimation. The investigation of two strategies, one the locale developing and another, a variation of split and consol- idation calculations for division groupings of fetal ultrasound pic- tures is discussed in [7]. They depict an intuitive framework that can quickly process and section a self-assertive number of high- lights. The UI was assembled utilizing the Tcl/Tk toolbox, which is publically accessible. The greatest shortcoming of the framework is the absence of compelling measures that can assess the exact- ness of the division. It likewise calls for procedures that are more tolerant of the commotion and antiques since district developing calculation is profoundly touchy to the nearby neighborhood.

Another probability would portray of the limit utilizing Binary Space Partitioning tree (BSP). The full programmed division and utilizing factual highlights recognizes ordinary and ultrasonic tumor liver pictures are proposed in [8]. The speckle noise in ultra- sound pictures was separated utilizing pinnacle and valley strat- egy, picture was smoothened and again a moment organize channel was embraced to additionally channel the commotion and to enhance the nature of picture. The peak and valley channel speaks to an intriguing swap for the middle channel keeping in mind the end goal to enhance the effectiveness. The utilization of contourlet change for de-speckling the ultrasound pictures of ovar- ies, dynamic forms without edge strategy for division and fluffy rationale for characterization represented in [9]. The experimenta- tion has been finished utilizing test ultrasound pictures of ovaries and the outcomes are contrasted and the deductions drawn by interim based classifier and furthermore those drawn by the experts.

There are multifarious filters to diminish the speckle noise. Each filter has its own statistical values. Different filter gives different results for different images. Several state-of-art denoising filtering techniques that is Wiener, Median, Lee and Kuan are being ana- lyzed by the researchers to improve the performance of these fil- ters in terms of quality, reduction of run time and many more factors [26,33,34].

Lee Filter. The Lee filter is based on the approach i.e. the variance over an area. If variance is Low, smoothing will be per- formed. But if variance is High near edges, it will not be performed [32,34,61]. Image can be approximated as given below

These sub-bands labeled LH1, HL1 and HH1 represent the finest scale wavelet coefficients i.e., detail images while the sub-band LL1 corresponds to coarse level coefficients i.e., approximation image. To obtain the next coarse level of wavelet coefficients, the sub- band LL1 alone is further decomposed and critically sampled using

Machine learning techniques in the field of medical imaging can be commonly utilize, computer vision, pattern recognition, etc. Here ANN has been employed for diagnosis of fetal development and acquires the substantial classification accuracy. But we pre- sume that ANN has definitely not revealed its advantage; therefore in our work, we enhance artificial neural network with fuzzy logic and compare the classification results with ANN.

Integration of ANN with FIS have attached the growing attention of researchers in numerous scientific as well as engineering fields because of increasing necessity of smart systems to resolve the real life issues. ANN learns from scratch through simply changing the interconnections among layers. In case we have knowledge con- veyed within linguistic rules, it will be easy to construct FIS, or in case indicate the fuzzy operators, fuzzy sets, along with knowledge base. Likewise for building an ANN for an application the consumer

Decision tree. A Decision tree is the predictive modelling approaches used in machine learning, data mining, and statistics. It is a supervised learning algorithm, that is, this algorithm consists of an outcome variable which is to be predicted from the given set of variables. Using these variables we generate a function and map the input to the desired output. The population is divided into two or more homogeneous sets in this algorithm using the significant attributes independent variables to develop various distinct groups whenever possible. In a decision tree, the leaf nodes represent the target variables and the input variable

It is called as regression tree when the predicted outcome is a single value or a real number. Let us consider an example of a hotel, suppose here we have two classes, first the number of bedrooms and second the house prices. Using this algorithm the computer will anticipate the costs of the house in light of the quantity of rooms, hence a value is predicted here instead of a class [1]. The term which refers to both the above processes is called Classifica- tion and Regression Tree analysis.

simple regression models give out failing results because of highly nonlinear relationships between variables making such models invalid. But, decision trees do not need any assumptions of linearity in the data. Hence, they can be used in the environ- ment where the parameters are nonlinearly related [41].

The working of SVM is explained by the Maximal-Margin Clas- sifier. The numeric input variable is (x) in your data forms an n- dimensional space. Suppose there are two input variables, then it would form a two-dimensional space. A hyperplane line in the graph splits the input variable space. The hyperplane selected in SVM separates the points in the input variable space by their class.

dictive accuracy of the proposed model. This signifies the TPR as well as FPR. The region within the ROC curve called AUC categorized among the finest techniques for comparing classifiers within two issues. The test outcomes perform bet- ter when the ROC curve goes up rapidly in the direction of upper left corner of the graph else when the value of AUC is greater. Region near 1 demonstrates the reliable examination while region near 0.5 indicates the unreliable evaluation [35].

This section represents the experimental setup and discusses the performance evaluation of the proposed system. The dataset of fetal ultrasound is available online on http://www3.medical. philips.com is considered as benchmark for public use for exper- imental study and research. The live dataset is collected from Civil Hospital, Jalandhar, Punjab and 12 live fetal images are con- sidered using the proposed scenario but only three live dataset results are shown by designed work along with the online bench- mark images. Experimental section is divided into five sections

CAD plays an important role in predicting fetal growth recently. In this thesis work, an automatic mass segmentation and classification method is presented; the aim is to overcome the accuracy and sensitivity limitations of the current solutions in fetal growth and development, firstly, In this research, the comparison of different denoising filtering methods is done with NormalShrink Homomorphic Filtering method in pre-processed step. Experi- ments are conducted to access the better performance from all denoising filtering methods. The result reflects that both qualita- tively and quantitatively Normal Shrink Homomorphic Filtering Methods outperforms as compare to spatial filters and finally, dis- tinguish the mass between normal and abnormal using genetic algorithm based neuro-fuzzy classifier. Experimental results are very encouraging: with respect to other existing state-of-the-art classification method including ANN and GA based Neuro-Fuzzy, the proposed approach has achieved the best classification accu- racy of 96% on the database of fetal images. When conducting experiment on both benchmark database and live database, method also proved to be the best. The values of sensitivity, speci- ficity, precision and F-measure are much better than those obtained with the other methods. To evaluate the availability of the feature data and the classification accuracy more comprehen- sively, we also use the AUC of ROC as assessment indicators. All of these measured indicators verify the effectiveness of the pro- posed method in this research work.

The promising results may be due to the following aspects: The first is the improved segmentation approach, and it can locate and segment not only the mass automatically but also with lower depen- dence on the initial active contour at the same time with stronger capability of convergence; moreover, this segmentation method is robust to the interference of blurry areas and tissue and able to con- verge to the object precisely. It is the important foundation of the follow-up work; secondly, the feature extraction method is also essential. The 32 extraction features represent the characteristic of mass area comprehensively. It does great influence on the following classification process. Last and most important, the genetic algo- rithm based neuro-fuzzy classifier used in this work improves the classification accuracy significantly. The random forest is selected for classification because of its interesting properties: (1) deal with high dimension feature without feature selection, (2) accommodate many predictor variables, (3) during creating random forests, gener- alization error using unbiased estimation, and (4) run new data through previously generated forests to generate classifications.

These promising results clearly demonstrate the great potential of the proposed approach in the automatic image processing and classification of biomedical data. The proposed approach can assist the radiologist in performing an in-depth exploration of the fetal growth and development within a short time and improve the accurate diagnosis of abnormal growth of fetal. The last step include the validation using classification learner and SVM is the best validated approach in ROC curve 0.9998 area covered and Confusion Matrix accuracy rate is 97%.

