To reduce the complexity of the above regression methods, an error-based interpolation method is proposed in [15], which uses the error in between the two sampling points in edge-direction, to interpolate the missing pixels. However, all this method cannot generate sharpened up-scaled images. To overcome this issue, the gradient details of an LR image are used in [16,17] while upscaling it. In [16], the missing pixels are interpolated by using the gradient features of the local, neighboring pixels, for proper reconstruction of the HR image. Similarly, the interpolation method proposed in

issue, Khan et al. [23] have used adjacent pixels slope to generate HR image with texture details. For a complex-textured image, a new reconstruction-based interpolation method is proposed in [24]. But the running time of this method is very high. One new, graph-based interpolation method is proposed in [25] to preserve more detailed information in the HR image. In this method, infor- mation is propagated from a known pixel to an unknown pixel, alongside preserving the information of the sharp edges and con- tinuous texturing. All the above methods fall short of producing sharpened HR images, as they cannot restore the HF degradation happening during interpolation. So, a new method is proposed here, which is based on preserving the edge and texture, to achieve better image quality in interpolation. It also preserves natural looks in the HR image.

The grid is made up of known pixels (in black) and unknown pixels (white circle). Image interpolation is a technique for determining unknown pixel values using known pixels. The weighted average of neighboring pixels is typically used to predict the missing pixel value, which introduces error. As a result, artifacts such as blurring, ringing, and blocking appear in the interpolated image. This neces- sitates the development of a new interpolation method capable of restoring all edge and texture details in an HR image while avoid- ing artifacts.

Blur is introduced in interpolation as a result of the incorrect estimation of pixel value at an unknown location. To address this issue, the USM concept [26] is applied prior to up-sampling, result- ing in less blurring after upscaling. The low pass or smoothed ver- sion of the image is extracted using LA gaussian filtering, denoted as gf . Over the GLR image, the gaussian mask gf is applied. The vari-

Each egg in a nest represents a solution in computer science, and a cuckoo egg represents a new solution. The goal is to use new and potentially better solutions (cuckoos) to replace less- than-ideal solutions in nests. Each nest contains one egg, which represents one solution, or multiple eggs, which represent multiple solutions. The CS is based on three fundamental rules.

be objectively evaluated using PSNR, structural similarity index (SSIM) [36], and feature structural index measurement (FSIM). Dif- ferent upscaling factors, such as 2 and 4, are used to assess the per- formance of the proposed scheme. PSNR is the signal power divided by the noise power. If its value is high, it indicates that the signal has been restored successfully. The PSNR is calulated by

Fang Y., Shi M., Li X., Liu Y. Single image super-resolution based on gradient profile prior and nonlocal self-similarity feature, in: Eleventh International Conference on Digital Image Processing (ICDIP 2019), Vol. 11179, International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2019, p. 111794P.

