Due to the current climate change issues humanity is facing, bicycles are becoming an increasingly popular mean of transportation for emis- sions reduction purposes [1,2]. Studies and academic research on bi- cycles have been developed and published, e.g., comparing bicycles cost with cars [3] or dealing with the role of bicycles in urban traffic [4]. The interest in their analysis is proved by the numerous and diverse articles

chain while shifting from most of the gears, derailleur systems are characterized by a higher need for maintenance [17], if compared to internal shifting hub systems. Internal shifting hub systems were intro- duced at the beginning of the 20th century. In 1901, Archer invented a mechanism which allowed the rider to change speed while riding [18]. This mechanism provided three different speeds, hence the cyclist could

be found in [27]. The main advantages with respect to derailleur systems are the protection from external impacts and dirt, and a better chain alignment. This results in less maintenance and a higher reliability [13] and represents a significant advantage in the case of city and tourism bikes. On the contrary, when race bikes are concerned, lightness is more important than maintenance, derailleur systems are always preferred.

Despite the broad availability of the two systems, single-speed road bicycles are very popular in cities thanks to their ease of use (no speed shift is performed), little need for maintenance, lower price and ruggedness. However as soon as there are gradients, or empty streets, the single-speed becomes a major drawback [28]: accelerating, climbing and maximum speed are compromised due to the single gear ratio. A compromise can be found using an automatic internal shifting hub, which enables to drive with different transmission ratios, while still granting ease of use, since shifts are automatically changed depending on the angular velocity of the hub [29]. Automatic multi-speed internal shifting hubs can be divided into electric and a mechanical. In the first case the shift control mechanism is represented by a controller which compares the sensed speed to the speed range stored in the controller memory for a specific gear position of the bicycle [30] and gives this information to an actuator that modifies the gear position accordingly. In the second case, the shift is actuated automatically in relation to the rotation of the hub components by making use of control devices such as centrifugal clutches, centrifugal governors and sprang clutches [31]. Depending on the speed change, a centrifugal clutch pushes or draws the shifting control device and hence actuates the automatic shift.

Centrifugal governors operate in a similar way with respect to centrif- ugal clutches. The basic functioning principle of centrifugal governors is based on the exploitation of the centrifugal force acting on two masses, which control a sensing element and can govern it thanks to their cen- trifugal movement [32]. Eventually, sprag clutches allow a single di- rection of rotation for the free wheel mode, but produce binding if the torque is applied in the other direction [33]. The main purpose of exploiting sprag clutches is indeed their high suitability for free wheel pedaling, since they allow a relative motion free of any resistance in one single direction of rotation.

As investigated, automatic shifting hub solutions are currently not so widespread or common on the market. An interesting example was developed by Hsieh et al. [52] but it is thought for a direct application on electric assisted bicycles, which goes beyond the scope of this work. Given the previous market analyses, it goes without saying that the unique option of automatic internal shifting hub for regular bicycles is represented by the SRAM Automatix [34], which is characterized only

by two gear ratios. Since examples with a higher number of gear ratios are still missing in literature, scholars intend to give their contribution to this topic through the development of an automatic internal shifting hub for regular bikes, characterized by three available gears, and therefore named Three-Speed Automatic Internal Shifting Hub (TSAISH). There- fore, the SRAM Automatix is taken as reference model, whose perfor- mance should be improved through the design of the new shifting hub described in this article by increasing the number of available gears from two to three. This is the key point where the novelty of the TSAISH ar- chitecture lays. Adopting three gear ratios instead of two increases the number of available combinations of torque and pedaling cadence to achieve a certain velocity, ensuring more riding flexibility and enabling

same top velocities (when the highest gear is engaged) of the SRAM Automatix. As far as the functional design of the TSAISH is concerned, the shifting hub will be completely characterized from a kinematic point of view, while regarding its dimensioning, a preliminary sizing of the hub gears will be presented. Since, as it will be later illustrated, multiple characteristics of the proposed design will be conceived starting from those of the SRAM Automatix, a real-world model of such shifting hub has been analyzed and, through a reverse-engineering process, all its geometrical features have been measured.

This paper will be structured as follows: first, the design of the TSAISH is discussed in Section 2. Thereafter, the preliminary sizing of the gearing components will be described in Section 3. The validation of the developed design is presented in Section 4, where the performance of the TSAISH and of the SRAM Automatix are compared over a driving cycle. Eventually, the key results of the design phase are summarized, and the remarkable characteristics of the final solution for the developed automatic internal gear hub are highlighted. Finally, conclusions and

change with the bicycle velocity, as it is determined by the number of chainring and sprocket teeth. Only the internal gear ratio changes (ac- cording to the values that are selected for iint,AS,G1, iint,AS,G2, and iint,AS,G3) and produces a change in the transmission of power. As a result, the external gear ratio (which can be easily modulated just by installing different chainrings or sprockets) will be calculated only after the in- ternal gear ratios that most facilitate the design of the TSAISH will have been selected.

scenario where the first gear is engaged and the first instants of bicycle acceleration after stand still are taken into account, when the peak torque values in the drivetrain are reached. Instead, when the two higher gears are engaged, the involved torques have to be derived from the maximum human power output that is provided by the rider. However, according to [62], which analyzed the torques developed by elite cyclists, even in cases of gears different from the first one, torque values higher than 250 Nm at the crank are not even reached by pro- fessionals in a competitive race environment. Such value is lower than

velocities prescribed by the driving cycle is always the same at each timestep, both when the SRAM Automatix and the TSAISH are employed. If the torques are generally lower when the TSAISH is considered, then inevitably the pedaling cadences must increase to provide the same power input. Nevertheless, the pedaling cadence never exceeds the maximum value set above of 90 rpm. What defines an improved riding easiness remains the fact that the torque, and therefore the force the cyclist has to exert on the pedals, is lower and more ho- mogenous. As a result, the validation confirms the advantages the TSAISIH can provide.

The TSAISH represents a novel example of architecture of automatic internal shifting hub for regular bicycles. After researching the current market, it emerges that the only established model of such devices is the SRAM Automatix, which is taken as reference model for the develop- ment of the TSAISH. The TSAISH is designed so that it features three different gear ratios, an unprecedented number for automatic internal shifting hubs for regular bicycles, and one more with respect to the reference model. A higher number of gears increases the number of combinations of torque and pedaling cadence to achieve a certain ve- locity, providing cyclists with more riding flexibility. In this regard, a validation is carried out through numerical analysis of the torque and pedaling cadence that are applied during a driving cycle, comparing the values that are obtained when the TSAISH and the SRAM Automatix are employed. Results show that the TSAISH enables cyclists to ride by applying lower and more regular forces on the pedals with respect to the SRAM Automatix. In this regard, it has also to be said that the structural complexity of the TSAISH architecture is higher than that of the SRAM Automatix and other common internal shifting hubs, with potential drawbacks on reliability and costs. However, as far as reliability is concerned, it is pointed out that the TSAISH is designed for regular

