Some studies revealed that, in many academic institutions, teaching spaces are partially occupied, as rooms are not in use half of the time, and when they are in use they are often only half full [9,10]. In many cases, inflexibility in allocating spaces does not necessarily mean that the institution has insufficient resources, but that it might lack the sufficient information about these resources. This happens because of the absence of a mechanism that provides timely and accurate information about spaces inside universities.

The increasing number of students enrolled in Egyptian public universities and their varying attendance patterns create the need for dynamically managing and utilizing spaces based on demand. The varying attendance patterns result in underutilization of spaces when students decide not to attend, and result in overutilization when students from other faculties or departments decide to attend the lecture. Underutilization and overutilization may also be the result of students transfer- ring to or from other faculties or departments. The solution presented in this paper integrates genetic algorithms with RFID technology to achieve better space management. This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related work on the timetabling and space allocation problems. Sec- tion 3 describes the contributed solution methodology. Testing and results are presented in Section 4. Section 5 includes the conclusion and future work.

Researchers conducted a study at the University of North Carolina to understand and analyze the important factors for efficient utilization of spaces [25]. They found that achiev- ing efficient classroom utilization saves cost and is strongly tied with their budget and funding. This also positively affects space planning decisions for acquiring more spaces in the future. The team conducting the study regularly visited the university buildings and rooms in order to monitor and report any updates and changes in the utilization of spaces. The team later analyzed the data collected to resolve deficiencies and/or problems encountered. They neither mentioned the use of any technology to assist in monitoring space utilization rates nor related that to the timetabling process.

place to at least one of the set of rooms or the set of events [9]. In their work, they also highlighted that current space planning practices are done with incomplete access to informa- tion about future events and enrollment patterns. They stated that the utilization of spaces is still measured by conventional, simple methods that get the average percentage of the seats occupied within the teaching space.

Different researchers tackled the space allocation problem in different contexts. However, these contributions mostly focused on the algorithms computational time, even for small problem instances. They also did not consider monitoring and reevaluation of the allocated spaces. Some examples follow. A

According to [51], RFID in job-shop scheduling was used to examine whether or not accurate information visibility can improve the performance of the shop-floor in manufactur- ing. The approach evaluated, among other objectives, the reduction in inventory waste, the waiting time, the assembly time, the cycle time and the number of backlog orders between an RFID and a non-RFID environment. The results of the study revealed that the information visibility provided by RFID had a great impact on operations, especially, when unforeseen disruptions in operations take place compared with a non-RFID scenario. Applying RFID in job-shop scheduling led to the reduction in many resource and time wastes and to the improvement in bottleneck operations.

The concept of information visibility for better resource management in universities was later introduced in [52]. The authors proposed the use of RFID technology to capture timely data about space utilization in universities. However, in spite of the fact that RFID is a powerful data capturing technology, data captured need to be processed using analyti- cal tools to provide solutions to the timetabling and space allo- cation problems. A survey on analytical tools and approaches used with RFID-based applications can be found in [53,54]. In the solution methodology, proposed in the next section, the authors do not rely on the RFID technology alone but also on the UGA [33] to achieve better resource utilization in universities.

Research findings concerning the size and complexity of uni- versity timetabling led to the first international conference on the Practice and Theory of Automated Timetabling (PATAT) calling for the importance of developing more generic problem solving algorithms. The Practice and Theory of Automated Timetabling (PATAT) series of conferences sponsor the Inter- national Timetabling Competition (ITC) [59] where partici- pants compete to solve real world timetabling problems. The contributed approach, in this paper, is novel and tackles a real world problem.

It is obvious that the number of events with poor occu- pancy rates (less than 75%) is 16 events and the number of events with good occupancy rates (between 75% and 100%) is 60 events. There are zero events with occupancy rates that exceeded 100% and 148 unoccupied events. The UGA algo- rithm saved up to 41% of the available rooms in the faculty instead of only 19% when following the old manual approach. Also, 29% of the total working hours available weekly to build the schedule were saved [33].

Sometimes after making all the possible reallocation deci- sions, some underutilized or over-utilized events remain. In the case of the underutilized events, a proposed solution might be to search for the possibility of merging two underutilized events together in one room, only if, they share the same pro- fessor and course and that the groups involved do not have any other scheduled events at the same time. Moreover, in the case of the overutilized events, splitting groups, in these particular events only, into subgroups might result in a better situation by coordinating this with professors.

Beyrouthy C, Burke EK, Landa-Silva D, McCollum B, McMullan P, Parkes AJ. The teaching space allocation problem with splitting. In: Selected papers from proc of the sixth int conf on the practice and theory of the automated timetabling (PATAT). Brno, Czech Republic. LNCS 3867; 2006.

