The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents user types and their compe- tency questions (CQs). Section 3 describes the main ontology components. Section 4 contains the answer for CQs. Section 5 enumerates implicit information that is derived from the ontology. Finally, we conclude in Section 6 with a summary of the present work along with further research perspectives.

The classes at the second level of the hierarchy are described by using data prop- erties. For example, the name, last name or gender of a User, the title and date of a Poster are modelled as data properties. All interoperability aspects that cor- respond to the implementation of OAI-PMH protocol and the DC elements can be represented as data properties that link posters and users with data values from an XML Schema Datatype or an RDF literal [8].

In summary, although the ontology is simple in terms that this represents the addition of semantic information to a particular collection of data from an IR, this is able to represent CQs and their answers using its own terminology. All the inconsistencies were corrected before release. Hermit and Pellet reasoners were used for validation of logical consistency. The ontology can be exported to different semantic web languages such as RDF [8] or the Ontology Web Language [10].

useful to discover possible data inconsistencies. For example, cardinality restrictions can be inserted into the ontology in order to establish a minimum, exactly or max- imum number of authors for each poster. Ontologies as the described in this paper can be used to represent collaborative work of other types of documents according to the interests of potential users.

The paper used a list of CQs that are answered by the ontology terminology in natural language and formal answers. The natural language answers are stored as definitions in the RDF language, while the formal answers are extracted from the usage dialogs from the Protg ontology editor. Ontology information is used by reasoners to infer new knowledge as well as to discover possible data inconsistencies, the last feature add value to data from IRs.

