An intuition about analogies is that two analogies could always be con- catenated if they do not have any symbol in common. In fact, there are three possible ways of concatenating which meet intuition. However, for- mally, concatenating is not the only possibility. One could mix up sym- bols, for instance: " : a = bb : bab. We shall reject this possibility.

The previous definition conforms to the usual presentation of formal languages. It aims at the generation of a language. Thus, as usual, stan- dard structural induction is used to generate all of the members of a lan- guage of analogical strings. Starting with the elements of A, all possible analogies with the elements of M as models are applied.

The reciprocal problem of generation is that of recognition. With an analogical system, the grammaticality of a given string, i.e., its member- ship in a language, is tested against the set of attested strings of that lan- guage, after the reduction of that given string, by analogy, using the set of models. For recognition, the strings in the pairs of M are used in the reverse direction they appear in M, and the analogies are solved in the direction reverse to that for generation. This is possible thanks to the in- version of ratios in Theorem 2.1.

Consistency: fan bn =n  1g  (fabg; fab ! aabbg). By induction on n. Base: ab 2 (fabg; fab ! aabbg) is true, by definition of a lan- guage of analogical strings. Induction: suppose that an bn is a member of

Proof. Let (A; M) be a language of analogical strings. Let us call kA the maximum over all j w j with w in A. kA exists, because A is finite. Let us call kM the maximum over all j v0 j j v j with v ! v0 in M. kM exists also, because M is also finite.

Only a small number of proposals have been made for the modelization of analogy, maybe because the dominant stream in linguistics for years, the generative one, against works by the founders of modern linguistics (e.g., [13, chap. V & XII] or [15, Part III, Chap. 4 & 5]), explicitly rebutted analogy as a possible object of research (see [6, 132 and 136], for quotations from Chomsky). However, according to other arguments [5], analogy may be argued to be a component in language (of course, surely not the only one). We have shown how to generate a family of formal languages, called languages of analogical strings. It is important to note that their construc- tion, as is the case with simple contextual grammars [4], does not make any use of non-terminals. Grammaticality is simply tested against some attested strings, after reduction according to some models. The approach by reduction to attested forms has already been advocated in natural lan-

