Change Level: causes the aircraft to fly to the new level indicated in the altitude window at the top center of the GCP. This value is set by turning the ALT dial in the center of the GCP. When the desired altitude is reached, the aircraft changes to Hold Altitude mode.

The behaviors just described seem fairly simple. They become more compli- cated if the ALT dial or VS thumbwheel is moved when a mode is already active. For example, if the ALT dial is turned while in Change Level mode, the new alti- tude will become the target, whereas if the VS thumbwheel is turned, the aircraft will transition to Vertical Speed mode.

Before describing how this mode actually works, I describe some scenarios that it can exhibit. In each case, the scenario begins with the pilot selecting Vertical Speed mode with an ascent rate of 2,000 fpm and a limit of 27,000 feet; the aircraft will climb as directed and the autopilot will switch automatically to Capture mode as it passes through 25,000 feet. Now suppose that while passing through 26,000 feet, the pilot changes the ALT dial to a new value. Let us consider the behavior for different values set in the altitude window.

Unfortunately, this is not possible. Certain behaviors of the autopilot are de- termined by the relationship between a new value set in the altitude window and the altitude at which Capture mode was entered. This latter information (i.e., the cap start altitude) is simply not presented to the pilot 3 and it is therefore im- possible to construct a mental model whose states are based on information avail- able to the pilot that accurately tracks the behavior of the real autopilot.

The suggested correction would avoid the altitude bust but would not, in my opinion, support a simple and accurate mental model. Corrections that would sup- port such a model include a light by the altitude window that is illuminated if a capture will occur (i.e., if limit set is true), or a more radical redesign in which turning the ALT dial when in Capture mode causes a reversion to Level Change (rather than Vertical Speed) mode.

