As the global population grows and energy consumption rises, the deficit in fossil fuels is becoming more prominent, revealing the sig- nificance of using renewable energy sources (RESs) [1,2]. The growth of fields and applications that utilize solar energy, which is a widely preferred type among RES, has played an important role in reducing the dependency on fossil fuels in the electrical power generation policies of countries [3]. Photovoltaic (PV) panels that allow solar energy har- vesting contribute to reducing environmental concerns. Moreover, easy installation, lower maintenance cost, and non-dynamic structures make the PV systems feasible for individual users and large-scale renewable energy-based electrical power generation systems [4,5].

The employed algorithm in the MPPT system has an essential role in the PV system efficiency. Especially under different PCSs and con- nection types, its performance may differ. Therefore, in this study, the three most widely preferred MPPT algorithms are put in perspective, as mentioned in Section 1. Being one of them, the P&O algorithm perturbs the operating voltage of the PV array and observes the output power until reaching the MPP of the array. The algorithm uses the

To assess the effectiveness of the three distinct MPPT algorithms and connection types under a variety of partial shading circumstances, the proposed MPPT-based PV power plant system is developed utilizing the PIL (Processor-In-The-Loop) platform. In the PIL-based MPPT system, unlike a regular simulation, the power stage is simulated in the soft- ware, whereas the algorithm is verified digitally in the hardware target microprocessor. Therefore, the algorithm in the PIL implementation can be tested in a real-time DSP with the C/C++ language.

Among the five shading patterns, all connection types have maxi- mum power under the DG pattern (excluding the SP-TCT connec- tion). Also, all connection types have their minimum ML under this pattern (excluding SP-TCT connection). Correlatively, the FF of all connection types (excluding SP-TCT connection) reaches their maximum under the DG pattern. Therefore, the DG shading pattern may not pose a severe problem for the power efficiency

Though the conventional algorithms reach fewer global points than the PSO in all given conditions, they have almost the same performance as PSO under the LW and DG patterns with all connection types. Therefore, if the shading patterns are predicted to be LW and DG, the employed algorithm and the type of connection will not make a difference. In this case, the lowest- cost connection type and the lowest-complexity algorithm can be used.

