behavior-based. But there is also a middle ground covered by life-related sciences, in particular ecology as the science of living systems in an open environment. These sciences pose especially interesting and hard challenges to the modeller, because neither state nor behavior alone seem to be sufficient for comprehensive system descriptions.

Our present work should be understood as a small step towards leveraging the tools of theoretical computer science for theoretical ecology. This overall goal is not easy to achieve; not least because the structural mathematics of computer science remain obscure and inaccessible to the more classically trained ecologist. As an intermediate, more modest goal, we aim at extending the repertoire of scientific ecological modelling with methods originally designed for the description of systems of logic, control and computation. Towards this end, we shall presently discuss a system that is simple and idealized, yet of some popularity in theoretical ecology. We shall illustrate that modelling questions concerning this system fall into the two aforementioned dual categories, and how they can be mapped to algebraic and coalgebraic formulations, respectively. Our focus here shall be the systematic development of modelling techniques from basic universal (co)algebra and their interpretation from the meta-viewpoint of philosophy of science; the connection to more realistic and practical ecological problems is outside the scope of this article.

Several options for this task exist. They are vastly different with respect to their reputation in science, to the extent that sometimes one paradigm, the physical one, is identified with the scientific method as such. However, empirics and management practice, at least for ecological problems, appear determined to remain methodolog- ically diverse. We do not take sides in this dispute, and present two dual modelling paradigms without judging their relative applicability a priori.

It is here where we expect the impact of coalgebra. The new theoretical approach may formalise a model paradigm which is already implicitly used in ecological prac- tice, but which has not been recognised in theoretical ecology [17]. A corresponding problem in the philosophy of science is the epistemological classification of computer simulations [8].

The logistic map has been chosen as an objct of study for its simplicity, not for its immediate practical relevance. For a more relevant example of ecological behavior, consider the idealised case of a domesticated species in which evolutionary change can be supressed deliberately. The complete space of possible behavior under human management can then be derived from its documented growth history. The scientific task is to comprehensively represent patterns of this history along with proper goals and intervention norms, in order to allow a sustained continuation of the past behavior, but without being able to reconstruct the system after irreversible failure, such as extinction of the species.

The single parameter r is interpreted as the effective growth rate of the system. The state of the system is interpreted as population density, normalised by the carrying capacity of the system with respect to the given environment. Any relation with the environment is encoded into the carrying capacity parameter, hence this gives rise to a discrete autonomous dynamic system.

The logistic map has been investigated with the methods of symbolic dynamics as an important case of a complex, chaotic system. In this role it has also been used as an application of coalgebra [16]. This, to our knowledge, has been the first connection between coalgebra and models used in biology. Here we use the well- known features of this map for reviewing the various roles in which dynamic models can be used in ecological modelling.

Time is discrete in a system with the step function fr. This is not necessarily an idealization for biological systems; e.g. generation times. But the state space I is ide- alized as continuous. For the application of symbolic dynamics and to accomodate the realistic assumption that measurements cannot be made arbitrarily precise, we discretize observations as partitions of the state space, specified by the assignment

The abstract algebra is merely a mathematical implementation of the specification. A scientific hypothesis is posed by claiming that the diagram commutes. Unlike in pure mathematics, and in the face of uncertainty about the model system, this is not a logical property to be decied, but rather an empirical property to be judged by testing and evidence, as prescribed by the Scientific Method. If the correspondence between the two sides actually holds, it gives clauses of the specification the special status of laws of nature. Reverting the top horizontal arrow results in the standard test situation for functional models, the prediction.

The claim that coalgebraic modelling departs from the state-based perspective may be surprising. This issue arises from a fundamental difference between the notions of state in physics and in computer science. The observed state of a physical system is objective reality. The state of a formal automaton, as opposed to its physical implementation, merely refers to its actual behavior, in the sense that semantics are given in terms of observed transitions not states; for instance as the regular language accepted by a finite automaton. The reference character of state is expressed formally by the notion of bisimulation between alternative virtual systems

For r > 4, the logistic map is not bounded by the interval I; we treat the case that the interval is exceeded as undefined. The set dom(fr) of points for which a single step is defined is easily characterized, but the set of points for which unboundedly many steps are defined is nontrivial. The following characterization and model are derived from [16].

is of particular interest. Many essential features of living systems are naturally char- acterized in terms of behavior, e.g. feeding, reproducing, growing, evolving. Being alive is not a state property in the functional sense, as the development towards ar- tificial life has shown [3]. Coalgebraic modelling facilitates the formal organization of chronicles, as opposed to measurements; this may prove an important extension in this context.

Interactive theories formulated in coalgebra not only have a different formal presentation, they encode different pragmatics. On the functional side, problems of prediction and reconstruction are solved by searching for laws that govern the dynamic mechanism. On the interactive side, problems of assessment and manage- ment are solved by searching for strategies, norms or intentions that govern the behavior of agents. The transition from the former to the latter paradigm will not solve the notoriously difficult problems about explaining ecosystems, but offers the opportunity to formalize models of sustaining ecosystems.

