India experiences one of the highest incidence rates of oral can- cer globally [1]. Oral cancer is the leading cancer type in men and the third most common cancer in women [2]. In India, oral cancer is usually detected at advanced stages and the five year survival rate for advanced oral cancer is very low [3], posing an important public health challenge. Hence the early detection of

In Indian population role of Bidi and SLT is well known [14]. When smoking tobacco is to be considered, in a meta analysis, Bidi smoking had higher odds ratio (OR) than cigar- ette smoking [15]. So Bidi smoking was considered more harm- ful than cigarette smoking. Cigarette smoke condensate was found to enhance matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), MMP- 2 and MMP-9 expression and thus increase collagen degrada- tion which ultimately increases chance of metastasis in cancer patients [16]. Considering the synergistic effect, if any person was exposed to both of the smoking agents on daily basis, they were considered to have maximum susceptibility for cancer.

Though the Indian scenario is unknown, age and cultural background are important variables influencing oral health- related quality of life. Poor oral health is another major under- lying cause of carcinogenesis beside the tobacco and betel quid/areca consumption habits. The younger age groups showed an increase in the proportion of individuals free from caries and restorations. Again globally, poor oral health among older people has been particularly evident in high levels of tooth loss, dental caries experience, and the prevalence rates of periodontal disease, xerostomia and oral precancer/cancer [20]. In India, there are many things to do for upgrading oral health awareness [21]. Again a direct relation was noted between the favorable dental health awareness, attitude, oral hygiene behavior, and socioeconomic status in the Indian population [22]. Even poor oral health was considered as an independent causative condition of OSCC [23]. The study sug- gested that educational level influences the oral conditions and should be considered in assessing risk, and in planning appro- priate preventive measures as health literacy also has impact on oral health [24,25]. Therefore, oral health literacy and oral hygiene can be taken into account while understanding the malignant potentiality and susceptibility to oral precancers and cancer. Level of schooling in Indian education system was used in flexible manner to define oral health education in this study.

Fuzzy logic is used widely to interpret uncertain knowledge present in a system and includes vague human assessment in problems which are not considered in any conventional com- puting methods. It can also be considered as an approach of computing with words as linguistic language is always pre- ferred for expressing opinions. The beauty of real-life applica- tion of fuzzy logic lies in the precision in meaning of an outcome and getting an idea of a complex system with toler- ance of imprecision [26].

In modeling problems, words are often led to use predicates in natural languages to represent incomplete information in a flexible way. The information may be quantifiable due to its nature, and can be stated only in linguistic terms. So to quan- tify the linguistic expressions here fuzzy numbers must have to be defined. Defining fuzzy numbers allows modeling of com- plex systems using a higher level of abstraction originating from defined knowledge and experience. A fuzzy number A~

Study population of Terrain and Duars region, the northern region of West Bengal, India, was chosen in this study. How- ever this population is known for its cultural diversity of the people in this area, but not well studied in respect of their oral health. The different social communities of the region include Nepali, Bhutia, Mech, Rajbanshi, Lepcha, Rava, Drupka and Sherpa. Multi-ethnicity is unique in this dataset.

