3.3 to 3.5 billion years ago [1]. The cyanobacteria can be found in nearly all the imaginable habitats such as fresh and salty water, polluted waters of lakes, ponds, water tanks, soil, rocks and tree barks. Its morphological form varies from unicellular to filamen- tous or colonial forms [2]. Some cyanobacterial species are ther- mophilic and growing in thermal springs [3]. Some cyanobacteria are environmentally-friendly and have the ability to fix atmo- spheric nitrogen and solubilize phosphate [4]. Cyanobacteria are considered as a rich source of primary metabolites such as polysac- charides, proteins, fats, oils, vitamins, pigments and hydrocarbons [5]. They are also a rich source of many secondary metabolites like

respectively [9]. There are a lot of intracellular and extracellular metabolites with diverse biological activities as antiviral [10], anti- cancer, anti-inflammatory, cytotoxic [11] and immunosuppressive agents. The production of extracellular antibiotic metabolites by marine microalgae and screening for other pharmacologically active compounds had been studied in past few decades [12]. In addition to that foregoing, there are many other important com- pounds with antioxidant activity like ascorbic acid, reduced glu- tathione, phenolic compounds and flavonoids [13]. Furthermore,

of production factors is usually a time uncontrollable and labor- intensive process. On the contrary, statistically designed two level-factorial experiments, had been proved to be valuable tools for optimizing microbial culture conditions [17]. The objective of this study was to apply Response surface methodology (RSM) to evaluate the effects of the medium composition for attaining the highest bioactive compounds production by cyanobacterium Ana- baena oryzae.

Cyanobacterium Anabaena oryzae was isolated from the rice fields in Egypt. The soil samples were collected, air-dried, ground to pass a 2-mm sieve. Soil samples were transferred into Petri- dishes, wetted by sterilized distilled water and incubated under fluorescent illumination for three weeks. The formed mats were inculcated into modified (BG-11) medium [18], and the mat was re-cultured several times to new solid BG-11 plates and incubated under continuous illumination using white fluorescent light inten-

Total phenolic content was performed by Folin-Ciocalteu method [24]. Distilled water (3.16 ml) was mixed with the 40 ll of sample and then 200 ll of Folin Ciocalteu reagent was added. After 5 min, 600 ll of 20% sodium carbonate solution (Na2CO3) was added and solution mixed again. The solution was left at room

The flavonoid content of Anabaena oryzae extract samples were determined according to the aluminum chloride method described by Barku [26]. One ml of sample solution of alga extract was added to 0.5 ml of distilled water. About 0.075 ml of 5% sodium nitrite solution was then added to the mixture followed by incubation for 6 min after which 0.15 ml of 10% aluminum chloride was added, shaked and left to stand for 6 min, 0.5 ml of 1 M sodium hydroxide was finally added and the mixture was diluted with

8.8 mM to 26.4 mM which increased the antibiotic production by Nostoc muscorum. However, increasing the concentration of iron from its base level of 5 mM to15 mM caused a dramatic decrease in antibiotic production. Similar results obtained by Ohta et al.

