Specific to medical education, researchers have sought to understand how VR can be used to educate learners on topics such as gastrointes- tinal endoscopy (Khan et al., 2018), anatomy education (Moro et al., 2017) or cardiopulmonary resuscitation (Wong et al., 2018). Findings from these studies suggest the lack of haptic input prevents VR from

being used as a tool to develop hands-on skills (Khan et al., 2018; Moro et al., 2017; Wong et al., 2018). However the evidence suggests that with a blended learning approach, the immersive nature of VR can potentially build foundational anatomy knowledge, develop clinical reasoning skills, construct compassion for the patient experience and prepare students for clinical placements with real patients (Radianti et al., 2020; Wong et al., 2018).

Our intention was to test both pedagogical content and virtual reality software to secure an understanding of both feasibility and benefit of a variety of VR approaches. To achieve this goal, the research team investigated, created, and acquired a series of educational VR modules. After consultation with VR experts, software creators and fellow re- searchers, we secured four separate VR educational modules for this research project. These were chosen for convenience, feasibility, and long-term potential. Specifically, the VR modules were:

Further to the 360 COVID-19 related video, this was previously developed by one member of the research team (Thomson et al., 2023). During this preliminary study, participants were able to use their own phones in conjunction with the cardboard headsets. For this present study, the participants were not involved in the previous study; there- fore, this was a new experience. In the days leading up to data collection, the research team discovered that Apple iPhones no longer supported the 360 YouTube videos that allowed viewers to interact with their environment by turning their heads from right to left or looking up and down. Therefore, we had to quickly pivot and acquire older android phones to support this VR video and data collection. This quick modi- fication allowed us to continue with still using the third module.

The potential participants in this study were students in the Masters of Occupational Therapy (MScOT) program at the University of Toronto. To limit persuasion, recruitment and communication came from a member of the research team who was not actively involved with teaching the students at the time of recruitment. Participants were recruited via email. Potential participants were informed that there was no obligation to participate in the study and that participation would have no impact on their academic standing. Participants were offered the opportunity to ask questions as they signed up to attend the VR research study in one of two timeslots. On the day of testing, participants were provided another orientation to the research and engaged in informed consent verbally and in writing.

All participants attended one of the two 3-h VR education module testing sessions. Participants were invited to test each of the four VR modules and complete the Virtual Module Questionnaire (Appendix A). This questionnaire was completed by all participants immediately after trialling each module; such that participants who completed all four modules would have completed four questionnaires regarding their perceptions of the experiential learning and the VR technology used.

The Virtual Module Questionnaire was developed by the research team based on questions from the UTAUT Questionnaire (Shen et al., 2019), the Extended Technology Acceptance Model questionnaire (Fussell & Truong, 2021), Student Satisfaction and Self-Confidence in Learning Scale (SSSCL) (Unver et al., 2017) and Satisfaction with Simulation Experience (SSE) (Levett-Jones et al., 2011) Scales (Hanshaw & Dickerson, 2020) (Appendix A). All these questionnaires informed a list of fifteen statements for the participants to rank on a five-point Likert scale from Strongly Disagree to Strongly Agree after using the VR educational module. One final open-ended question asked students for any additional feedback. All data were collected via MSForms.

A total of n = 23 MScOT students participated in this study. Of these students, n = 17 participants trialed and completed the questionnaire on the anatomy learning module using the HoloLens, n = 22 trialed the assessment of a patient using the Oculus headset and hand controls, n = 19 trialled the experience of being a patient with COVID-19 using the cardboard headset and n = 14 observed the 360-research planning video. For each of these trials, the students completed the Virtual Module Questionnaire to evaluate the respective VR module. Following the trial of all four VR educational modules, n = 14 participants completed the VR in Medical Education Survey.

The second portion of the data collection asked the participants for overall reflections of all four modules and how these might be used in the curriculum. Consistent with the findings from the individual module questionnaires, the final survey highlighted that participants strongly prefer learning modules that allow them to take an active role. There- fore, the learning that is both interactive and immersive, such as learning with the Oculus and Hololens, were identified as preferred learning modules.

Overall, the participants shared that the interactive and immersive nature brings value add to the learning experience. Students shared that the VR learning felt like a safe way to practice their clinical skills. Additionally, most students shared that they enjoyed learning the new technology.

of immersion is enabled with the HoloLens and the Oculus, participants may feel more engaged and maintain motivation to learn (Suh & Prophet, 2018). In the literature, head-mounted displays (HMDs) that allow for immersive VR (i.e., Oculus), were found to increase enjoyment of learning, improve concentration, and allow users to gain a level of control of their environments (Harrington et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018).

A review by Jensen and Konradsen (2018) examined the use of HMDs and factors influencing immersion and presence on learning. Across all the studies examined, learner attitudes towards HMD technology were positive. Specifically, it was found that use of HMDs was useful for cognitive, psychomotor, and affective skills acquisition. Other than these situations, the HMDs showed no specific advantage compared to traditional methods and showed that it may even be counterproductive due to physical discomfort and technological difficulties (Jensen & Konradsen, 2018). Notably, participants in the current study also re- ported uncertainty about adjusting to the technology or having the necessary skills to learn the software.

With regards to the Google Cardboard headset, it was found that this immersive modality was not as engaging as the other modes of VR. This is inconsistent with findings in a previous study by Papachristos et al. (2017), which found no differences in immersion levels between Oculus and a cardboard VR. It must be noted that in the current study, Android phones, which are not traditionally used for cardboard VR were used. Not only may this have impacted the overall experience of participants, but it may also have affected the level of discomfort experienced by the participants, which is consistent with findings that the cardboard VR may be more demanding for the visual system of participants (Papach- ristos et al., 2017). In the VR literature, a common theme that has been raised is physical discomfort (i.e., nausea, motion sickness) experienced by users (Jensen & Konradsen, 2018; Radianti et al., 2020; Suh & Prophet, 2018).

Finally, there were mixed opinions about the 360 video, which is a non-immersive method of VR; some found it was more interesting and accessible, while others stated that it may not enhance learning as compared to a traditional video. This supports the idea that level of immersion is an important factor to consider in the use of VR. It also raises an important question to consider, which is the content available for VR use. Presently, most VR simulations available are designed for self-learning, meaning content is provided by the VR producers (Jensen & Konradsen, 2018). As the profession of occupational therapy places importance on the uniqueness of every person and follows a client-centered philosophy of practice, the use of VR for occupational therapy education may be more relevant if educators can create their own content, which is more promising with non-immersive VR methods like 360 videos (Grant et al., 2021). Overall, regardless of the mode of VR, the focus should not be on the technology, but rather the use of

These findings contribute to the overall growing base of evidence that virtual reality has promise and potential as a pedagogical tool in medical education (Radianti et al., 2020; Wong et al., 2018). However future studies need to expand beyond pilot and conceptual (Radianti et al., 2020) and begin to measure effectiveness (Kim et al., 2021) and begin to test the hypothesis that this innovation is superior to traditional

There are limitations that should be noted when considering the findings within this study. Most specifically is the small sample size. With a participant rate of approximately 20% the findings cannot be seen as representative of an entire class or student population. Further to this, there is significant response bias, as students who chose to partic- ipate in the study may have already had a strong interest or previous experience with VR technology. Additionally, this study embraced a mix of technology and pedagogies, and therefore we are not able to address impact on learning. Lastly, not all participants completed the final sur- vey, those adding a confounding variable about the reliability of the conclusions.

