A common feature between both types of hemimetabolous and holometabolous insect development is that the periodic pulses of the steroid hormone 20 hydroxyecdysone (20E) which dictate each developmental transition. The ecdysone receptor complex is the key element, which enacts the ecdysteroid-induced physiological and morphological changes during insect moulting regulated by ecdysteroid hormones like 20-hydroxyecdysone (20E) and its ana- logs that bind to the ligand-binding domain of the ecdysone recep- tor [1]. Although the molecular action of 20E has been extensively studied in holometabolous insects and the data on hemimetabo- lous is scarce [2]. The hormone 20E is lipophilic in nature, which synthesized and released into the hemolymph, and enters into the cells are responsible for metamorphosis. The Ecdysone receptor gene is a nuclear receptor with 2 major domain named as ligand binding domain (LBD) and DNA binding domain (DBD), it is seen

in cytoplasm at inactive state. The 20E binds to LBD of ecdysone receptor gene and it activates the DBD. The basic structure of ecdysone receptor protein (EcR) consists of five domains referred to as A/B-transcriptional activation domain, C-DNA-binding domain, D-hinge region and E-ligand-binding domain [3].

The moulting process is initiated by a number of transcription factors in the nuclear receptor super family. This result showed in the up-regulation of several late genes in the hormone pathway and help in mediating the moulting process [4]. These nuclear receptors have ability to travel through the nuclear pores due to its heterodimeric nature, and bind to specific sites of DNA, which undergoes active replication, chromosome remodeling and finally results in translation. Cuticle degradation and formation of new cuticle are one of the major signaling functions of ecdysone during moulting and N-acetyl-b-D-glucosamine (chitin) is a major compo- nent of the insect cuticle [5].

The targeting of specific developmental protein (insect specific) may help in controlling the target pests. The screened compounds mimic 20 hydroxyecdysone which precisely interfere with recep- tor functions and helps to control the mass number of agriculture pests. This could be achieved by using an effective bioinformatics tools to design a perfect molecule to dock with ecdysone receptor proteins.

Glide program was employed to set up the Receptor Grid Gen- eration by clicking the Receptor Grid Generation Panel. Default parameters were used and no special constraints were incorpo- rated during grid generation. Default grid size was adopted for all the active sites.

Molecular simulation, the positions and velocities of particles corresponding to atoms evolve according to the laws of classical physics [17]. In this paper, we showed the super-imposed conformational structure for AmEcR-20E, AmEcR-Etoxazole and AmEcR-ZINC20031812 complex by calculating RMSD value. RMSD measures the average change in displacement of selected atoms for a specified frame with comparison to a reference frame, which is intended for all frames in the trajectory. In protein RMSD, pro- tein frames would be aligned initially on the reference frame back- bone where the RMSD is calculated based on the atomic selection.

In the past, the control of arthropods depended mostly on chemical insecticides and these chemical pesticides are known to pollute the environment and also effects on non-target species. Chemical pesticides are not only depleting the nutritional value of our food, also it accumulates. Research has consistently found pesticide residues in food, by consuming it leads to myriad of dis- eases. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that there are 3 million cases of pesticide poisoning each year and up to 220,000 deaths, primarily in developing countries and children are more vulnerable to the chemical pesticides.

Now-a-days, there is more number of databases which provide thousands of plant based compound. These bioactive compounds may be potent in controlling the serious agricultural pest and also they are eco-friendly. These bioactive compounds may have allos- teric regulation property, it can target the protein in other poten- tial binding sites which may be effectively changes the conformational structure of protein and inhibits the binding of nat- ural 20-hydroxyecdysone hormone in its dedicated pocket. The limonoids a compound belonging to tetranortriterpenoid group, in general, compounds belong to this group exhibits a wide range of biological activities like insecticidal, anti-feedant and growth regulating activity on insects [25]. Cytotoxic effect of nimbolide (a limonoid) was analyzed on Sf9 (insect) cell lines, whereas the concentration at 9.8 lM acts fast on the Sf cells lines and induced

The larvae of many Lepidopteron species are major pests in agriculture. The major pest family belongs to Noctuidae, Pyralidae and Tortricidae. Ariadne merione belongs to the order Lepidoptera and family Nymphalidae. Although it is not considered as a serious pest, the in silico studies facilitates to maintain the data on target protein, compounds and an insight to design insect specific biopesticide.

