Parasites infect more than 200 million people worldwide. Chronic infestations may elicit inflammation, lead to cancer formation and deaths [1]. Infections from parasitic worms and protozoa are the major cause of human and wildlife morbidity and mortality. In tropical and sub-tropical regions, Plasmodium species, the parasitic protozoan responsible for human and animal malaria, is the leading cause of morbidity and mor- tality with children highly vulnerable, accounting for about 1e2 million deaths annually [2]. Similarly, schistosomiasis, lymphatic filariasis, ascariasis, enterobiasis and onchocerci- asis caused by helminthes and nematodes, are common health issues in most tropical and sub-tropical countries [3]. In endemic situations, these protozoan and worms coexist in human and animals to cause severe infestation and death [4]. In this situation, mass drug administration is usually the recommended treatment strategy for effective parasite clearance [5].

capable of producing both beneficial and harmful effects. It is important to evaluate the possible deleterious effects of administering mass drugs during protozoa and worm co- infections to avert the probable health effects. This is neces- sary considering that the harmful drug effects have been linked to liver damage, bone marrow toxicity, carcinogenesis and fetal developmental anomalies [18,19]. It is plausible that combine drug administration against malaria and parasitic worm co-infection may elicit toxic effects in the host due to drugedrug interactions [20]. In vivo and in vitro studies of in- dividual drugs; A-L, ABZ and IVR induced various toxicities in biological systems. Artemether treatment induced necrosis in gastric cancer cell line (PG100), and necrosis and apoptosis in human lymphocytes [24]. ABZ induced cytotoxicity in liver

cells of treated rats via elevation of liver function enzymes and alterations in oxidative stress enzymes during sub- chronic exposure [25]. IVR similarly induce cytotoxicity and genotoxicity in treated mice and Chinese hamster ovary cells [20,26]. These reports showed that A-L, ABZ and IVR are potentially harmful to biological systems. They may be considered effective and safe at therapeutic doses, but an overdose may result into severe tissue injury, organ failure and death [27].

Liver, the most sensitive predictor of chemical induced toxicity due to its involvement in metabolism, detoxification and storage of drugs and their metabolites, is an important target organ for drug induced injury in mammals [25,28,29]. Also, bone marrow the site of blood cell proliferation may be subject to drug induced toxicity during acute and chronic exposure [25,26]. Considering that Artemether and Lumefan- trine (A-L), Ivermectin (IVR) and Albendazole (ABZ) may be ignorantly abused following the mass drug administration strategy in the control of malaria and parasitic worm co- infection. It is important to understand the possible mecha- nism of liver dysfunctions and bone marrow cell toxicity (genotoxicity) of combine treatments of A-L, IVR and ABZ in mammalian systems is linked to reactive oxygen species formation.

Bone marrow micronucleus test was conducted according to Schmid [36]. Femoral bones from treated and control rats were surgically removed and the bone marrow flushed into eppendof tubes using 0.5 ml of Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS). The cells were centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 5 min and smear made on pre-cleaned grease free slides. Prepared slides were air dried and stained with May-Grunwald and Giemsa stains. They were coded and examined under an Olympus light mi-

prescriptions. Free access to drugs, coupled with wrong application due to ignorance of drug toxicity may endanger human and animal health. Ivermectin, Albendazole and Artemether-Lumefantrine used in this study were selected based on their overwhelmingly and extensively use as broad- spectrum anti-nematode, anti-helminthic and antimalarial drugs respectively [5,7,13,14,37]. Also individual toxic effects

Ivermectin induced neutrophilic activation and eosinophilic bursting of the human peripheral blood [43,44] further sup- ported the cellular inflammatory actions of the drugs. Generally inflammatory cells; macrophages, neutrophils and lymphocytes function by destroying invading microorgan- isms, removal of necrotic cells (accidental cell death) and cellular debris caused by drugs and other xenobiotics during phagocytosis [45,46]. This process is usually associated with intracellular ROS formation via autoxidation [45], which is in support of Hyslop et al. [47] that abscess is associated with inflammatory processes capable of producing ~100 mM of H2O2 (ROS). Alterations in the anti-oxidant enzymes and lipid per- oxidation status of the treated rats compared to the negative control further supported the cellular inflammatory actions.

injury due to its central role in drug metabolism, detoxifica- tion, storage, and portal location within the circulation [48]. It is the most sensitive predictor of chemical toxicity that cor- relates well with histopathology and serum biochemistry with little inter-animal variations [19]. As the major site of AL, ABZ and IVR metabolism [25,49,50], the liver may be prone to the toxic effects of these drugs and or their metabolites. Cell membrane damage in the liver is usually associated with the release of a number of cytoplasmic enzymes into the circu- latory system; this provides the basis for clinical diagnosis. Serum AST and ALT are the most used biochemical markers of hepatocellular necrosis and are considered sensitive in- dicators of hepatic drug induced injuries [51,52]. Significant increase in the activities of serum ALT, AST and total bilirubin observed in the treated rats mostly from groups D, E, G, H, J, K and L suggests acute hepatocellular injury due to drug induced necrosis. It is suggested that the administered drugs and or their metabolites induced lipid peroxidative damage to the hepatocytes (accidental cell death; necrosis) which increased cell membrane permeability to the cellular enzymes. This is supported by the observation of numerous hepatic necroses in the liver cells and significant increase in serum lipid peroxi- dation in the treated rats. Moreover the reports that Iver- mectin [29], Abendanzole [25], Artemether-Lumefantrine [49] and co-administration of albendazole and ivermectin [50] treated  rats  at  different  concentrations  significantly

increased transaminase concentrations is in concert with the observations herein. Also, increase in serum total bilirubin concentration with concomitant elevation of transaminases in AL treated rats have been associated with hepatocellular injury [53,54]. Histological study yields the most reliable in- formation on the type of lesions induced by drugs and their metabolites in tissues. It is also useful in providing informa- tion about acute and chronic effects of toxic substances that may not be detected by biochemical analysis [55,56]. Acute exposure of the drug combinations induced hepatic necrosis, kupffer cell hyperplasia and congestions of the hepatocytes by inflammatory cells observed in the liver cells of the treated rats correlated with the clinical signs and biochemical find- ings. These lesions were similarly reported in rats dosed with combination of Artemether-Lumefantrine and were attrib- uted to drug induced liver injury [57].

antagonism to induce alterations in enzyme biochemistry, biological molecules (ROS) and cell membrane [20,58,59]. These alterations may include increase in cellular formation of oxidative stress via creating imbalance between ROS and the antioxidant systems [48]. SOD activity is important in preventing oxidative damage by scavenging and converting superoxide anions to hydrogen peroxides, while catalase causes the decomposition of the hydrogen peroxide to protect tissues from the actions of the highly reactive hydroxyl radi- cals [52,60]. During these processes the activities of these en- zymes may be altered leading to ROS induced pathological disorders and DNA damage [46]. The observed significant decrease in the activities of SOD and CAT in the treated rats suggests harmful effects of the drug combinations (groups D, E, G, H, J, K and L) via excess undetoxified free radical forma- tion. These unscavenged free radicals probably induced lip- operoxide formation which caused lipid peroxidation in the cell membrane (increase MDA concentration) of the treated

DNA damage induced by the tested drug combinations. It is plausible that the drug combinations induced MNPCE was via ROS formation. Since DNA damage may be associated with accidental cell death (necrosis) or apoptosis induced by reac- tive oxygen species [66]. The combination of these drugs possibly affected the actively proliferative bone marrow cells during the M-phase of the cell cycle to induce oxidative DNA damage in the treated rats. Similar data obtained from the cyclophosphamide treated rats (positive control; group M) is in support of this assertion. Cyclophosphamide, an alkylating agent widely used in cancer chemotherapy [67], is known to alkylate DNA and protein via oxidative stress induction [68,69], leading to cytotoxicity and genotoxicity [68]. Alter- ations in the serum oxidative stress parameters and increase MNPCE formation in the bone marrow of cyclophosphamide treated rats (positive control; group M), validated the findings herein. Studies similarly reported that mice treated with abendazole harbored significant increase MNPCE in the bone marrow [70]. Pediatric patients with hepatic hydatid disease on abendazole treatment presented significant increase in sister chromatid exchange (SCE) and micronucleus fre- quencies in peripheral lymphocytes [39]. Also, mice exposed to  ivermectin  expressed higher  chromosome  aberration,

MNPCE formation and DNA fragmentation compared to the negative control [20]. The combinations of the tested drugs generated reactive oxygen species (ROS) which played important role in MNPCE formation in the treated rats. So- matic DNA damage due to drug toxicity predisposes cells to chromosome related disorders, aging and carcinogenicity [29,39,59,71,72].

The role of oxidative stress in the induction of abnormal cellular functions and pathological disorders are the current research focus for many studies [73e75]. Oxidative stress induced cell damage may occur via a number of mecha- nisms [74] and the damaged cells may be eliminated either by programmed cell death (apoptosis) or accidental cell death (necrosis). Necrosis, the most common histological lesions observed in the liver of the treated rats, is associated with the destruction of certain signal pathways in the cells and the disruption of mitochondrial functions via in- flammatory process [76]. Cellular necrosis and inflammatory cells have been associated with liver damage in Artemether- Lumefantrine treated rats [57]. This study showed that the combination of the tested drugs, mostly at higher doses elicited ROS formation in rats. Oxidative stress in- duction correlated with cellular necrosis, inflammatory cell production and other pathological lesions observed in the hepatocytes. Also MNPCE formation in bone marrow cells

Morita T, Asano N, Awogi T, Sasaki YF, Sato S, Shimada H, et al. Evaluation of the rodent micronucleus assay in the screening of IARC carcinogens (Group 1. 2A and 2B). The summary report of the 6th collaborative study by CSGMT/ JEMS MMS. Mutat Res 1997;389:3e122.

Brozovic G, Orsolic N, Rozgaj R, Kasuba V, Knezevic F, Knezevic AH, et al. DNA damage and repair after exposure to sevoflurane in vivo, evaluated in Swiss albino mice by the alkaline comet assay and micronucleus test. J Appl Genet 2010;51:79e86.

