Risk analysis has recently emerged as a structured and precise methodology to help modern companies understand their risks and plan the relative countermeasures well in advance. It is based on a number of indicators: parameters that quantify the key concepts on which an enterprise designs its security and safety investments. A modificator is a function that further modifies an existing indicator, and is itself an indicator. It is argued here that Risk Analysis can dramatically benefit from three novel modificators. One, the Exposure Factor during Critical Time (EFCT), expresses the percentage of loss or damage that an attack can infer to a time-critical asset. Another one, the Exposure Factor under Retaliation (EFR), formalises the mitigation to the loss or damage that an attack can infer to an asset when that loss or

damage can be retaliated back onto the attacker. The third one, the Mitigated Risk against Collusion (MRC), formalises how a security measure can be effective against a single attacker but not necessarily against a large team of attackers working collaboratively for the same target. Our simulated results firmly support the benefits of such augmented Risk Analysis confirming the novel insights it can provide.

This paper concentrates on Risk Analysis and precisely on Security Risk Analy- sis [12]. It is important to premise that a security threat is not necessarily successful in general, namely it will not accomplish its intended security breach with absolute certainty. However, Risk Analysis generally is an anticipated study of the conse- quences of successful threats. Therefore, the threats mentioned in the following are always assumed to succeed with total probability, and hence can be considered actual breaches.

The final modificator deals with the concept of collusion of attackers. Physical security of core assets in an enterprise cannot simplistically assume that the attacker is a single individual. Collusion of a group of attackers towards the same crime real- istically is a higher threat against the target asset. It follows that a security measure effective against a single attacker does not necessarily remain as effective against a team of colluded attackers. Our modificator Mitigated Risk against Collusion will formally enter collusion into the Risk Analysis process.

The Risk Assessment begins with the identification of the relevant assets. An asset can be seen as any tangible or intangible item that has some value for an enterprise and therefore needs protection. Once the assets are clearly defined, this phase produces a report describing threats and vulnerabilities that can harm a system, and advances putative countermeasures. Following [7,12,5], a threat is the potential for a threat-source to exercise (by accidental trigger or intentional exploit) a specific vulnerability; a vulnerability is a flaw or weakness in system security procedures, design, implementation, or internal controls that could be exercised (by accidental trigger or intentional exploit) by an attack and result in a security breach or a violation of the systems security policy; a countermeasure is a control that should be implemented in order to reduce the ability for an attacker to leverage existing system vulnerabilities.

The Risk Mitigation sees the senior management team prioritize, evaluate and implement the countermeasures recommended by the previous phases. Based on the risk level presented in the risk assessment report, the implementation actions are prioritized. Every alternative solution is analyzed calculating the indicators defined in the analysis phase, and then the most appropriate and cost-effective ones are selected for actual implementation. When the countermeasures are in place, they should be practically evaluated.

It is important to notice that estimating the ARO could be very difficult. It is usually created upon the likelihood of the event and the number of attackers that could exploit the given vulnerability. For example, a meteorite damaging the data center could be estimated to occur only once every 100,000 years and will have an ARO of 0.000001. In contrast, 100 data entry operators attempting an unauthorized access attempt could be estimated to occur six times a year per operator and will have an ARO of 600.

Summarizing the above indicators, SLE (and EF) gives a measure of the damage of a single threat; the ARO gives the likelihood of a threat to occur in a year; ALE tries to consider both the likelihood and the damage of each threat. All of the indicators seen so far do not consider the fact that the enterprise can try to build some defense for reducing the probability of vulnerability exploitation by attackers (e.g. implementing some firewall filtering), or reducing the damage of an attack (e.g. applying some backup strategies).

One may naively think that a valuable indicator must not address a microscopic detail such as the number of broken hinges, and that only macroscopic details are worthwhile. But this is not at all a theorem. A microscopic indicator may turn out to be relevant if specific analyses are being carried out, such as exactly on resistance of the hinges. The converse example says that the cost of installing stronger hinges is subsumed by the ROI, which may generically embody a variety of security measures. It follows that a valuable Risk Analysis tradeoffs detail and intelligibleness.

The same statement can be trivially rephrased swapping CFT and EF, as in the following proposition. However, it may exceed intuition that the totality of CTF ends up into EFCT even if EF is null. It means that even a normally uninteresting asset becomes problematic if attacked during critical time. It seems more intuitive that the highest EF produces the highest EFCT regardless of the CTF.

The second asset is the large simulation infrastructure typically used to conduct long experiments. The high CTF refers to a time when a very long experiment is about to terminate. Its influence on the SLECT is net. It is assumed that the infrastructure is subject to attacks with a rate of occurrence that is independent of the CTF. This proceeds from the assumption that always the same set of precautions is taken through time. This assumption has a major impact on the ALECT, which is some two and half times the ALE.

The concept was originally spelled out in the context of security protocols [3]. Two decades of research efforts have been spent to analyse security protocols. Such analyses would either find protocol flaws or prove the protocols immune to attacks. A number of papers have been published to report on previously unknown protocol flaws and to often come to the same conclusion: the protocol must be redesigned because it is flawed.

Modern security economics [1] teaches us that is not always possible in practice to redesign a security system from scratch even after serious evidence that it is flawed. The system may already be widely deployed so that the costs of its global replacement would be prohibitive for any enterprise. An important contribute to the currently fervid debate is the chance to keep a flawed system in use without much concern if it is found that the attack can be retaliated.

Our contribution here is a generalization of the concept of retaliation from the specific setting of security protocols to the broad security setting. Industrial espi- onage, which is a well-known though hardly documented reality, arguably proceeds on this very paradigm: spy on competitors but never allow them to take advantage of this espionage. Hence, we feel that the classical EF must be upgraded to consider attacks on assets that can be retaliated. This inspires the following definition.

says that zero damage entails zero retaliation, as it is intuitive. The second high- lights that the highest EF and the highest RF together bring the EFR down to null. Some pondering may convince that this is exactly in the spirit of retaliation. If we can totally retaliate, then we can get paid back of exactly what was stolen to us.

It can be seen that a very small ALER, namely a negative number actually expressing a benefit for the attacked enterprise, would produce a negative ROIR. Not only would this be an indication that a security investment is inconvenient, but it would also express the paradox that the enterprise rather benefits from being attacked and then retaliating. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that negative versus positive outcomes are accounted for in the context of Risk Analysis.

The second asset sees a similarly low retaliation factor but no variation between ARO and AROR. With this very static asset, it is reasonable to assume that attacks that can be retaliated occur at the same rate as attacks that cannot. This is in contrast with the first asset. The same considerations made for the first asset apply to the SLER and to the AROR here.

back! The negative ALER also reflects this setting. Because the MR and the CSI are never negative, the negative ALER produces a negative ROIR. It is a clear indication that any security investment to prevent the attack is technically inconvenient: the researcher benefits from being attacked and then attacking back.

Facing a single attacker is not generally the same as facing a team of attackers work- ing for the same illegal purpose. Researchers in computer security have considered this issue determinant ever since the 1970s. A security measure may withstand an attacker but fail to resist another one. Therefore, any security statement is strongly

Remarkably, this model of attacker has been adopted by researchers in com- puter security for some two decades. However, its age is starting to show [2], as collusion against computer security is not always necessary or desired at present. Offensive skills have become easy and cheap to acquire, so the present setting sees a large number attackers each working for his own sake. It is worth remarking that our treatment here is oriented to any security issues that an enterprise must face, and not to just those in computer security. If it is debateable that the Dolev-Yao threat model is rather unrealistic for computer security nowadays, it undoubtedly is entirely inappropriate for general security.

The best example might come from film fictions presenting attacks to banks or casinos performed by teams of colluded robbers. It is clear that a single attacker would have failed against such a demanding target. Not even surrounding a treasure with a number of robust steal-alloy doors operated by retina scanners will protect the treasure from an offending team with the same number of kamikazes plus a leader. If these examples confirm yet again the importance of setting a threat model, they also call for a detailed Risk Analysis able to account for the differences between one and many colluded attackers.

The Mitigated Risk [5] easily reflects the moderation percentage of a security attack following the adoption of a security measure. This indicator appears to be too static to both account for mitigation against a single attacker and a team of attackers. This concern inspires the following definition.

threat on an asset causes to the enterprise. Another significant indicator, the Mit- igated Risk, formalises the success of a security measure in withstanding a threat. This paper has advanced three novel indicators, two of which are modificators of the Exposure Factor, and the other one is a modificator of the Mitigated Risk.

Our Exposure Factor during Critical Time (EFCT) expresses the influence of time-criticality on EF. The Exposure Factor against Retaliation (EFR) indicates how the chance of retaliation can influence EF. The Mitigated Risk against Collusion (MRC) formalises the impact of a security measure against a team of colluded attackers. We have seen simulated results to demonstrate the novel insights that the three modificators can bring out.

