New and advanced technologies have introduced amazing areas like the Internet of Vehicles (IoV) and Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV). These two technologies are emerged to facilitate the ground users by providing more fast and convenient data communication services. Due to the open nature of these net- works, security and user privacy is always a serious concern. Different types of security attacks have been noticed in these networks like jamming attacks, global positioning system jamming, signal jamming, and data jamming. The existing solutions have been designed to resolve and tackle security issues such as authenticity, insurance of data integrity, provision of correct message authentication, and removal of redundant authentication. However, existing schemes have some limitations in terms of computational costs and efficiency and do not provide security at all levels. This paper proposes an Efficient Authentication Scheme for Safety Applications for Internet of Vehicles (EASSAIV) for message authenti- cation. The proposed scheme can gather, process, and verify the information delivered to roadside units, UAVs, or to the vehicles and authenticate the received messages. Proposed scheme achieved better per- formance as compared to state of the art scheme in terms of safety, packet loss, delay and computational cost.

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the over- view of related studies and research articles, which are related to the proposed research work. Section 3 explains the proposed mechanism in detail with all its working, security model, and authentication protocol. Section 4 presents the results, analysis. The last section concludes the paper with future direction.

In [19], authors proposed a Secure Authentication Scheme for VANETs with Batch Verification (SAS-VANET) based on three phases including key generation and pre-distribution, pseudo- identity generation and message signing, message verification. The first phase uses system parameters for the vehicles and RSUs. In the second phase, the vehicle uses its unique identity and runs the pseudo-identity generation process. In the last phase, the mes- sage is verified and accepted. The RSU is also verifying the message by using batch verification. The proposed scheme is evaluated in terms of average delay and lost packet rate. The results indicated the better performance of the proposed scheme is compared to the previous scheme. However, this scheme is not feasible for high mobility nodes and dynamic topological changes like in vehicular ad hoc networks.

In [20], the authors explained the infrastructure authentication scheme and discussed two types of infrastructure elements. OBUs are mounted on vehicles, and Road Side Units (RSUs) are deployed at the roadside as an infrastructure. These infrastructures commu- nicate usually with the help of the TA for the integration of regis- tration and provision of authentication services. The proposed scheme consists of four phases including system initialization, key generation, signing stage, and verification stage, and then these phases are technically explained. Afterward, the security analysis is conducted and lastly, performance evaluation is done. Authors claimed that results where the proposed scheme contained costs

In [21], the authors proposed a privacy-preserving sensory data sharing scheme and addressed location privacy preservation, sen- sory data acquisition, and collection issues of IoV networks. This data collection and distribution is collected by sensor nodes and onboard devices installed in vehicles. Researchers modified the pallier cryptosystem with the structuring of multi-dimensional sensory data that is recorded at different locations. The modified pallier cryptosystem helps in achieving privacy-preserving sensory data aggregation for location. In the second phase, data acquisition is performed. In this phase, the proxy re-encryption technique is used to achieve results related to location privacy preservation of data querying at the network edge. This implies location privacy preservation without the involvement of a trusted central entity. It is expressed that during data aggregation, the location-based data queries may violate the location privacy of vehicles. Existing schemes are mostly designed for cloud environments that are out-

sourced with typically fixed storage. The proposed scheme also maintains data integrity and collision attack resistance. The results showed that the proposed scheme largely reduced the computa- tional overhead and communication cost in comparison with exist- ing OT and data aggregation protocols. However, vehicle nodes mobility is one of the important factor to design any kind of secu- rity solution for IoV network.

In [25], the authors discussed an enhanced anonymity resilience security protocol for vehicular ad hoc networks. This work is an enhancement and refinement of an earlier proposed protocol. The authors proposed a robust protocol that ensures security protection on existing security attacks. Also, it protects all related

possible attacks. The authors also performed simulations through Scyther and confirm that all the private information is protected while developing the common key. The proposed solution has five distinct phases including system setup, user registration, system login, mutual authentication, and data authentication. Subse- quently, formal security verification is done using a broadly accepted Scyther tool. It is to formally analyze security protocols and potential vulnerabilities. The results show better performance in terms of computation and communication overheads. However, road safety measures, multimedia data transfer, and vehicle perfor- mance data are some important factors which need attention.

vision of complete security at all stages of message authentication. To address the aforementioned issues in this research, an Efficient EASSAIV is proposed. This proposed scheme secures the informa- tion between the imparting vehicles utilizing asymmetric encryp- tion procedures for example using the public key and private key encryption and decoding. This encryption-decoding measure is uti- lized to trade information between the vehicles and with drones securely. The proposed scheme is based on three main phases including the initial deployment phase, implementation phase, and operational phase. The first phase is relatively brief and the lat- ter two phases are more comprehensive. These phases are the core of the entire model and the complete concept is explained thor- oughly in these phases.

The timestamp expresses facts about the occurring of an event, on the other hand, the nonce is an assessment value that is utilized just a single time and is utilized to recognize one case of the pro- tocol from the other. The selection of nonce value and timestamps also helps in the provision of deterrence against a replay attack. The controller ensures if the nonce value is not issued prior, it is done by comparing and validating the received timestamp with the current timestamp. The vehicle ID is obtained and the con- troller creates a virtual identity for V1 and stores the ID in the data- base. The controller now sends the concatenated values of the virtual identity of V1, and encrypted values of Vehicle V1 private

successful validation, the gateway checks its database for informa- tion about V2. After this gateway sends K12 to Vehicle 1. This is a shared key for establishing communication between Vehicle 1 and Vehicle 2. Along with the shared key, the gateway sends a sec- ond nonce value N2 after concatenation with the current times-

shared key from the public key of the gateway and shared key con- catenation with the private key of vehicle 2. This assures vehicle 2 that it has been provided by the gateway. After performing decryp- tion, vehicle 2 gets a third nonce value using the shared key. As vehicle 2 know the hash function and shared key it can now get and perform validation on timestamp. Now, vehicle 2 responds to vehicle 1 with the fourth nonce value N4 after concatenating it with received N3 and valid timestamp. This shall be encrypted by a shared key. This authenticates Vehicle 2 to Vehicle 1. Lastly, vehi- cle 1 responds with a fourth nonce value encrypted by a shared key which is only known by Vehicle 1 and Vehicle 2, this shall authen- ticate Vehicle 1 to Vehicle 2.

This tool cannot perform cryptanalysis despite having complete control over the network due to the assumption that the crypto- graphic primitives used are perfect. This tool uses HLPSL which is a formal language based on a modular approach for modeling com- munication and security protocols. This is an expressive language that is role-based. AVISPA allows the user to interact by submitting a security problem that can occur and the protocol under verifica- tion needs to be tested. The specifications are then translated into Intermediate Format at a lower abstraction level. Foregoing in view, these translations are then served as inputs to the AVISPA backend for verification of the communication and security protocol.

The property of secrecy ensures the unauthorized access of data/ information for anyone. In other words, the information should only be accessible to those for whom it is intended. This proposed protocol ensures the property of secrecy by keeping all nonce values encrypted and secret during communication. Only intended receivers can decrypt the nonce values and similarly the shared key is also kept secret between communicating parties. The property of integrity implies that the information when

received is not been altered or tempered during communication. If this property is maintained, the data received must be in original form from the sender. This proposed protocol is designed keeping in mind the property of integrity by using hash values of the shared session key. Upon receiving, the receiver verifies the hash by using the same algorithm, and in this way, data integrity is ensured.

sive attacks. It also indicates that there is no authentication or secrecy attack on the protocol and it is also safe against man in the middle and replays attacks. The shared session key is found safe by having no attack by the intruder. Authentication of partic- ipating entities is being done by initiating the exchange of nonce values. Message transmission and secrecy are also found to be intact after the communication. The back-end confirms the absence of any possible attack and found the proposed protocol to be safe. Hash functions are proved to maintain the integrity of communication.

SPAN. After this for verifying the model, back-ends are used which are provided in this tool and an active intruder is introduced. OFCM and CL-AtSe back-ends show verification results by confirming the safety of the protocol under both back-ends. This simulation also ensures that the proposed protocol is secure against active or pas-

In this paper, a scheme is introduced for UAV and IoV networks and provide more secure data communication by using authentica- tion mechanism. The proposed EASSAIV is using a mutual message authentication mechanism between drones and vehicles nodes to ensure the security in IoV networks. Most of the existing message authentication schemes do not work on the mutual authentication between nodes. The proposed scheme ensured mutual authentica- tion between vehicle-to-vehicle. The proposed scheme is verified using the AVISPA tool and modeled in SPAN using HLPSL for more practical demonstrations and theoretical evaluations of the results. Simulation results showed the better performance of the proposed scheme compared to the state of the art scheme. This work is also extendible in the future especially for highway environments where the distance between vehicles is another challenge for an authentication mechanism.

