Authentic learning is an instructional approach that often situates learning in a context akin to the real world. Authenticity in learning occurs through the dynamic interactions between the learner, the task, and the environment where the learning occurs (Barab et al., 2000). The attainment that occurs due to these dynamic interactions allows the learner to apply the knowledge gained in a similar context in the future. The authenticity of learning experiences has been of interest to re- searchers for decades as such experiences engage learners as they can connect what learners are learning in their classroom to real world problems, applications, and contexts (Falconer, 2010, 2013, 2014; Kno-

In this paper, we discuss a study where graduate students completed learning activities to practice specific skills (e.g., asking a patient ques- tions during an interview) within a virtual reality learning environment (VRLE). In the study, we investigate whether the collaborative nature of the learning activities and the authentic design of the learning experi- ence, including the learning tasks, learning environment, and the social

authentic problems (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014). Situated learning theory (i.e., situated cognition theory) holds that knowledge should be delivered in authentic contexts (Brown et al., 1989), which involves placing learners into learning contexts where learners can observe, evaluate, participate, and interact with others, including experts who can model behaviors (Lave & Wenger, 1991). Situating learners in an authentic learning context offers them opportunities to develop knowl- edge and skills for real-world situations while the support of a classroom instructional context with a teacher and peers (Lowell & Yang, 2022; Radinsky et al., 2001; Stefaniak, 2015).

An authentic learning context, also referred to as a learning envi- ronment, consists of the task, the environment, and the culture and should reflect how the knowledge and skills learned will be used for authentic tasks in real life (Gulikers et al., 2005; Herrington et al., 2014; Holt et al., 2012; Onda, 2012; Smeds et al., 2015; Zuo et al., 2019). The learning context could be physical or virtual, and it should resemble the real world with the complexity, limitations, options, and possibilities found in real life (Gulikers et al., 2005) and it may include simulated and immersive tasks and a realistic environment (Zuo et al., 2019).

When creating instruction and learning experiences, designing a realistic learning environment based on a real-world context is an important goal, as replicating real-world complexities is essential to maximize a significantly higher recall of learned content and better skill transfer (Imuta et al., 2018). Human memory is highly dependent on the environment in which the learning or event occurs (Smith & Vela, 2001), as recall of concepts learned occurs best when the learning context is replicated in the test environment (Imuta et al., 2018). Thus, carefully designing the instructional context to the real-world context is essential to maximize the knowledge or skill learned for potential transfer.

Functional	The degree to which the virtual environment simulates the stimulus- response characteristics of the real world (Champney et al., 2017). For example, the response of the environment when the user presses a switch or pushes a door. Does the virtual environment replicate the real-world response to such actions?

Fidelity is "the degree to which the detail and quality of an original, such as a picture, sound, or story, is copied exactly" (Cambridge Dictio- nary, n.d.). A learning environment's physical, functional, psychological, and  social  fidelity  governs  how  closely  it  replicates  the real-life/performance environment, creating a complex and realistic learning environment that provides the safety of formal learning (Bland et al., 2014; Branch, 2013; Champney et al., 2017; Maran & Glavin, 2003; Sinatra et al., 2021).

Authenticity is important in enhancing the learning outcome in a virtual reality-based learning environment. Several studies have shown that the authenticity of a VRLE impacts the cognitive, affective, and social learning processes (Harley et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2010; Makransky et al., 2019a & b; Salzman et al., 1999). A VRLE where the authentic learning experience is created would impact processes. Therefore, it is necessary to study how the media and technology features of the VRLE impact cognitive, affective, and social learning (Kozma, 1994).

Learner motivation regulates the energy and attention assigned to a task or activity (Ratey, 2001), and higher satisfaction leads to higher motivation and learner engagement (Bhagat et al., 2019; VanMeerten & Varma, 2017). Enjoyment is an activity-related emotion and can be observed as a by-product of motivation and learner engagement (Pekrun, 2006; Harley et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2010). Studies that measure the affective outcome of a VRLE have shown that ease of use and relevance of learning content leads to higher levels of satisfaction among learners (Bursali & Yilmaz, 2019; Lee et al., 2010). Moreover, enjoyment levels were higher in a more authentic learning environment (Harley et al.,

week of their Diagnosis of Mental Health Issues in Counseling course and provided several scaffolds, including tutorials on using the technology. The two units were chosen near the end of the course to provide students time to become familiar with the instructional methods of the course and the VRLE environment. Further, two units were used in this study, rather than one, to account for the possibility of unit content making a differ- ence in students' experiences, perceptions, and learning. We compared role-playing activities in a simulated context and environment to stan- dard methods (i.e., assigned readings, videos, class discussions) used to instruct students on the disorders and the procedures for interviewing and diagnosing patients.

When designing authentic virtual experiences, the authenticity of the learning environment, task, and culture is important. The virtual coun- selor training facility was created in the VR environment, Second Life. The students downloaded the client software to their computers to access the VR environment. Once logged in, they could explore the virtual world with an avatar they choose, interact with others, build things, and pur- chase items with in-world funds. There was no cost for users to download the client software, explore, or interact with others. Second Life provided many benefits for activities in the Diagnosis of Mental Health Issues in Counseling course, including ease of access for the instructor and stu- dents during and outside of scheduled learning times and options to design the environment and avatars to meet instructional and learner needs. The physical and functional authenticity of the environment was achieved by closely recreating the structure and complexity of the building where students would normally apply their skills.

Learning outcomes for the VRLE activities include developing inter- viewing and diagnosis skills and correct procedural application. Two different skill sets are needed for interviewing: facilitative and clinical skills. Facilitative skills focus on developing rapport with a patient and building a therapeutic alliance. Clinical skills concentrate on information gathering and diagnosis (case conceptualization). Specific skills needed to conduct diagnostic interviews include determining the presenting problem(s), observing signs, listening for symptoms, gathering informa- tion to differentiate one disorder from other disorders, and determining if the presenting problem impairs personal functioning (American Psychi- atric Association, 2013).

The CAP scale was administered after each of the three learning ac- tivities for both units. We thus had three data sets for each unit - one for the literature review, video, and the VRLE. The data from the cognitive and affective subscales were summed to get a cumulative score for every learner for the data collected after each activity in both units. We thus had cumulative scores for three activities in each unit.

A mixed-method research design was chosen because qualitative and quantitative research approaches offer opportunities to analyze and interpret the data using different methods. This research design will provide a complete picture (O'Cathain et al., 2010), and including both approaches will strengthen the validity of the study design (Oleinik, 2011).

The quantitative research strand in this study is based on objective methods and numeric data that explore a research query from a hu- manistic or idealistic approach to understand the participant's beliefs, experiences, attitudes, behavior, and interactions (Pathak et al., 2013). By triangulating the data from a qualitative and a quantitative approach, we can analyze the data objectively and through a humanistic view.

When reviewing the qualitative data, we completed a content analysis of the open-ended questions from the attitudinal survey using both an inductive (Denzin, 2012; Thomas, 2006) and a semantic approach (Oleinik, 2011), allowing the data to determine the themes. Next, we used a descriptive exploratory approach to complete the thematic anal- ysis. Our theoretical lens in our qualitative data collection and analysis is based on past research on authentic and situated learning, as well as observations of students during the learning activities, and our review of the data collected with the goal that aspects of the theory will guide us in determining what is most important in the data (Noble & Smith, 2014). Content analysis is a widely used research approach for making repli- cable and valid inferences from texts (or other meaningful matter) to the context of their use (Salkind, 2010).

- one for literature review, video, and a 3D virtual environment. The data from the cognitive and affective subscales were summed to get a cumu- lative score for every learner for the data collected after each of the three activities in both units. A one-way ANOVA was conducted on scores for every unit to compare the mean confidence level for each of the three activities in that unit.

was conducted on these scores to compare the mean level of perceived confidence for each of the three activities in a unit. This was followed by the Bonferroni T-test to make a pair-wise comparison of each activity in the unit. The confidence levels of the learners after each type of activity for both units were statistically at par with each other, showing no sig- nificant difference in confidence levels in any of the units. These results showed that the VR-based activity was at par with their regular learning activities in developing confidence in learning transfer.

Integrated findings. The physical, functional, affective, interac- tive, and social experiences noted by the learners reflect that the VR- based learning activity and the environment were perceived as very realistic and authentic by the students. This outcome is confirmed by what was captured in the quantitative data, thus verifying our results.

Integrated findings. It is evident from the qualitative data anal- ysis for the second research question that students' self-efficacy beliefs for individual tasks in the counseling and diagnosis practice varied a lot after the experience within the VR environment. The perceived confidence was also distributed on a broad spectrum after the VR activity. Moreover, students experienced metacognitive reflection about their learning and practice needs because of the VR activity. The realization of what the interview process entails and what skills and knowledge they need to build on was evident through the qualitative data. In conclusion,

We also found that the average confidence of learners to perform the task after the VR learning activity was on par with their confidence after other pedagogical approaches used during the course. Qualitative data revealed a broad spectrum of confidence levels among learners after the task. While some learners experienced increased confidence and others said their confidence had decreased, several learners expressed a change in self-efficacy beliefs about specific tasks such as diagnosing, inter- viewing, and assessing as well as experienced metacognitive realizations about the skill and knowledge they needed to work on for the actual performance context of counseling interviews. These self-efficacy beliefs and metacognitive realizations were unexpected in this study that may help understand how VRLEs affect the learning process. For further un- derstanding of this finding, we will define each of these constructs theoretically and then discuss the implications of the same from the findings.

This finding may be particularly useful in furthering research around the long-term retention and transferability of skills learned in a VR-based learning environment. Research in VR-based education shows that stu- dents demonstrate better retention and transfer of skills post-VR-based activities when tested immediately after the learning activity rather than a delayed assessment (Birt et al., 2017; Merchant et al., 2014). Hence, more research is needed to identify how long-term retention and

Like all studies, some limitations must be considered when reviewing the results of this study. First, relevant prior research studies on our topic were limited. Although a pilot study was completed to develop a theory, our research topic had yet to be studied to provide a theoretical foun- dation for our research questions. Second, this study was conducted in one course with one set of students and one instructor, potentially limiting the generalizability of the results. We encourage additional studies to examine similar questions with other populations. Other lim- itations involve the capabilities of the technology to produce high- fidelity rendering of content and interaction fidelity. Specifically, the lack of control of avatar body movements (e.g., facial expressions, hand

Students perceived the learning context in the VRLE, comprising the learning environment and the learning tasks, as authentic. Further, stu- dents perceived the fidelity of the design of the learning environment and learning tasks as authentic. However, some students did have technology challenges that impacted their perceived fidelity and authenticity. Thus, learning experiences in a VR environment need to be designed and tested to ensure optimum technological performance in the learning context. For example, checking whether the VR experience will function well at the location of the training facilitation when multiple users are engaging with it simultaneously. It is also important to ensure that learners are provided onboarding to the VR platform or environment to familiarize them with the technology before they experience the intended learning activity.

