In this paper we present a verification strategy for signalling principles for the control of a railway interlock- ing system written in ladder logic. All translation steps have been implemented and tested on a real-world example of a railway interlocking system. The steps in this translation are as follows: 1. The development of a mathematical model of a railway interlocking system and the translation from ladder logic into this model. 2. The development of verification conditions guaranteeing the correctness of safety conditions.

In this paper we summarise the work carried out in a small case study, some of which is reported in [9]. Within the scope of this project we have written software which allows for the fully-automated verification of railway interlocking systems using SAT solver technology. This software has been applied to the interlocking system of a small UK railway yard.

Part of the research was to implement a prototype verification system. This system takes as input: the ladder logic to verify, a model of the railway yard, and a signalling principle; if a counter-example is identified, the system provides a LATEX document detailing the state of the system when the counter-example appears. LATEX is used, as opposed to simply outputting the state of the system in plain text, so that the produced counter-examples can be elegantly formatted and presented to make it easier for an engineer to understand.

Signalling principles for the UK railway industry are written in plain English. A second component of the research was to define a formal language in which to precisely represent signalling principles. We have written a program which takes signalling principles defined in this language, and produces safety conditions for which the ladder logic is to be verified.

This paper is structured as follows. We start by providing some background knowl- edge on railways and interlocking systems. We then provide a discussion of the verification technique used in this research. Then a discussion of the production of safety conditions from signalling principles follows. Finally, we present a survey of related work and some conclusions to the research carried out.

Points. Points are a special type of track segment used to merge two lines into one line. A train can drive over a set of points if it has been locked, i.e. reached a definite position, and has been so locked into position physically and virtually

by software. The two possible positions of a set of points, when it is locked, are called normal and reverse. The normal position is when the points allow trains to travel straight over the points and reverse is when the points allow trains to branch off of, or on to, the line. 5 Each set of points in a railway yard is given a unique identifier in addition to the unique track segment identifier.

Verification of safety properties in systems defined with ladder logic can be achieved in a number of different ways. Ladder logic is conceptually trivial to translate into propositional logic; this is exploited to allow the verification to be performed within the framework of propositional logic. Thus, safety conditions to be verified are also defined in propositional logic.

which can not actually arise. There may be a state in which the safety condition holds, but such that after the execution of the ladder the safety condition is violated; however it may be that the original state is unreachable. In order to find out whether the counter-example is genuine, it is necessary to find a trace from the initial state to the identified counter-example. This is not straight forward with our inductive proof system 6 .

The translation has two steps: the first removes quantification, and the second resolves predicates into literals from the ladder or a constant Boolean value depend- ing on the context. Variables in the signalling principle range over finite domains, as all railway yards are finite. Thus, universal quantification can be replaced by a finite conjunction, and existential quantification can be replaced by a finite disjunc- tion. The topology model would be queried for a finite set of quantified values. For instance the variable pt in the example signalling principle introduced ranges over the domain of all points in the railway yard.

We do not know how well our approach scales up, since we have only applied it to a modest railway yard. Current interlocking systems being developed have over 3000 assignments. We do not anticipate any serious problems although the nature of the satisfiability problem means that the computational complexity will grow exponentially when attempting to verify interlocking systems with more and more assignments.

