For certain types of Gibbs distributions it has been demonstrated that there are algorithms which recover an unknown image which is a typical sample from the distribution when provided with the projections of the image and with the values of the parameters of the Gibbs distribution [7]. A difficulty is that in a practical application the parameter values are not known to us. On the other hand, we usually have access to typical images of the application area. The problem that we address is the estimation of the parameters from such sample images for the purpose of reconstruction.

In the rest of this introductory section we make mathematically precise the ideas just introduced, both for Gibbs distribution parameter estimation and for binary tomography. In Section 2 we point out several considerations that can be made in order to reduce the number of parameters which need to be estimated for Gibbs priors. Section 3 gives some examples of images modeled by Gibbs distributions and their reconstructions from three projections. We describe the Metropolis algorithm which is used for generating random samples from a distribution. The Metropolis algorithm can be adapted to find images that approximately satisfy the projections in addition to having relatively high probability of occurrence according to the Gibbs distribution. Section 4 describes three published methods, from [1], [2] and [3], for the estimation of the parameters. Once we have estimated the parameters, in Section 5 we use the squared norm for measuring the success of the estimation process. In Section 6 we evaluate the estimated Gibbs priors from the point of view of their usefulness in binary tomography. Finally, in Section 7 we give the conclusions of the paper.

To see the usefulness of image modeling by Gibbs distributions in binary tomography, consider the problem of reconstructing a binary image from its horizontal, vertical, and one of the two principal diagonal projections, under the assumption that the image is a sample from a known Gibbs distribution. If we view the image as a matrix of 0 and 1 entries, then the row (column) sum of the matrix corresponds to the horizontal (vertical) projection of the image. The inputs to the reconstruction problem are: the three projections of the image and the parameters that define the Gibbs distribution from which the image is assumed to be a sample.

0.52, 0.2) (bottom-left), and (1.2, 1.2, 1.2, 0.52, 0.6) (bottom-right). Note that the difference between the top-left and any other image is caused by a change in only one parameter. With respect to the top-left image the top-right image has a higher

