For the sake of presentation, in the remainder of the paper we assume n = 3 (one leader, two followers). We remark that our results can be adapted to any n. In Sect. 9, we will indeed report on computational experiments carried out for games with more than two followers.

We show that the first action of the leader can be safely discarded from the game (U4, U f1 , U f2 ) if and only if the game (U1, U2) admits a mixed-strategy NE providing the players with a utility of m, which implies that deciding whether the first action of the leader can be discarded is NP-hard. If the leader plays their first action, they receive a utility of 1/4. If the leader plays their second action, the followers play the best NE for the leader, which can be either (i) the pure-strategy NE in which both play their last action providing the leader with a utility of 0 or (ii) if it exists, the mixed-strategy NE providing the leader with a utility of 1. For any mixed strategy of the leader, the behavior of the followers does not change w.r.t. the case in which the leader plays their second action as a pure strategy. This is because, when the leader

randomizes between their two actions, the utility of the followers f1 and f2 is an affine transformation (with positive coefficients) of U1 and U2, making them play exactly as in the case where the leader plays their second action as a pure strategy. Thus, at an optimistic LFNE the leader plays a pure strategy, playing their first action if (U1, U2) does not admit a mixed-strategy NE and their second action if it does. The first action of the leader can therefore be safely discarded if and only if (U1, U2) admits a mixed-strategy NE providing the players with a utility of m.

Throughout the section, the results of our experiments are compared w.r.t. com- puting time (in seconds) and (multiplicative) optimality gap.3 For both values, we report the arithmetic average for each game class and value of m and n over the 10 corresponding instances. In all the boxplots that we report, the red dash indicates the median, the box extends from the 25th to the 75th percentile, and dotted lines denote the whole sample distribution. Outliers are highlighted with a red mark.

lower bound (corresponding to the best feasible solution) and the smallest upper bound found by the solver within the time limit. The min operator prevents an unbounded value for LB = 0. An optimality gap of 105 highlights that the method fails to produce a useful solution as, due to the payoffs being in [0, 100], any strategy of the leader can achieve, at least, a utility of 0.

as well as extra valid constraints). These results suggest that the formulation which is solved more efficiently with each solver is O-NF-LMFM-I with BARON and O- NF-LMFM-III with SCIP. These results are in line with the general computational behavior of BARON and SCIP, as the former tends to exhibiting a better performance on highly nonlinear and mostly continuous problems, whereas the latter becomes more efficient as the number of integer/binary variables of the problem increases.

