nism of heavy metal ions on AP and AAC was studied using various analytical techniques. The effect of several parameters such as contact time, algal dose, effect of pH, and initial concentration of metal ions on the adsorption process was estimated. The optimum ad- sorption was found to occur at pH 5.0, contact time 60 min, adsorbent dose 0.8 g/L, and initial concentration 60 mg/L. The maximum removal efficiency values of AP and AAC for heavy

paint pigments, batteries, mining operations and agriculture sector [5,6]. Because of their toxic nature, most heavy metals cause several health problems like kidney damage, brain func- tion disorders and nervous system deteriorations [7,8]. Their poisonous symptoms are insomnia, irritability, anemia, dizzi- ness and muscles weakness [9].

During the study of pH effect, the parameters of initial metal concentration, algal dosage, and shaking time were fixed at 10 mg/L, 0.1 g and 120 min, respectively. Effects of pH were tested at pH value 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8.

This experiment was achieved to verify the effect of biomass weight on the sorption process. Different weights of biomass (0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8 and 1.0 g/L) were mixed and shaken with a so- lution of 10 mg/L at pH 5 for 120 min.

Constant weights of AP and AAC (0.4g) were added to 10 mg/L heavy metal solution. Contact times were fixed at t = 5, 10, 20, 60 and 120 min. The solutions were filtered after each contact time and analyzed by atomic absorption spectrophotometer.

Pb+2 ions. SEM and nitrogen adsorption indicated the pres- ence of porosity on KOH-activated carbon more than its precursor powder. TGA exhibited thermal instability in the case of U. lactuca when compared with KOH-activated carbon and the presence of chemical function groups on both adsorbents was illustrated by FTIR. The optimum adsorption condition was found to occur at around pH 5.0, contact time 60 min, adsor- bent dose 0.8 g/L, and initial concentration 60 mg/L. KOH- activated carbon was found to be more efficient than algal powder in removing heavy metal. Finally, it was concluded that KOH-activated carbon based U. lactuca can be used as an ef- fective technology for removal of metal ions from contaminated environment.

