Agents in a cellular grid have the task to move from their start positions to their individual target positions as fast as possible. Four models using agents are proposed that can be applied to the problem. These models are conform to the CA paradigm. The agents have either a moving direction (directed agent) or not (undirected agent). The agents behave either in a deterministic way according to a control automaton

one agent can be located on one site. Each agent has its own target and the targets are disjoint. Thus each agent tries separately to move to its own target. When the agents are moving to their targets they will constrain each other by cells that are

A CA based path planning algorithm in multi-agent systems has been proposed in [17], where many agents have to find the same target. Our investigation is related to this work, but a main difference in our task is, that each agent has its own individual target. The target search in agent systems has been researched in many variations: with moving targets [11,4], and in single-agent systems [10]. Here we restrict our investigation to stationary targets, and multiple agents having only

In this model no control automaton is used. Instead the agent tries to move directly on the shortest path to the target. The shortest path is any path that reduces the distance to the target in each step in any of the two directions. Often there are two alternate directions that can be used for the shortest path. If the agent has a choice, the choice is decided randomly. If a conflict is anticipated in direction of the shortest path, the agent randomly chooses one of the other directions, or it is blocked when a conflict is anticipated in all four directions. Note that it is not necessary for success that all agents follow the shortest path, nevertheless they will follow it, if no conflicts occur.

Each agent has a moving direction. No control automaton is used. Instead the agent tries to move directly to the target by turning itself in the right direction. Often there are two alternate next directions that can be used for the shortest path. If the agent has a choice, the choice is decided randomly. If a conflict is anticipated one agent is selected to move by the arbiter comprised in the crossing cell (as in the model M3). If two agents are in direct contact and point to each other they are swapped (as in the model M3).

(3) directed agents, (4) random directed agents. The moving and turning actions of an undirected and directed agent are controlled by a MEALY control finite state machine (also called control algorithm) that is a part of the whole cell automaton. Control algorithms for a different number of agents (k = 1 ... 256) were evolved

