The purpose of this paper is to describe a set of properties of a theory of physics, which together imply that the theory makes use of the complex numbers. These properties are phrased in terms of the way that physical processes interact with each other, and as a result are intuitive and physical. Our approach is also robust: we are not concerned with many details of the theory, such as the nature of dynamics, or the way that measurement is described.

We call this category the category of processes associated to a particular physical theory. Of course, very few realistic theories of physics will naturally be presented in terms of a category of processes, but for many theories there will be natural candidates. If any of these have the properties we will describe, then that will indicate that the underlying theory somehow makes use of on the complex numbers. For the case of quantum mechanics, we might take systems to be separable Hilbert spaces and processes to be bounded linear maps; this theory certainly makes use of the complex numbers, and its category of processes satisfies the properties we will describe.

In any monoidal category, we define the scalars to be the hom-set Hom(I, I). This will have a certain amount of extra structure, depending on the properties of the ambient category. At the very least, as is well-known, it is a commutative monoid, where monoid multiplication is given by morphism composition.

Proof. We have already shown that the scalars in such a category are commutative and have cancellable addition and multiplication, and we will use these properties throughout. Let A, B, a, b be scalars satisfying aA + bB = aB + bA and a /= b. If a = 0 then bB = bA, and cancelling the nonzero b we obtain B = A; the case b = 0 is similar. Conversely, if A = 0 then bB = aB, and B = A = 0 is the only possibility, or B would cancel contradicting our assumption that a /= b; the case B = 0 is similar. In each of these cases, therefore, the implication holds.

We will use this theorem to show that the self-adjoint elements of the field Q(D(S)) admits an order. It then follows straightforwardly that the semiring of self-adjoint elements of S admits an order, through its involution-preserving embedding into Q(D(S)). However, we emphasise that there is no guarantee that this order will be unique, or that there will be a canonical choice of order.

From this lemma we see that a sum of squares of nonzero self-adjoint elements of the field Q(D(S)) is nonzero. So by theorem 3.7 the self-adjoint elements of Q(D(S)) admit an ordering, and in general they will admit many different orderings. By extension, the self-adjoint elements of the scalar semiring S also admit an ordering, since they embed into the self-adjoint elements of Q(D(S)). This concludes the proof of the main theorem.

done, so suppose that neither hold. Suppose that  (J ) + a < b: then  (J + a) < b by the preservation of infima by addition, but this is not possible, since b would then serve as a greater lower bound. Similarly, we can rule out (K) + a > b. The only remaining situation is that in which (K) + a < b < (J ) + a, from which it follows by additive cancellability that  (K) <  (J ). Construct the mean of  (K) and V(J ) as m := 1 (W(K) + V(J )); then by property (i),

with 1 (H) < n; from this we see that (H) < 2n, and so (H) itself is not an infinite element. But then 2n is a greater lower bound for the elements of H, which contradicts the definition of  (H). The only remaining possibility is that the set H is empty.

Finally we will show that if the involution on the scalars is nontrivial, then the scalar semiring is actually isomorphic to C, with involution given by complex conju- gation. We have demonstrated the existence of an involution-preserving embedding of S into C; this embedding contains the nonnegative reals, and nontriviality of the involution implies that there is at least one point off the real line. However, from a consideration of the geometry of the complex plane, it is straightforward to show that any such semiring must in fact be the entire complex plane.	2

