This paper presents a stochastic model of the cell cycle control in eukaryotes. The framework used is based on stochastic process algebras for mobile systems. The automatic tool used in the simulation is the BioSpi. We compare our approach with classical ODE specifications.

CDKs activity can be regulated in three ways: by availability of cyclin sub-units, by stoichiometric binding to a cyclin-dependent kinases inhibitor (CKI) and by phosphorilation of CDK sub-units. Most CDKs are present in constant abundance throughout the cell cycle, while the cyclin abundance depends on the rate of cyclin synthesis and degradation, both of which are regulated during the cell cycle as we will see later. The stoichiometric inhibitor CKI of cyclin/CDK dimers also is synthesized and degraded at rates that are regulated during the cell cycle. Finally, CDKs activity can be inhibited by phosphorilation of a specific tyrosine residue. During the cycle the phosphorilation state of CDK varies as the fluctuation of the activity of the tyrosine kinase Wee1 and tyrosine phosphatase Cdc25.

The operational semantics of the calculus thereby defines the dynamic behaviour of the modeled system driven by a race condition, yielding a probabilistic model of computation. All the activities that are enabled in a state compete and the fastest one succeeds. The continuity of exponential distributions ensures that the probability that two activities end simultaneously is zero.

state of CYCLIN process (CYCLIN BOUND), that identifies the cyclin/CDK dimer can undergo three reactions: cyclin sub-unit degradation (DEGCYC), binding with a CKI (CYC CDK CKI), to form the trimer cyclin/CDK/CKI (TRIM), or the degradation of CKI sub-unit (DEGCKI). The active form of Cdh1 protein (CDH1) can degradate the cyclin (DEGRCYC), can be inactivated (INACT) by the join with a phosphate group or can be activated by CDC14 (ACTCDC14) that removes from it the phosphor. The trimer CYC CDK CKI can be resolved in the dimer cyclin/CDK (DIM) or it can remain itself (NOTHING).

