Since the 1970s, chaotic dynamics has attracted a great deal of attention within the theory of dynamical systems (see, e.g., [12]), and much effort has been put into giving the notion of chaos a precise mathematical definition. In this regard, several concepts of chaos have been established, and there is an extensive literature deal- ing with the interconnections between all the different approaches. For a detailed exposition of this issue we refer to [9,14].

In [18] the notion of strong chaos is explored in the slightly more specific but still wide-ranging context of topological groups. Among other things it is shown there that a locally compact Hausdorff topological group admits a faithful strongly chaotic continuous action on some Hausdorff space if and only if it is strongly syndetically separated and non-compact. In the case where the acting group is discrete this result specializes to a characterization of infinite residually finite groups in terms of topological dynamics, which is due to [4]. As one might expect from this, the concept of chaos developed in [4], which has been discussed by several authors, particularly from a group-theoretic point of view, e.g. in [5,15,16], is closely related to the one established in [17] (see Section 4 of this paper).

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we address certain rather general issues concerning continuous group actions. Afterwards, in Section 3, we introduce some terminology regarding compactifications of topological groups and a closely related kind of separation property. In Section 4 we establish the desired notions of periodicity and chaos relative to a fixed class of group compactifications and illustrate how these generalize the corresponding concepts discussed in [17,18]. In Section 5, we provide a geometric characterization of those classes of compactifica- tions of a fixed locally compact Hausdorff topological group G for which G admits a faithful respectively chaotic continuous action on some (compact) Hausdorff space (see Theorem 5.5). As a special instance of this parametrized result, we obtain a novel description of non-compact, maximally almost periodic, locally compact Hausdorff topological groups by means of topological dynamics (see Corollary 5.6).

As established by Lemma 2.2 and Proposition 4.6, if G is a topological group and D is a non-empty subclass of C(G) such that G admits a faithful D-chaotic continuous action on some Hausdorff space, then G is non-compact and D separates compact subsets in G. In this section we prove that the converse is valid for locally compact Hausdorff topological groups.

