Makerspace environments are becoming popular project-based learning spaces where students interact with physical objects and peer collaboration, while developing 21st century skills and engaging with science, tech- nology, engineering, and math (STEM) topics. At the same time, augmented reality (AR) technology, which combines physical objects with digital visualizations, is becoming increasingly applicable for makerspace activ- ities and has potential to address challenges for student learning in makerspaces. However, there is a lack of understanding of how to use and integrate AR in real makerspace environments. In this research we use a co- design methodology to address the following questions: (1) How can AR be useful for education in maker- spaces? (2) How are students impacted by the process of co-designing AR technology? and (3) What are practical considerations for integrating AR in makerspaces? We engaged in a co-design process in a semester-long mak- erspace course attended by 18 students in a graduate school of education. Through this process, we generated six prototypes with seven student co-designers, exploring AR use in design, fabrication, programming, electronics, and training. We also identified areas where AR technology can benefit makerspaces, such as teaching STEM skills, facilitating construction activities, enhancing contextualization of learning, and debugging. We observed that students participating in co-design demonstrated improved understanding of technology design, enthusiasm for engaging with makerspaces and AR, and increased critical thinking about AR technology. These results suggest considerations and guidelines for integrating AR technology into makerspace environments.

(Peppler et al., 2016; Taheri et al., 2019). However, a challenge of learning in makerspaces is that students focus more on fabrication than conceptual learning, due to the difficulty of learning about invisible STEM concepts, the time-consuming nature of designing and fabricating objects, and the lack of personalized scaffolding and guidance from trained facilitators (Blikstein, 2013; Dougherty, 2011; Harron & Hughes, 2018; Lock et al., 2018; Radu & Schneider, 2019a).

2020), and is generally useful in collaborative learning contexts (Phon et al., 2014; Wanis, 2019). Most explorations of AR for education have not been done in the context of makerspaces, but the increasing avail- ability of AR-enabled devices such as headsets and smartphones, com- bined with the increased interest in using AR for education, is expected to lead to an increased usage of AR in makerspaces.

However, research on AR in makerspaces is sparse, and much remains unknown about optimal design and challenges that arise when inte- grating AR in these environments. Without this knowledge, AR applica- tion designers may create experiences that are ineffective or unusable by students in real contexts and can increase barriers for teacher adoption (da Silva et al., 2016). The current research investigates the potential usefulness and integration of AR in makerspaces by using a co-design methodology with students in a semester-long makerspace course, and addressing the following research questions.

In this section we first introduce literature about the potential of augmented reality for education, and the potential and challenges of makerspace education. Then we present the growing research literature investigating how augmented reality can enhance makerspace activities, and we reflect on the need for further explorations and guidelines for integrating AR in makerspaces. Finally, we discuss how a co-design methodology can be used for exploring future uses of AR technology, while positively impacting students in current environments.

biology (Kalana et al., 2020); non-STEM domains such as language and literacy (Parmaxi & Demetriou, 2020), history (Challenor & Ma, 2019), social-emotional learning (Papoutsi et al., 2021); and to enhance other activities that may occur in makerspaces, such as design, collaboration and training (see Section 2.3 for discussion about AR for makerspaces). Compared to traditional educational methods, AR applications can be more effective because they show 3D structures that are difficult to mentally visualize (Abdinejad et al., 2021; Wolle et al., 2018), visualize phenomena that are invisible with the naked eye (Beheshti et al., 2018; Radu & Schneider, 2019a), reduce physical and cognitive demand by providing learners with information in context of use (Buchner et al.,

In open learning environments such as makerspaces, learning is process-oriented and student-centered (Hannafin, Hall, Land, & Hill, 1994; Hill & Land, 1998): students take responsibility for the direction of their learning, make mistakes, learn from them and iterate, build collaboration skills, develop strategies to overcome obstacles, learn to regulate their emotions, become curious about the world around them, and ask conceptual questions rather than focusing on facts and proced- ures. This type of learning emphasizes authentic experiences and prac- tical interactions, over traditional teaching methods like lectures and textbooks, and allows learners to develop problem-solving, critical thinking, and collaboration skills applicable in a variety of contexts. In the past, this approach to learning has been commonly used in university labs, industrial workshops, and entrepreneur innovation labs, and more recently in makerspaces (Cevallos et al., 2020; Flanagan-Hall et al., 2018; Land, 2000; Weinmann, 2014).

interacting with, which makes it more difficult to investigate and communicate about these topics (Radu et al., 2022,b; Radu & Schneider, 2019a). Another reason is that designing and creating objects is time consuming, and students tend to focus on using tools for production rather than learning (Blikstein, 2013; Harron & Hughes, 2018). Furthermore, students are interested in a wide variety of self-driven projects, and his can be a challenge for receiving personalized scaf- folding and guidance from a limited number of makerspace facilitators or other knowledgeable peers (Blikstein, 2013; Hira et al., 2014; Lock et al., 2018).

These issues can be alleviated when augmented reality is integrated into makerspaces. For example, AR applications could make it easier to see and communicate about invisible phenomena (Radu, Hv, & Schneider, 2021), help in fabrication and debugging tasks (Beheshti et al., 2017), take the role of the facilitator to provide students with personalized scaffolding (Kang et al., 2019), and other opportunities, as will be discussed in the next section.

Guidelines are meant to help designers create better educational products. They typically start from formal and informal studies and then become standards (Gabbard & Swan, 2008). In the field of augmented reality, researchers have proposed guidelines for designing applications for various goals such as navigation (Ko et al., 2013), tourism (Kour- outhanassis et al., 2013), or learning (Cuendet et al., 2013; Dunleavy, 2014; Laine, 2018; Radu, 2014). These guidelines are specific to the application's intended domain. For example, for learning applications, designers are advised to show the unseen and provide appropriate challenges (Dunleavy, 2014); design for minimalism and awareness (Cuendet et al., 2013); and present relevant information at the appro- priate time and place (Radu, 2014).

To date, these guidelines have not specifically addressed the inte- gration of AR into makerspace learning environments. Such guidelines would likely include similar themes, such as supporting familiarity and usability of technology, but also new themes specific to the diverse physical and social environments of makerspaces and how these interact with the capabilities and limitations of AR technology. One method of generating such guidelines is by studying AR technology use with stakeholders in current makerspace settings.

This previous research has shown that co-design is a valuable method for exploring future applications of technology, and it has specifically been used in generating AR ideas for enhancing classroom orchestration, computer science and history education, educational board games and AR-enhanced textbooks. It is feasible that the co-design method can be used to explore future of AR technology for other domains, such as makerspaces. We expect this approach will yield a variety of AR design opportunities, and that participants will develop a deeper understanding of AR technology while gaining a deeper sense of empowerment and agency in influencing future makerspace environments.

In summary, this literature shows that both augmented reality tech- nology and makerspaces are educationally valuable and are growing in popularity. It is foreseeable that AR applications will be increasingly integrated in makerspaces, since they have the potential to enhance student learning and fabrication activities. However, there is a lack of research exploring the opportunities and guidelines for integrating AR in makerspaces. The present study addresses this by investigating a co- design intervention in a makerspace course and contributing a set of design opportunities for using AR in makerspaces, a set of themes for how students are impacted by the co-design process, and a set of practical guidelines for integration of AR in makerspaces.

Prior to the study all students voluntarily consented to participate in the study, which was approved by the university ethics committee. Seven students participated in the co-design activities, which involved designing and evaluating AR prototypes in collaboration with the research team. All 18 students from the class participated in the evalu- ation of the AR prototypes, through in-class observations and survey questionnaires. The research team was composed of four persons who had skills in AR software development and/or AR educational research. In the course, students were taught about the technical skills and pedagogical aspects of makerspaces. The course had been running for several years prior to this study without any augmented reality tech- nology integration. In the course, all students (whether they participated as co-designers in our study or not) completed weekly or bi-weekly homework assignments while working individually or in pairs. When

For our study, the course was extended to accommodate AR co-design activities. These activities occurred outside of class in connection to six homework assignments. For each of these occurrences, the research team asked for one student team to volunteer for participation in the co-design activities, after students had finished self-selecting their teammates. A total of six prototypes were generated: three prototypes involved single students working with the research team; two prototypes involved teams of two students; and for one prototype no students volunteered so the research team constructed the prototype by themselves, informed by knowledge about what students were studying in class at the time.

The six prototypes, along with their construction and evaluation, contributed significantly to understanding AR opportunities for maker- spaces (RQ1), understanding impacts of co-design process on students (RQ2) and for generating guidelines for integrating AR technology in makerspaces (RQ3). To illustrate the rich data collected through this process, we describe each prototype, along with quotes from the students who were authors of the prototypes and from students in the class who observed the prototype. Emerging themes are shown in bold.

Facilitating Object Assembly/Disassembly: This theme emerged in the Kerf and Dinosaur prototypes, as well as in brainstorming sessions. Augmented reality was found to be useful for showing how an object can be taken apart (e.g., showing the student the step-by-step instructions while they are deconstructing it), or showing instructions for how an object can fit together from different pieces of a construction kit. The Kerf prototype worked especially well for this purpose, especially since the construction process had the added complexity of turning 2D shapes into 3D structures through bending and connection. Beyond actively guiding the user, students also thought AR was valuable as a passive tool, for example for recording how a student deconstructs an object and allowing them to replay the recording backwards while manipulating the object, to guide reconstruction.

them. For example, the Blocks prototype was useful to understand how a program behaves in relation to physical actions, and students could use it while building other programs with similar behaviors. As another example, if students use specific sensors, they could use the Sensor visualization prototype to better understand why their own sensor does not work. Similarly, if tools exist for measuring circuits or visualizing working programs, students can use these in real time to debug their creations. It is worth noting that, for students to be able to debug using AR tools, these kinds of AR tools need to be designed to support a wide range of use cases (e.g., an AR tool for visualizing energy inside circuits will have more success if it can be applied to many kinds of circuits).

Adding Object-Based Entertainment: This theme emerged in the Maze and Blocks prototypes, as well as in brainstorming sessions. AR can be used for enhancing the entertainment value of objects. For example, in the Maze prototype, AR was used to provide special effects to the object when the user solved the maze. Other similar ideas included using AR to add virtual characters or other virtual objects to projects, to provide challenge or narrative as users engage with the objects.

Contextualizing: This theme emerged in the Marbles prototypes, as well as in brainstorming sessions. Students thought it would be possible to use AR for contextualizing an object to understand the larger context where it would fit. For example, if a student is constructing a motor, AR could be used to understand how it would fit into a larger object such as a car or a windmill. Or if the student builds a toy dinosaur, AR could be used to envision the larger environment where that dinosaur would be living had it been alive. AR was also thought to be valuable for envi- sioning what an environment would look like if the students were in a real work environment, for example if they were operating their robot in a real industrial warehouse.

Community and Inclusion: This theme emerged in the Dinosaur prototype and in brainstorming sessions. AR was thought to be valuable for improving a makerspace sense of community between the physical users of the makerspace, and increasing inclusion to other students or instructors who cannot be present. AR can be used to allow remote collaboration, for example from users who are at home or in a different makerspace and connected in an embodied way through VR or 3D scanning methods (Radu, Joy, & Schneider, 2021). Connections between students in the same makerspace could be enhanced by AR, as the technology can allow students to see 3D visualizations of past or present student projects, either if students are present (such as in the Dinosaur prototype where different users could look at student designs) or even if students are not physically present, to learn what others have created or get inspirations from other people's creations.

Understand students' previous experience with AR/VR: There is a wide variety of possible student exposure: some students may never have been exposed to AR technology; other students may have been exposed to VR experiences but do not understand how this differs from AR; and other students may have been developers of AR. Before engaging stu- dents with AR technology, it is helpful to get a sense of the class's pre- vious experience and comfort levels. In our study we achieved this by providing students with a pre-activity questionnaire, and clarification questions during our 1-on-1 interactions with students.

Give an interactive introduction: It is useful to expose students early to in-person live AR examples and use-cases of AR applications, before talking about how AR can be used in general for education. This is because often students may think they understand what AR technology entails, but they have misconceptions or are thinking of related tech- nologies like VR. To achieve a clear introduction, the facilitators can walk students through examples of applications (through live demos or videos or student-downloadable apps), so students can gain a more concrete idea about how AR could be integrated into real-life contexts, before they start using or generating their own ideas.

Be mindful of the role of AR in presentations: Presentations can involve augmented reality visualizations for a variety of purposes. AR can be used as a way of explaining something about the student project - for example to help communicate about concepts that are invisible or diffi- cult to explain, such as magnetic fields involved in a student project. Or, AR may be an integral part of the student project - for example, being used to add special visual effects to enhance student engagement with the project. Or, AR may have been used only during a small part of the project's creation, for example to help the student debug the electronic components. When students generate presentations to explain how AR relates to their project, it is important to contextualize the purpose of AR and its role in the rest of the project.

Be clear about what is real and what is virtual: When preparing the presentation with AR, the presenters should consider different as- pects of how AR visuals may confuse the audience (e.g., Limit the number of visuals that appear at the same time; Do not overwhelm the visual field; Ensure that AR visualizations remain lined up with their corre- sponding real-world anchors; etc.). Furthermore, the presenter should make sure to explain what is physical and virtual, because it is sometimes difficult for audience members to distinguish between the two. Finally, presenters should follow principles of presentation design (e.g., Combine the narrative with the AR visuals; Explain what is being visualized; Direct

Provide clear communication of goals, roles, and expectations: It is important to clarify the overall goal of the process, and specifically each participant's role and responsibility. For example, in our process, we wanted participants to generate ideas, not simply confirm and validate ideas from the research team, and specifically we wanted to generate ideas where AR was used as a presentation tool to educate the audience, not simply to enhance learner motivation. This clarifying about roles and expectations ensures open communication and facilitates better collab- oration among participants and facilitators.

Consider time constraints: When co-designing with students, the overall process needs sufficient time for familiarization, brainstorming, and iterative design. In our process we found that, after students brain- stormed AR ideas, at least two iterations were needed for students to view AR prototypes and offer feedback to the developers, prior to final presentation to class. We made sure to communicate this commitment prior to students enlisting in our activities, and the participants expressed their appreciation for how time constraints were noted beforehand so they could set realistic expectations for their experience.

Create a supportive environment: Since co-design may involve multiple parties (e.g., researchers, facilitators, class instructors, stu- dents), it is important to ensure an open-minded and mutually respectful environment where people of diverse backgrounds and perspectives feel supported. We found that within technology design discussions, an open mind and supportive environment is especially needed when stake- holders may offer ideas that are not feasible to implement with current technology, or when other technologies may be better suited to achieve similar results. Furthermore, the facilitators should be accessible and resourceful for providing support and feedback even outside of the duration of the co-design activities.

By engaging students in co-design, this research showed that the process of designing future AR applications can be aided by student involvement. Involving students in the design process can be a source of idea generation and evaluation, as well as a source of personal trans- formation. Participants were excited and eager to learn and teach each other about new technologies, leading to increased familiarity and sense empowerment. These findings are similar to previous research that shows co-design improves content knowledge and empowerment (e.g., Cockbill et al., 2019; Hyett et al., 2020; Thabrew et al., 2018); however, because our participants had background in education and explored novel tech- nologies, additional themes were found that are not widely documented in previous research. For instance, participants began considering how AR can be used to enhance their curricula. Some participants developed

In this research we investigated the opportunities of AR technology for makerspaces, by engaging in a co-design process within a semester- long makerspace course attended by 18 students over 12 weeks. Six prototypes were generated with seven student co-designers, exploring AR uses for topics such as design, fabrication, programming, electronics, and training. We identified nine areas of opportunity where AR technology can benefit makerspaces, including teaching STEM skills, facilitating construction activities, enhancing contextualization of learning, and debugging. Through example AR applications in each of these areas, we illustrate underexplored opportunities where future designers and re- searchers can focus their explorations, to improve student efficacy and better understand the impacts and uses of AR technology. Additionally, this study explored how students changed their relationship to AR technology as part of the co-design process. For example, students improved their understanding of technology design, increased their enthusiasm for engaging with makerspaces and AR, and promoted crit- ical thinking of AR technology. This research shows that involving stu- dents in co-design has the potential not only for generating new ideas for technology applications, but also to improve student understanding and future engagement with educational technology. Based on this process we provided a framework consisting of 18 considerations and guidelines, under four categories for integrating AR technology into makerspace environments. As teachers integrate AR technology into makerspace ac- tivities, this framework can be used to guide different levels of student engagement, ranging from students simply using AR applications, to students creating and co-designing AR technology.

The data for this study is confidential and not available for open ac- cess. The study has approval from the university's Institutional Review Board and adheres to the institution's ethical guidelines. The participants participated voluntarily, and all data has been anonymized prior to publication.

We wish to thank Max Cembalest for his invaluable assistance in software development. We also thank the co-designers Rachel Parker, Chali Kaewla, Helen Onome Turner, Juan Pablo Garces Ramirez, Aashna Saraf, Yani Su and Ji Su Lee, along with the other HGSE T519 course participants and the publication reviewers. This material is based upon work supported by US National Science Foundation under grant no. 1917716.

