The present study aims to survey exopolysaccharides (EPSs) production in 29 bacterial strains isolated from the sediments around the mangrove trees in Ras Mohamed area, Red Sea Coast, Sinai Peninsula, Egypt. Two of the strains were able to produce EPSs. A higher yield of EPS was obtained from isolate No. 12. Strain identification resulted in a close similarity with Bacillus altitudinis. The produced EPS was characterised as a heteropolysaccharide containing mannouronic acid, glucose, and sulphate. A gel permeation chromatography was used to estimate the EPS molecular weight which found to be

Exopolysaccharides (EPSs) are long chains of high molecular mass polymers produced by different microorganisms, including bacteria, fungi and blue green algae [1]. EPSs produced by bacteria exhibit significant structural diversity with novel biological prop- erties are considered as valuable sources of natural polymers with multiple biotechnological applications. Microbial EPSs are preva- lent in the extreme marine environment where they are essential for microbial existence. Most of the functions attributed to EPSs are of a protective nature and their accurate roles are dependent on the ecological functions in which the microorganisms live. They could support the microbial communities to suffer extremes of temperature, salinity and nutrient accessibility, construct a bound- ary between the bacterial cell and its included environment.

potency and fewer effects [6]. Human pathogens, as well, have resistance formed from the abnormal use of commercial antimicro- bial drugs. This resistance with the undesirable side effect of cer- tain antibiotics motivated the scientists to look for new antimicrobial substituent from many sources [7].

Marine sediment was collected from the rhizosphere of a man- grove trees (Avicennia marina) from Ras Mohamed, Sinai Peninsula, Egypt. The sample was serially diluted in 90 ml sterile water and plated on a medium containing (in g/l) [glucose (20); yeast extract (0.1); NH4NO3 (0.8); CaCO3 (1); K2HPO4 (0.6); KH2PO4 (0.5);

Periodate consumption was calculated based on absorbance change [21] and formic acid products were monitored by the phenol-sulphuric acid method [9]. Ethylene glycol (2 ml) was added and the solutions were dialyzed against distilled water for 48 h. After that NaBH4 (100 mg) is added and the mixture was left for 24 h temperature and then ice cold acetic acid (4N) is added to stop the reaction. The solutions were again dialyzed as described above and lyophilized [22]. The resulting polyalcohol was hydro- lyzed with HCOOH 90% for 5 h and the produced sugars and sugar alcohols were analyzed by HPLC.

The purified EPS produced a negative response by Bradford test indicating the absence of protein. Monosaccharide analysis by HPLC revealed that EPS composed of mannuronic acid and glucose with molar ratio 1:2.2. The chemical composition of EPS indicated the presence of uronic acid (14.26%) and sulphate (15.47%).

Hasui M, Matsuda M, Okutani K, Shigeta S. Structural analysis of the lactate associated galactan sulfate produced by Gymnodinium sp.A3. In: Yasumoto T, Oshima Y, Fukuyo Y, editors. Armful and toxic algal booms. Inc., Inter Governmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO; 1996.

