Classification of network traffic has become popular recently due to breakthroughs in technology. The increasing growth of high-speed internet traffic demands has increased the need for such tasks. Network traffic classification facilitates the efficient management of network resources, which is also essential in managing and securing the network [1]. Accurate Classification of network traffic will assure that customers are provided with a quality of Service (QoS) and that the network is managed efficiently.

Various encryption methods are available today, and among the commonly used ones include HTTPS, SSH, SSL, and programs such as Tor and TrueCrypt. These methods are used in internet traffic encryption to safeguard the privacy of internet users from breaches. Thus, there is a need to classify these network traffics that are generated by the applications. The Classification will facil- itate network management while preventing malware and maxi-

Ensemble learning techniques are proposed in this study to classify encrypted network data. The traffic is classified using deep learning and machine learning methods. Deep learning is employed as a learning algorithm, which automatically learns fea- tures based on the raw network traffic [5]. Many researchers used different statistical features for developing their models. This has resulted in models with different overall accuracy levels. For instance, the researchers in ref. [6], employed 44 statistical fea- tures extracted from the raw PCAP file, while the researchers in ref. [7] employed four (4) statistical features. However, there are some researchers, such as [8,9] they did not provide nor mention the number of statistical features they have used.

The motivation of the research comes in twofold: one is moti- vated by network uses, and the other is motivated by achieving better tradeoffs to meet the identification needs, ultimately boost- ing network activities. Another reason is that the number of appli- cation types significantly impacts the accuracy of ML-based and ensemble learning classification. The preceding motivates us to develop a lightweight ensemble classification system capable of accurately and quickly identifying VPN traffic.

tion of traffic (through the use of HTTPS) throughout the process of communication from the source to the concerned destination based on the I.P. address, protocol encapsulation through the use of I.P. Security protocol, and application-specific port numbers, or particular applications, like Gmail. Some of those real-time appli- cations have complex nature because they employ various ser- vices. Hence, the applications are usually identified with their associated tasks [1,10].

McGaughey et al. [6] formulated a statistical feature selection method involving selecting features with predictive values from raw network traffic data by applying the Fast Orthogonal Search (FOS) algorithm for encrypted communications classification. Selecting just a subset of features from the raw traffic data in the classification process can minimize errors. The raw traffic data fea- ture is the primary feature set extracted using NetMate. A total of

Aouini et al. [17] constructed a system to classify residential encrypted network data using the C5.0 machine learning algo- rithm. The system employed an extensive French residential aggre- gation network with over 34,000 users as traffic data input. From the training data, the proposed system could classify seven fea- tures. Features with high accuracy rates in positively impacting the categorization process were manually created during extrac- tion; therefore, the authors could not determine the importance of the source of the option. Meanwhile, the turbo mode of C5.0 increased the training time nine-fold, and despite the use of the destination port to improve the speed, there was a risk of overfitting.

Based on IoT technology, Al-Qurabat et al. [21] used compres- sion and minimum description length technology to send data from sensors to set up a remote monitoring system for smart agri- culture. The results showed that this method could significantly slow down the speed of data transmission and provide a better way to monitor in real-time. China was slow to start smart farm- ing, and smart farming based on the Internet of Things is still in its early stages.

All works that use machine learning algorithms for network traffic classification must be retrained to remain robust in the face of new and diverse data. Furthermore, most such efforts select a subset of applications or protocols to test the feasibility of Classifi- cation. As a result, such solutions are most effective for training applications and protocols, posing scalability and adaptation con- cerns. In any discipline of traffic analysis, the problem of high false-positive rates is a crucial obstacle. Unfortunately, due to the great diversity and variability presented in recent years, it does

In the present research, the ensemble model was designed using 3 machine learning from various categories. The researcher used random forest (R.F) from the tree categories, Neural networks as computational machine learning (N.N.), and Support Vector Machines (SVM) as statistical machine learning.

The researcher conducted several experiments assessing the proposed system and having it compared with other comparable systems. The VPN-Non-VPN dataset [11,24], utilized in numerous experiments by researchers like [25], was used in this study. The researcher utilized the Intel(R) Core (T.M.) i7-8700 CPU @

This section describes the proposed VPN and Non-VPN Traffic analysis and a classification system based on stacking ensemble learning. Based on the empirical results, ensemble learning shows better performance when significant differences among the ensemble models exist. The stacked model involves several learn- ing stages, and the ensemble learning approach has been the most popular. Therefore, the researcher proposed a new system, which possesses 2 levels of structure, namely a base module and a com- bining module. It aims at employing the base modules and com- bining ones.

The base module involves training, testing, and utilizing a set to have the base classifiers tested and trained. After that, decisions shall be forwarded to the logistic regression algorithm to make decisions in the second level. The present study addresses VPN and Non-VPN Traffic problem detection on the internet. This prob- lem is connected to binary Classification. Therefore, this study uses three (3) base classifiers to create a base module for the proposed system. The latter classifiers involve random forest (R.F.) [33], Arti- ficial Neural Networks (ANNs)[26], and support-vector networks

Support-vector networks (SVM) is a known classifier. This classifier can classify with a limited set of samples. However, it can have predictions optimized [31]. Researchers in ref. [32] proved that SVM is better than ANNs in terms of detecting intru- sions while experimenting with basic security module (BSM) audit

researcher applied Cn to generate a classification matrix during the testing phase. After repeating this procedure for (K) times, he obtained (K) matrices of Classification and averaged them by rows to generate a matrix An(n = 1,.. ., N). This procedure shall be repeated to the N classifiers. Regarding the whole, the matrices of prediction Pn will be combined into a set of training P. Regarding all the An. They are averaged for generating a modern test set (A) for making a prediction result representing every classifier in level

In this section, the researcher presents the results obtained from the dataset described in subsection 3.1. The conclusion and the most important results are duly highlighted. The researcher used various measures utilized in regression to assess the perfor- mance level of the base methods and ensemble scheme. Those measures  were:  accuracy,  Precision,  Recall,  AUC,  F1_Score,

The choose machine learning and the meat classifier at the final layer contribute to the complexity of the suggested approach. It is essential to select a base classifier with minimal complexity and a wide range of base classifiers. Based on the above two ideas, we consider Random Forest (RF), Neural networks (NN), and support vector machine (SVM) as base classifiers (SVM).

In our experiment, 10-fold cross-validation was used to esti- mate the classifier performance. The results showed that the pro- posed ensemble model performs better than any individual ML classifier. However, to determine if the differences between differ- ent model predictions are statistically significant, we used the Wil- coxon signed-rank test to ensure statistical differences between the proposed ensemble model and each machine learning classi- fier. So, we perform the one-tailed hypothesis test. The null

estimates the Wilcoxon statistical results for the accuracy metric. Based on the results, we can conclude that there are no significant statistical differences between SVM and KNN, which means they have the same performance in classifying VPN network traffic. However, when comparing the Ensemble model with the machine learning classifiers, we found significant differences between them, whereas a p-value < 0.05 that mean can reject the H0.

Dr. Ammar Almomani received his Ph.D. from Univer- sity Sains Malaysia (USM) in 2013. He is the author of over 75 research papers in renowned International Journals and Conferences, including IEEE, Elsevier, ACM, Springer, and Inderscience, with countless of interna- tional awards, He has toured various nations in pre- senting his valued research work and has revised 10s Journals in IEEE, Springer, Wiley, and Taylor & Francis. He has lectured for 16 years, covering over 40 subjects in computer science, networks, cybersecurity, and pro- gramming language. He holds numerous international certificates and has contributed to various projects and

specialized scientific courses. He has been exploring cybersecurity, advanced Internet security, and monitoring as an ardent researcher. Dr. Ammar Almomani is currently serving the post of senior lecturer at Al- Balqa Applied University. Cur- rently, he leads the research and innovation department in SKYLINE university college-SHARJAH-UAE. Link: https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=d_tRtPkAA AAJ&hl=en.

