We prove that quantum key distribution is secure against several types of attacks within the framework of classical knowledge knowledge for quantum systems, a formal model which was developed in [8]. In particular we rephrase security as a logical property and use meta-logic reasoning on the finite state machine corresponding to the quantum key distribution protocol. While these security issues have been studied before, it is the logical-based approach that is original here.

of particular protocols and their security, these definitions are usually at a low level of abstraction. This makes it hard to analyse different protocols systematically and see how properties evolve when protocols are combined. Also, it is difficult to gauge how well these definitions capture the realities of an actual implementation. Formal methods, on the other hand, are based on well-defined protocol languages which support a systematic presentation of protocols and properties. Most importantly, they provide tool support for automated proof techniques. Such tools are particu- larly useful for analysis of distributed protocols (and thus cryptography), for which proofs are particularly tedious and error-prone if done by hand.

Formal analysis is a necessity still for QKD, even though the quantum commu- nity considers its security analysis as a solved problem. This is because a mathe- matical proof on the theoretical security of QKD does not guarantee actual security in a practical setting. Hardware issues are not captured in theoretical proofs, and these are important in security, as they can result in backdoors for breaking the system (an example is the so-called timing attack for RSA). Formal methods are more flexibly adapted to these situations and hence can cover a range of different situations.

Research into formal methods for distributed quantum computation is relatively recent and hence not very prolific. Several formal languages for protocol specifica- tion were developed, either in the flavour of classical process calculi [17,13,4] or in terms of dynamic logic [1]. Some of these frameworks have been augmented with logical tools for protocol analysis: both [14] and [8] use meta-logic reasoning to assert correctness properties on top of non-logical base language, though only the latter defines epistemic operators. In fact knowledge for quantum distributed sys- tems was defined earlier in [24] independently of a protocol specification language.

Before we can actually define modal operators for knowledge or time, we need to clarify what the propositions are that these act upon. It is not our intention to define a full-fledged language for primitive propositions; rather, we define these abstractly, and specify the usual rules for combining them with standard logical connectives. We do give some examples of the kinds of properties that we are interested in later on.

In this section we prove that QKD is secure against several types of attacks within our logical framework of knowledge and time. While these security issues have been studied before, it is the logical-based approach that is original here. We head off by showing that eavesdroppers listening in on classical communication channels cannot derive the key. This is of course the core property in making QKD so valuable as an alternative to classical private symmetric secret key establishment protocols.

