In this paper, we explore the process of emotional state transition. And the process is impacted by emotional state of interaction objects. First of all, the cognitive reasoning process and the micro-expressions recognition is the basis of affective computing adjustment process. Secondly, the threshold function and attenuation function are proposed to quantify the emotional changes. In the actual environment, the emotional state of the robot and external stimulus are also quantified as the transferring probability. Finally, the Gaussian cloud distribution is introduced to the Gross model to calculate the emotional transitional probabilities. The experimental results show that the model in humanecomputer interaction can effectively regulate the emotional states, and can significantly improve the humanoid and intelligent ability of the robot. This model is consistent with experimental and emulational significance of the psychology, and allows the robot to get rid of the mechanical emotional transfer process.

Micro-expressions is a short facial expression that cannot be independently controlled by brain, and it is trying to suppress or hide the true human emotion [1]. In 1966, Haggard and Isaaes found a quick facial expression that is not so noticeable. They believe the expression is related to the self-defense mechanisms and shows some pent-up emotions. In 1969, Ekman and Friesen also independently discovered the facial expressions, and have a name for it: micro-expressions [2].

Cognitive model is the criteria of personal information processing. In addition, the criterion is the basic principle of cognitive reasoning. According to these principles, the changes of emotional state can be inferred from the effective factors in specific circumstance. And the factors include the human (H) and the environment (E) [7].

Among them, the first four are carried out prior to the formation of emotional response. And they are antecedent- focused emotion regulation. The adjustment of reaction is carried out after the formation of the emotional response, so it is response-focused emotion regulation. Gross proposed the process model of emotion regulation [13]. Moreover, he identified two major subdued ways of emotion regulationdthe cognitive reappraisal and the suppression of expression.

For each basic emotional state, m is defined as the activation threshold of emotion, and n is defined as the saturation threshold of emotional. If the stimulus intensity is lower than m, there would be no effect on the behavior of the robot. If the stimulus intensity is higher than m, the emotional state will be activated. When the emotional intensity reaches saturation threshold, its value reaches the maximum. But in general, the emotional intensity won't keep in the maximum. Instead, it has

emotional states. This includes all of the emotional states of the robot. And the robot can freely switch among them. The change of emotional state is free, discrete, and discontinuous. Therefore, we use the Gaussian cloud distribution to build the emotional state transition model of the robot [18].

robot. The robot will tend to avoid certain people, places or things to regulate emotion. The facial muscle contraction of micro-expressions is not sufficient, so the expression of emotional state is very weak. Therefore, the emotional state only has a very low intensity in stimulating space w.

The experimental results show that the model in human- ecomputer interaction can effectively regulate the emotional states, and can significantly improve the humanoid and intelligent ability of the robot. This model is consistent with experimental and emulational significance of the psychology, and allows the robot to get rid of the mechanical emotional transfer process. Typical functions of the conclusion of a scientific paper include 1) summing up, 2) a statement of conclusions, 3) a statement of recommendations, and 4) a graceful termination. Any one of these, or any combination, may be appropriate for a particular paper. Some papers do not need a separate concluding section, particularly if the conclusions have already been stated

Xiujun Yang born in Yunnan province in 1991. She received B.E. degree in electronic engineering from the University of Science and Technology Beijing, China, in 2013. Now, she is a graduate student in electronic science and technology, in school of Com- puter and Communication Engineering, in USTB, in Beijing

Lun Xie received his Ph.D. degree in control theory and engineering from the University of Science and Technology Beijing, China, in 2002. In 2002, he was a faculty member at USTB, China. Currently, he is a professor in the school of Computer and Communi- cation Engineering at USTB, China. He has published over 100 refereed journal and conference papers. His research interest covers intelligent robot, embedded system, simulation and design of automation system. Prof. Xie is a member of CAAI, BPES

Jing Han born in Hebei province in 1990. She received B.E. degree in electronics and information engineering from Hebei University of Science and Technology, China, in 2012. Now, she is currently a doctoral candidate in communication and information system at University of Science and Technology Bei- jing, China. His research interest covers Pattern recognition and affective computing

Zhiliang Wang received his PhD. degree in Harbin Institute of Technologies, China, in 1988, and In 1991, he was a faculty member at University of Science and Technology Beijing, China. Currently, he is a profes- sor in the school of Computer and Communication Engineering at USTB, China. He has published about over 200 refereed journal and conference papers. His research interest covers artificial psychology, internet of things, and service robotics.

