Salvinia molesta, commonly known as giant Salvinia, is a floating fern belonging to the family of Salviniaceae. In this study the active fractions of the fern extract were separated using column chro- matography and phenolic compounds present in the active fractions were determined by RP-HPLC. Ethyl acetate extract was found to possess significant pharmacological activity when compared to other extracts under study and therefore an attempt was made to fractionate ethyl acetate extract. The analysis was performed through two different mobile phases involving solvent A (acetonitrile) and solvent B (0.1% phosphoric acid in water) and solvent A (methanol) and Solvent B (4% acetic acid). HPLC analysis indi- cated the presence of phenolic compounds namely ascorbic acid, quercetin, gallic acid, resorcinol, cate- chol, vanillin and benzoic acid with specific retention times. The detected compounds possess antioxidant and antitumour activities. The results of the present study suggests the possibility to use

The phenolic compounds are ubiquitous in plant kingdom. They synthesize several thousand different chemical structures and are characterized by hydroxylated aromatic rings. These compounds are secondary metabolites which are derived from the pentose phosphate, shikimate and phenylpropanoid pathways in plants [1]. These are one of the most widely occurring groups of pyto- chemicals which are of appreciable physiological and morphologi- cal importance in plants [2]. A number of studies have been aimed to characterize the health promoting activities of phenolic com- pounds due to their antioxidant properties. They are useful in treatment and management of cancer, cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases or as components in anti-aging or cos- metic products [3].

Modern studies have shown that ferns possess biological properties such as anti-microbial, antioxidant, anti-proliferative, anti-inflammatory, antitussive, antitumor, anti-HIV, enzyme mod- ulation and stimulation, hormonal action, interference of DNA replication and physiological action [15,16]. Iqbal Choudhary et al. [17] have isolated phenolic compounds together with few other phytoconstituents for the first time from the aquatic fern S. molesta. The isolated compounds were two glycosides, 60 -O-(3,4- dihydroxy benzoyl)-b-D-glucopyranosyl ester and 4-O-b-D- glucopyranoside-3-hydroxy methyl benzoate, along with five already known compounds viz., methyl benzoate, hypogallic acid, caffeic acid, paeoniflorin and pikuroside. They exhibited potent free radical scavenging activity in a non-physiological assay. These compounds possess interesting characteristics, noteworthy of further study.

Hexane, ethyl acetate, ethanol, methanol, acetone, vanillin-H2SO4 spray, acetonitrile, phosphoric acid, acetic acid, chromanorm water, gallic acid, catechol, benzoic acid, resorcinol, ascorbic acid, vanillin, quercetin, silica gel and sea sand. All the above chemicals were of analytical grade and were purchased from Hi media, Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai, India.

Plants of S. molesta were collected from the paddy fields, rivers and ponds of Kalliyad and Kaiyamkulam, Kaithachira, Thrissur, Kerala, India. The specimen was identified and authenticated by Dr. G. Jeya Jothi, Taxonomist, Loyola College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India. The voucher specimen (No: LCH-130) of the plant has been preserved in Loyola College Herbarium for further reference. The plant materials were cleansed under running tap water three to four times, after which it was shade dried at room temperature for three weeks. The dried plant materials were pulverized into fine powder, passed through a sieve (mesh No. 40) and were stored in airtight containers [18].

was maintained to prevent drying of the column. Gradient elution method was followed to separate fractions from EAE by using sol- vents from low polarity to high polarity (i.e. hexane to methanol) in varying ratios. The flow rate was adjusted to 5 ml/min and 40 ml solvent was collected for each fraction.

Fractions with the same Rf values were pooled and concentrated to dryness using rotary evaporator. The dry weight of the fractions was measured. The condensed fractions and EAE were further ana- lyzed by HPLC for the presence of antioxidant phenolic compounds.

each fraction were dissolved in 3 ml of methanol for the analysis. The solvents used for the mobile phases were previously filtered through millipore and degassed prior to use. Quercetin, ascorbic acid, benzoic acid, gallic acid, vanillin, resorcinol and catechol were used as standard solutions for the quantification of phenolic compounds.

slurry was prepared with hexane and was poured from the top of the column approximately 2/3rd of the column with simultaneous draining of the solvent to aid proper packing of the column. Sea sand was added to the top of silica slurry to 1 cm height and the sand particles were rinsed down with the solvent. 20 g of EAE was mixed with minimum quantity of hexane and was poured down from the top of the column along the sides and was rinsed down with the solvent. Sea sand was added to the top of the extract to 1 cm height. Solvent level 6 cm from above the extract

The present study has reported the presence of phenolic com- pounds such as ascorbic acid, quercetin, gallic acid, resorcinol, cat- echol, vanillin and benzoic acid in the fractions of ethyl acetate extract of S. molesta. Ethyl acetate extract was found to possess sig- nificant pharmacological activities; hence it was fractionated using silica gel column chromatography using different solvents in vary- ing polarity. The study has found that S. molesta, an aquatic fern has promising medicinal properties and is a potent natural antiox- idant owing to the presence of a number of phenolic compounds. Therefore, further investigation is needed to purify these phenolic components to be used as lead compounds for the development of novel antioxidant drugs.

