a product line, its scope characterizes the set of its features common to all the associated models. In contrast to the set of models F assigned to the nodes of a product line description in a bottom-up fashion, the scope S associated with each node can be constructed in a top-down fashion. The root nodecontains the features common to all variants of the product line, i.e., all features directly aggregated by the top alternative. Any other alternative additionally comprises all features associated to those alternatives higher in the tree-structure of the description of the product line. As variation points do not aggregate additional features, their scope is identical to the scope of their corresponding super-alternative.

Therefore, to support the description of commonalities and differences between alternatives on the diagrammatic level, a separation of concern based on the scopes of alternatives is introduced. As the scope of an alternative specifies the features common to all models of it and thus available within the context of this alternative, the diagrammatic descriptions can be restricted to those features. As furthermore the scopes of a product line description form a semi-lattice in congruence with the structure of the description, features are classified as those aggregated by the current alternative (and thus accessible), by its super-alternatives (and thus visible), and by its sub-alternatives (and thus invisible).

Approaches like [7] or [10] only focus on the modeling of the variability as- pects, without integrating domain-specific aspects, and thus cannot really provide a precise definition or methodical treatment of product lines of system description. On the other hand, approaches like [8] only focus on the modeling of the domain- specific aspects, leaving out all variability aspects. In contrast, here both aspects are integrated into a precisely defined common model, thus supporting the direct description of dependencies between variability constraints on the domain level.

identifying product lines. In contrast, here a canonical extension of conceptual do- main models is introduced, including the resulting possibilities for using variability. Closest to the presented approach, [1] and [6] explicitly link variability and do- main concepts. In [1], however, unlike in this approach, these links are introduced on a rather informal level; in [4], these links are introduced in form of presence con- ditions. Thus both approaches do not use an explicit integrated conceptual model. As a result, they do not offer a view-based construction process on the diagrammatic level, supporting immediate application of domain-specific consistency conditions to

