The electrical resistivity method is an effective geophysical tool which is widely used for groundwater exploration. It provides information about the subsurface structures and lithology [3]. The vertical electrical sounding (VES) method is used to provide reliable information about the shallow subsurface layers.

The northern border of the Qattara Depression is marked by a steep escarpment (250 m a.s.l.) of white limestone of the Middle Miocene Marmarica Formation. The Qattara Depression is cut into nearly horizontal beds of Miocene to Eocene age. The subsurface

This cross-section shows that the subsurface section consists of three geoelectrical units. The first unit is composed of surface Qua- ternary wadi deposits with thickness ranging from 5.9 to 27 m and resistivity values ranging from 304 to 1333 Ohm.m. The second geoelectrical unit is composed of sandstone (Moghra Formation) with depth ranges from 5.9 to 27 m and its resistivity values range from 33 to 72 Ohm.m. This sandstone represents the main aquifer

Structurally, this profile is affected by two probable faults. The first fault (F1) is located to the southwest of VES 10 with downthrown side towards the northeast, while the second fault (F2) is located to southwest of VES 4 with downthrown side towards the southwest. These two faults form a horst structure which reflects that the central part represents the shallower part of Moghra Formation (the main aquifer in the study area).

Structurally, this profile is affected by two probable faults. The first fault (F1) is located to the southwest of VES 11 with down- thrown side towards the northeast, while the second fault (F2) is located to southwest of VES 5 with downthrown side towards the southwestern direction. These two faults form a horst structure.

The pseudo-section indicates that the central part of this section is affected by two faults. The geoelectrical cross-section shows that the subsurface section consists of surface Quaternary wadi depos- its with thickness ranging from 7.2 to 34.6 m and its resistivity val- ues range from 248 to 1378 Ohm.m. The thickness of this unit increases from NE to SW direction. The second geoelectrical unit

Structurally, this section is affected by two probable faults. The first fault (F1) is located to the southwest of VES 12 with down- thrown side towards the northeastern direction, while the second fault (F2) is located to southwest of VES 6 with downthrown side towards the southwestern direction. These two faults form a horst structure.

The first layer is composed of surface Quaternary wadi deposits with resistivity values ranging from 248 to 1378 Ohm.m. and a thickness ranging from 5.9 to 34.6 m. The second geoelectrical layer is composed of Moghra Formation (Lower Miocene) with depth ranges from 5.9 to 34.6 m and its resistivity values range

