Abstract In case of wireless sensor networks (WSNs) the sensed data which are collected by the ordinary senor nodes will have to be forwarded to the sink node (Base Station) in order to be acces- sible by the remote users. The location of the sink could significantly affect the energy dissipation and throughput of the network. This paper aims to investigate an optimal location for the sink node in such a way that the sum of distances from all the sensor nodes to the sink node is minimized. In an effort to place the sink node within the network our algorithm finds the geometric median of all the location associated with the sensor nodes. In a discrete set of points, the geometric median could be defined as the location which basically minimizes the sum of distances to all the points. Perfor- mance evaluation reveals that the proposed location for the sink node extends the network lifetime comparing with other possible location within the network field.

This paper intends to find out an optimal location for the sink node so that the sum of distances from all the nodes to the sink node is minimized. To spot the optimal place our algo- rithm finds the geometric median of all the locations associated with the sensor nodes. In a discrete set of points, the geometric median could be defined as the location which basically mini- mizes the sum of distances to all the points. Despite of being a straightforward concept, its computation is a challenge. The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 the related work and proposed solutions are discussed. Sec- tion 3 discusses our strategy and algorithm in order to find the optimal location for the sink node. The network model along various parameters that are used in the simulation is pre- sented in Section 4. Section 5 contains the performance evalu- ation and the result of our simulation and conclusion of the work is given in Section 6.

In [12] the sink has been located on different places and the con- clusion indicates that the center of the network as well as the center of the quarter having the highest density of nodes are far better choices for the sink location. In [13,14] the P- median, a well-known NP-hard problem was used to decide the optimal location of the sink node. The result given in [14] shows the optimal placement of the sink would be the center. Authors in [15] fix the sinks location by taking into account the nodes whose data are conveyed through a node close to the sink. In [16] optimal base-station locations regarding two- tiered WSNs have been proposed. The network lifetime was evaluated by the distances of all the nodes and the sink as well as the average rate of bit stream. In [17] the result from the sim- ulation shows that improvements on data rate and power Effi- ciency can be accomplished by employing different algorithms to discover a layout for the base station. The sink node position was selected to increase the joint weight of data flows in an effort to reduce the energy consumption of the WSN. In [18]

the points. In statics, geometric median is a significant method to calculate an estimate of a location. Additionally it is a typ- ical problem in facility location, in which it deals with the issue of locating a facility in an effort to minimize the total cost of transportation [19].

puted to the point (x, y). In the next step the four neighboring points of (x, y) which are away an experimental distance e in every directions (up, down, right, left) are found and the sum of distances to each of them is calculated. If any of the points give a better result, then the (x, y) will be updated and the same procedure with the same value of e will be carried out. In case if none of the points improves the present value of

The location of the Base Station has a significant effect on the energy dissipation and lifetime of the WSNs. An optimal loca- tion for the base station has been investigated within this paper, in such a way that the sum of distances from all the sen- sor nodes to the base station is minimized. In an effort to place the sink node within the network our algorithm finds the geo- metric median of all the location associated with the sensor nodes. The optimal spot of the sink node found by our algo- rithm has been compared with various other options such as center of WSN field. Performance evaluation reveals that the proposed location for the sink node prolongs the network life- time comparing with other possible location within the net- work field. However the throughput of the network is slightly better while the sink node is placed at the center of the field (50, 50) as well as at location (30, 45) comparing with

