In flowchart languages, predicates play an interesting double role. In the textual representation, they are often presented as conditions, i.e., expressions which are easily combined with other conditions (often via Boolean combinators) to form new conditions, though they only play a supporting role in aiding branching statements choose a branch to follow. On the other hand, in the graphical representation they are typi- cally presented as decisions, intrinsically capable of directing control flow yet mostly oblivious to Boolean

While categorical treatments of flowchart languages are abundant, none of them provide a treatment of this dual nature of predicates. In the present paper, we argue that extensive restriction categories are precisely categories that capture such a condition/decision duality, by means of morphisms which, coincidentally, are also called decisions. Further, we show that having these categorical decisions amounts to having an internal logic: Analogous to how subobjects of an object in a topos form a Heyting algebra, we show that decisions on an object in an extensive restriction category form a De Morgan quasilattice, the algebraic structure associated with the (three-valued) weak Kleene logic Kw. Full classical propositional logic can be

Given that restriction categories are built on a foundation of idempotents, one would expect it to be occasionally useful when all such restriction idempotents split, and indeed this is the case. Say that restriction structure is split when all restriction idempotents split, and let Split(C ) denote the category arising from the usual idempotent splitting (i.e., the Karoubi envelope) of all restriction idempotents in C . That Split(C ) is a restriction category when C is follows by [7, Prop. 2.26]

Since total morphisms are closed under composition and include all identities, they form an important subcategory Total(C ) of any restriction category C . Like- wise, partial isomorphisms are closed under composition and include all identities, so all objects and partial isomorphisms of C form the subcategory Inv(C ). As the notation suggests, this category Inv(C ) is not just a restriction category but an inverse category (indeed, it is the cofree such [18]) in the usual sense (see [7, 20]).

As such, we have that each collection of decisions on an object form a local model of Kw, giving us the first part of the fibration. For the second, we need to show that decision transformers preserve entailment and the propositional connectives (though not necessarily the constants). This is shown in the following lemma.

4.17 of [8], Par(C , M) is a classified restriction category under the +1 monad. Since C has coproducts and Par(C , M) is classified, it follows by Proposition 2.3 of [9] that Par(C , M) has restriction coproducts. That 0 is a restriction zero in

ion, using partial inverses to decisions rather than the codiagonal. Indeed, the inspiration for using decisions as predicates came from the study of the categorical semantics of reversible flowchart languages (see [13,19]). Since a decision in C is still a decision in Inv(C ) (see [19]), Dec(X) is still a De Morgan quasilattice in Inv(C ), though the homomorphisms between fibres differ (i.e., only decision transformers that are partial isomorphisms occur in the decision fibration on Inv(C )).

