A conic optimization problem is a problem involving a constraint that the optimization variable be in some closed convex cone. The field of conic optimization is a broad one, as any convex optimization prob- lem can be cast as a conic problem, see Nesterov and Nemirovski (1992). In this paper, we will focus on more specific conic problems which ap- pear naturally when solving quadratic or combinatorial optimization problems. In particular, we will highlight developments in second or- der cone programming (SOCP), semidefinite programming (SDP), and copositive optimization.

is optimal for (D). The converse is, however, not true in general: a posi- tive duality gap may exist, or the optimal value of (P) or (D) may not be attained. Examples for this phenomenon in second order cone program- ming can be found in Alizadeh and Goldfarb (2003) or in Ben-Tal and Nemirovski (2001, Section 2.4.1). For the SDP case, examples can be found in Helmberg (2002), and a thorough analysis of this behavior can

and Wolkowicz (1981a,b). (ii) Other approaches (e.g. Ramana, 1997) work on the dual side and construct an extended dual which achieves strong duality without assuming a constraint qualification. A good ex- position of these two approaches can be found in Pataki (2013).

Mixed integer SDPs have applications in truss topology optimiza- tion (Gally et al., 2018), in certain clustering problems (Aloise and Hansen, 2009), or in sparse principal component analysis (Li and Xie, 2020). References to numerous fields of application of nonlinear SDPs in engineering, (robust) control, finance and others can be found in Andreani et al. (2020) and Yamashita and Yabe (2015).

CP are proper cones and have been studied for decades in the linear algebra literature, see Berman and Shaked-Monderer (2003) and refer- ences therein. They have numerous interesting properties but are still not fully understood, cf. Berman et al. (2015). Note that the two cones are given in different form:   is given by its extreme rays which are

determining the stability number of an infinite graph appears e.g. in the kissing number problem (Dobre et al., 2016) and other packing prob- lems, see DeCorte et al. (2021). Dobre et al. (2016) generalized the con- cept of copositive matrices to the infinite dimensional setting by defining

relaxation of a quadratic problem corresponds to the Lagrangian dual of that problem, whereas considering partial Lagrangian duals (i.e., du- alizing the problem only with respect to a subset of the constraints) leads to various copositive relaxations, cf. Bomze (2015). The Shor re- laxation can be improved by adding more constraints to the SDP, or by using some relaxation-linearization techniques, yielding stronger SDP- relaxations. This has been discussed in detail in Bao et al. (2011).

of the problem. So in a sense MaxCUt is a canonical model for linear and quadratic binary problems. Note that (11) is a special instance of the problem (5) studied by Burer. It can therefore be formulated as a copos- itive problem, and then approximation hierarchies from Section 3 can be used.

In this paper, we have discussed various conic approaches to binary quadratic problems. It is noteworthy that not much literature is avail- able for conic approaches to nonconvex quadratic problems involving general integer or mixed integer variables, i.e., problems with a vari-

