We introduce a Control Flow Analysis for Brane Calculi. This verification technique allows properties regarding the behaviour of biological systems to be checked. This is an approximate technique that focusses on the static specification of a system, rather than on its dynamics, striving for effectiveness. Examples illustrate the approach.

The behaviour of a system is usually given in terms of its transition system, whose size can be huge, making its exploration computationally hard. Resorting to static techniques offers the possibility of drastically reducing the computational costs, particular high when modelling complex biological systems. The specification of the system is statically analysed in order to obtain information on the dynamic behaviour and to check the related dynamic properties, without actually exploring the whole state space of the associated transition system. The price to be paid is a loss in precision, because usually these techniques can only approximate the actual

behaviour.  Static analysis can be exploited for a sort of preliminary screening of the in silico experiments by efficiently testing different hypothesis and rapidly identifying which in vitro experiments worth to be performed. We first introduce a Control Flow Analysis for the version of Brane Calculi [6,7], called MBD and based on the operations for membrane fusion and splitting. Afterwards, we extend the framework, in order to include also the PEP actions that represent the operations modeling endocytosis and exocytosis. The analysis offers predictions on the contents of membranes: which membranes can be contained in the analysed one and which actions can affect it. This information offers a basis for studying dynamic properties, by suitably handling the over-approximation the static analysis introduces. Having a safe over-approximation of the exact behaviour of a system means that all the valid behaviour are captured. More precisely, all those events that the prediction does not include will never happen, while when included, the events can happen,

The paper follows the tradition initiated by [12,13] and continued with [15,16,3] of applying static techniques and, in particular, Control Flow Analysis to process calculi used for modelling biological phenomena. Our choice of the Brane calculi depends on the fact they have resulted to be particularly useful for modelling and reasoning about a large class of biological systems, such as the one of the eukaryiotic cells that, differently from the prokaryiotes, possess a set of internal membranes. Other applications of static analysis techniques have been proposed, like the Ab- stract Interpretation for BioAmbient in [10]. In a different context, the behaviour of processes is safely approximated and the properties of a fragment of Computation Tree Logic preserved. This makes it possible to address temporal properties and therefore some kinds of causality.

The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Section 2 we present the MBD version of Brane Calculi. We introduce the Control Flow Analysis in Section 3. In Section 4 the analysis is extended in order to also treat the PEP actions. In Section 5 the new analysis is applied to a model of infective cycle of the Semliki Forest Virus and to a model of communication via a mobile vesicle. Section 6 presents some concluding remarks. Proofs of theorems and lemmata presented throughout the paper are collected in Appendix A.

We develop a Control Flow Analysis for analysing Brane calculus systems, borrow- ing some ideas from [13]. The aim of the analysis is over-approximating all the possible behaviour of a Brane system. In particular, our analysis keeps track of the possible contents of membranes, thus taking care of the possible modifications of the containment hierarchy, due to the dynamics. An approximation of the contents of a membrane or estimate I is defined as

In Brane calculi the dynamics of biological membranes is abstracted by means of interactions that lead to modifications of the hierarchy of compartments. Control Flow Analysis gives information on the possible variations of the containment hier- archy. Both examples presented below show why this information is important, as it offers the basis for qualified predictions about the possible dynamic behaviour.

Usually, the Semliki Forest Virus is brought into the cell by phagocytosis, thus wrapped by an additional membrane layer. An endosome compartment is merged with the wrapped-up virus. At this point, the virus uses one of its special (viral encoded) membrane protein to trigger the exocytosis process that leads the naked nucleocapsid into the cytosol, ready to continue the infective cycle. By summarising,

In eucaryotic cells a large variety of proteins is targetted to its final destination via mobile transport vesicles, i.e. small membrane-enclosed sacs separated from the cytosol by a lipidic bilayer. Proteins can be contained in the vesicles (e.g. secretory proteins) or embedded in their membrane, e.g. transmembrane proteins.

Like the ones in [12,13,3], our analysis is context-insensitive and also flow- insensitive and these features affect the analysis precision. Future work regards the improvement of our analysis precision, along the lines of [15,16]. Preliminary results make us confident that useful information on the behaviour of the analysed systems can be obtained and used in order to establish biological properties of the systems under consideration. In particular, the properties that can be expressed as reachability properties of the model. Furthermore, we can obtain information on the role played by the various elements composing the investigated system. There- fore, it becomes easier to evaluate the behaviour of the whole system when a single element is added or removed, following an approach similar to [4].

