We present a model of concurrent games in which strategies are probabilistic and support both discrete and continuous distributions. This is a generalisation of the probabilistic concurrent strategies of Winskel, based on event structures. We first introduce measurable event structures, discrete fibrations of event structures in which each fibre is turned into a measurable space. We then construct a bicategory of measurable games and measurable strategies based on measurable event structures, and add probability to measurable strategies using standard techniques of measure theory. We illustrate the model by giving semantics to an affine, higher-order, probabilistic language with a type of real numbers and continuous distributions.

Another use of game semantics is in probabilistic computation. As first shown by Danos and Harmer [12] in a probabilistic version of the original Hyland-Ong game model [18], programs with random features can be interpreted as probabilistic strategies carrying the extra quantitative information. This works particularly well for probabilistic programs with state: the model is fully abstract for Probabilistic Algol, an extension of PCF [21] with ground type references and probability.

We forget about probability for now and until Section 4. The rest of this section is dedicated to the development of our framework for game semantics in a measurable setting. We define measurable strategies on measurable games and describe their composition and organisation as a bicategory.

Note the above use of  as an operation on maps of esps. We observe that this operation lifts to maps of fibred and measurable esps. Furthermore, it is functo- rial and makes (MES, , 1) a symmetric monoidal category, where 1 is the empty measurable event structure. We will make use of this functorial action, and write BE  E1 and fE  E1 for BE  BE1 and fE  fE1 .

Because standard Borel, race-free esps are closed under the various constructions of Section 3, there is a sub-bicategory of MG involving only such esps. We shall assume from now on that all measurable esps are race-free and standard Borel; in particular, we regularly make use of the property that in a standard Borel space all singleton subsets are measurable. We first introduce valuations on discrete esps.

We now aim to compare the probability of convergence of a closed term to that of its interpretation. The former was defined in 3.1, and we say here what we mean by the probability of convergence of a ground type strategy.

