regulation. As a matter of fact, regulators usually act differently above certain threshold values. The logic abstraction is able to capture this non-linear nature of networks behavior, despite its simplicity. The (global) state evolves to the next one, due to a set of functions that define the next state of each gene starting from the current state of the genes which regulate it.

The theory of Petri Nets, already exploited in Systems Biology (e.g. in [15,14]), has been employed to analyse the dynamics of regulatory networks in several works (see e.g. [7,27,28]), in which the logical models are translated in terms of Petri Nets, thus exploiting some of the above useful features. Process Algebras provide an alternative framework to analyse the dynamics of regulatory networks. They ([23,25,24,9,10,11,5,22,8], to cite only a few) have been fruitfully used to model several kinds of biological systems, relying on the idea that a biological system can be abstractly modelled as a concurrent system. Our approach aims at using process algebras for modelling and analysing GBNs. More in details, our purposes are

Boolean Networks (BNs) [16] have been introduced in Biology to model Gene Reg- ulatory Networks (GRN), i.e. those networks of interaction between genes that are at the basis of the protein synthesis. A Boolean Network is composed by a set of entities which regulate each other in a positive or negative way. The state of each gene (seen as a regulatory entity) is represented by a boolean value, i.e. active (1) or inactive (0). The (global) state of a boolean network, composed of n genes, is represented as a n-dimension vector of boolean variables, one for each gene. The evolution from a state to the next one is computed by a set of n boolean functions, each acting on each single variable, that define the next state starting from the current state of the genes which regulate it.

BNs and its generalised version are traditionally applied to infer genetic reg- ulatory networks starting from a partial biological knowledge (see [12] for a short review). Nevertheless, GBNs can also be used to describe metabolic networks, where it is possible to have a wider range of concentration values. In general, it is worth- while investigating which conditions allow the molecular species of interest to reach threshold values.

the differentiation process of two cell lineages, namely lymphocytes T-helper 1 and 2 (Th1 and Th2, respectively) from the common precursor Th0. T-helpers play a crucial role in the context of mammals immune system and their differentiation is finely regulated by different molecules (e.g. Interleukines and Interferons) produced by Th themselves or by other cell types including monocytes and dendritic cells. For more details on T-helper lymphocytes and their role in the immune system we refer the reader to [1] or to [18].

First we show an example of computation according to our formalism illustrating also how to apply the CFA on it. Then we verify the consistency of our model comparing the results of our computation and analysis with those presented in [18]. Finally we show how our method can be used to gain insights on the roles played by the network elements.

