here some methods that give up the uniform choice of the next state. They bias this choice according to the number of traces, or states, or transitions, reachable via each successor. The methods rely upon techniques for counting and drawing uniformly at random words in regular languages as defined by Flajolet et al. [5] and imple- mented in the CS package of the Mupad environment [12]. These techniques have, in the considered cases, a linear complexity in the size of the underlying automata, thus they allow dealing with rather large models.

However, even linear complexity techniques cannot cope with very large models. But it is possible to exploit the fact that most of them are the result of the concurrent composition of several components, i.e a product, synchronised or not, of several models. Each component is considered as an automaton defining such a language. It is shown how it is possible to combine local uniform drawings of traces, and to obtain some global uniform random sampling, without constructing the global model. This is described in section 3

Two major approaches have been developed for counting and drawing uniformly at random combinatorial structures : The Markov Chain Monte-Carlo approach (see e.g. the survey by Jerrum and Sinclair [8]) and the so-called recursive method, as described by Flajolet et al. in [5] and implemented in [12]. Although the former is more general in its applications, the latter is particularly efficient for dealing with a very large class of structures, namely those formed of atoms combined by the following constructions:

that it was not possible to deal with systems of size more than 104 states. Even if the memory size of the processor was bigger, it is rather unlikely that it would be possible to gain an order of magnitude. This is the motivation of the next section, where we show that generating traces of composed models allows to handle up to 1027 states and more.

Fortunately, huge models are rarely stated from scratch. They are obtained by com- position of smaller ones, the main source of state number explosion being parallel compositions. We show here how to use uniform random walks in the components to perform (approximately) uniform random walks in the global system.

The generalisation to several synchronisations is sketched in [9] and is the topic of an on-going Ph.D. thesis. Preliminary results on complexity let think that it will be practicable in the case of a small number of synchronisations only. However, in presence of many synchronisations, the synchronised product is smaller and a brute-force method, where it is constructed and used for uniform drawings, may become feasible. Actually, practical solutions are probably combinations of these

However, maximising pmin must not lead to give up the randomness of the method. It may happen, for instance, when there is a path in G going through all the elements e1,..., em to be covered. In this case, maximising pmin leads to give probability 1 to this path and 0 to all the other ones, yielding a deterministic

In this paper, we have briefly presented how to combine random exploration of models and coverage criteria. We have reported some promising first results in this area. A common basis of these various pieces of work is that they are based upon powerful techniques on counting and drawing uniformly at random combinatorial structures. It is our belief that these techniques could bring much to simulation, model based testing, structural testing or model-checking.

