based on highest energy label of nodes. The cluster head aggre- gates the data coming from different sensor nodes in a cluster and then it sends the aggregated data to the sink node. The data aggregation process by a cluster includes the collection of incoming data from different sensor nodes and sending those to the sink node for further processing. As the sensor nodes have very limited battery power, so it is very difficult to send data periodically to the sink node. Therefore, the data aggregation technique is used by a cluster head to enhance the battery life of sensor nodes.

toring [5] where response time is very important when emer- gency occurs [6]. Therefore, some of the applications must sup- port periodic data aggregation within deadline. For instance, in case of a chemical plant control, it is very important to col- lect periodically various readings such as pressure, tempera- ture. within deadline [7]. Similarly, in case of earthquake detection it is very important to collect various data about damages after certain periods. One major advantage of the periodic data aggregation in real time is that based on the cur- rent readings immediate actions can be taken. Another impor- tant application of periodic data aggregation is in defense forces. The sensor nodes collect the information about the sit- uation of the field over networks periodically.

To support periodic data aggregation with high data rate, authors propose a conflict-free periodic data aggregation tech- nique. CPDA technique supports conflict-free data aggrega- tion by maintaining d time between two consecutive data packets. CPDA also works with heterogeneous WSNs where some of the sensor nodes suffer from less amount of energy. Authors then present the mathematical analysis of the pro- posed data aggregation technique.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the related work. Section 3 describes the proposed periodic data aggregation technique and also the scheduling policy in heterogeneous environment. Section 4 presents the problem formulation of data aggregation technique. Section 5 presents simulation results and analysis. Finally, Section 6 con- cludes the paper.

To calculate the minimum inter data packets release time, we consider an approach as described in [20]. We assume two con- secutive data packets as Dd;i and Dd;j. Now, when Dd;i is execut- ing and at that time Dd;j waits for d time. Now, if a running data

Let C = {c1; c2; c3 ... ; cn} be a set containing n number of chil- dren of any parent node Pi in WSNs. Now, all children collect data from the environment and send to their respective parent nodes. To avoid conflict, Pi should receive data from all chil-

In this work, authors propose a conflict-free data aggregation technique in WSNs named as CPDA. The simulation results indicate that CPDA performs better in terms of different parameters as compared to existing approaches. CPDA sup- ports conflict free data aggregation as well as it works with low battery power sensor nodes in WSNs. In this work, authors also present the mathematical analysis of data aggre- gation technique. In future, authors would like to develop a priority based periodic data aggregation technique in WSNs.

