There had been a significant increase in security breaches and had to be wary of by the companies [1]. The record number of cybersecurity breaches exposed had risen by a staggering 36 billion in 2020. This was the worst year on record for information technol- ogy security [2]. Cybersecurity policymaking needed to be done properly so that security threats and attacks can be properly miti- gated. From the perspective of technology and information security management, risk assessment and measurement of security readi- ness were an important part. Companies needed to implement risk management in information security to minimize the level of secu- rity risk and provide business continuity [3]. Every critical infras- tructure had to implement an effective risk management process to protect stakeholders from financial, organizational, and reputa- tional losses [4]. Cybersecurity framework had been proven to pro- vide best practices in building security infrastructure and organizational systems [5].

This paper proposes a different approach from previous studies. The proposed approach is a combination of risk assessment and cybersecurity framework ISO/IEC 27001 to produce the best and most accurate recommendations for policymakers in making deci- sions on the development of information technology security sys- tems. The model built can map the priority value of threat mitigation based on the relative threat score against the relative evaluation score of the implementation of ISO/IEC 27001 compli- ance. The mitigation priority value is the key in determining prior- ity recommendations for building an information technology security system based on the ISO/IEC 27001 framework. The pro- posed model also provides a mapping of the ISO/IEC 27001 domain as well as threat mitigation priorities to make it easier for policy- makers to make decisions. This approach is oriented to the extent to which a threat and the application of a cybersecurity framework can affect business continuity. This paper also provides a compre- hensive analysis of the results of implementing recommendations for information technology security systems in the form of security testing on the system being built. The paper ends by conducting a statistical evaluation of the system built based on the recommen- dation of an information technology security system using the pro- posed model to obtain a significant level (p-value) between the system conditions before and after the implementation of informa- tion technology security system recommendations. The author raises 2 cases to find out the relationship between differences in system conditions before and after the implementation of security system recommendations where this case has never been pre- sented in previous studies in the design of information technology security systems.

The Governance factor evaluates the readiness of the form of information security governance along with the agencies/compa- nies/functions, duties, and responsibilities of information security managers. The risk management factor evaluates the readiness to implement information security risk management as the basis for implementing an information security strategy. Framework factor evaluates the completeness and readiness of the information secu- rity management framework (policies & procedures) and its imple- mentation strategy. The Asset management factor evaluates the completeness of securing information assets, including the entire cycle of use of these assets. The Technology aspect factor evaluates the completeness, consistency, and effectiveness of the use of tech- nology in securing information assets.

A cybersecurity attack is an attack carried out by virtual world criminals against one or several computers or networks. Maya attacks can be evil to deactivate computers, steal data, or use com- puters burglarized as launch points for other attacks. Virtual world criminals use various methods to launch a virtual world attack such as brute force, port scanning, malware, phishing, spam, ran- somware, denial of service (dos), and other methods [24].

In this study, we adopted the PDCA cycle (Plan do Check Action) for the stages of the problem-solving problem, where each cycle contains all activities in the study. The proposed method we place in the stage do, where the proposed method is a combination of risk analysis using the OCTAVE Allegro method and adherence evaluation of the cyber security framework ISO/IEC 27001. The combination of the two methods of analysis produces the priority value of mitigation for each security threat and mapping cyberse- curity Framework ISO/IEC 27001.

Plan stage, ideas, and formulations of research problems are dis- cussed and developed, at this stage, we conducted literature stud- ies on various related studies and models used in previous studies. Make the problem in the organization and determine the scope of research and mapping organizations. At this stage, we start plan- ning models used in research and identifying organizational assets. Do stage, is an analysis stage using the method proposed to pro- duce cybersecurity recommendations as supporters of cybersecu- rity decisions by conducting Direct Observation and interviews with each Business Process Owner (BPO) asset technology. At this stage, Management also provides a decision on the list of recom- mendations that are implemented. This stage ends by implement- ing/developing safety recommendations that have been decided by

Step 4: Identify the Area of Concern. In this step, the risk profile is developed by information technology assets by finding a compo- nent of threats from situations or conditions that might threaten the information technology assets owned. Development is made as detailed as possible and must still consider the specified security needs for information assets and how these assets can be affected by the threat when a real scenario is made. Area of Concern is made and used as the beginning of the development of risk profiles in the next step.

Defer, is a situation where the risk is not accepted or miti- gated based on the wishes of the organization to gather additional information and carry out additional analysis. The suspended risk is monitored and evaluated in the future. The suspended risk is usually a risk that has no significant impact on the organization.

Correlation layer. This layer is the process of combining the results of the risk analysis and the compliance evaluation analysis of the cybersecurity framework. To get the mitigation priority value for a type of threat to the dimensions of the ISO/IEC 27001 framework, 2 variables are needed, namely the relative threat score and relative evaluation score.

The relative threat score is a value of the probability of occurrence that can be achieved by a threat to information tech- nology assets. The greater the relative threat score of a threat, the higher the level of occurrence of threats to assets and the greater the impact received by the organization. The smaller the relative threat score, the smaller the level of occurrence of threats to assets and the smaller the impact received by the organization. The relative threat score is obtained from the weight value of a threat divided by the maximum value that each threat may have. The value of the weight of a threat is obtained by accumulating the number of assets affected by the threat to the level of threat criticality for the organization.

The relative evaluation score is the highest possible score for the implementation of cybersecurity framework compliance. The higher the relative evaluation score, the better the implementation of cybersecurity framework compliance in the organization. The lower the relative evaluation score, the worse the implementation of cybersecurity framework compliance in the organization is. The relative evaluation score is obtained from the results of the cyber- security framework compliance evaluation in the previous layer.

on the network. 2 units are allocated for the main data center and 1 unit for DRC. This device has an Auto Failover feature so that the presence of 2 units of this device can guarantee the availability of the device in the event of a failure on one of the devices. Switch 10g Edge-Core ESC5520-18X and Switch Edge-Core 1g Edge-Core

ESC4510-28T are network devices that function as links between data center devices. The HP ProLiant DL380 G10 server is a physical server that is used as a hypervisor host for Virtual servers. ESXi Hypervisor is an engine for server virtualization technology based on VMWare vSphere. This software is installed on each physical

Evaluation is the stage of quantitative analysis of the results of the implementation of security recommendations that have been built. The evaluation aims to find out whether there are differences before and after the implementation of security recommendations. In the calculation process at the evaluation stage, we use program- ming with R language with a value of Degree of freedom (df) = 0.05

With a significant level value of = 5% (0.05), a distribution is said to be normal if the significance level is > 0.05, whereas if the signif- icance level is < 0.05 then the distribution is said to be abnormal. Furthermore, with the Shapiro Wilk test method, it is known that the population data before implementation has a p-Value of 0.6469 and after implementation has a p-Value of 0.2037 so that both p-Value values > 0.05, it can be concluded that the data is nor- mally distributed.

Threats and attacks on information technology security systems have increased very significantly. Companies need to carry out risk management and evaluate the readiness of information security systems to minimize the level of security risk and provide guaran- tees for business continuity. With risk analysis and cybersecurity compliance evaluation, it can be seen the level of risk of each threat and security gap that exists in the company. Risk analysis and eval- uation of cybersecurity compliance can assist companies in making policies to develop information technology security systems effec- tively and efficiently. Based on the research that we have con- ducted on companies engaged in the retail industry, it shows that the proposed model can provide effective results in mitigating security threats and proves that there is a relationship between risk and the value of cybersecurity compliance evaluations against security threats. This is evident from the results of the evaluation with a statistical approach showing an increase in the average value of the evaluation of ISO/IEC 27001 compliance from 36.27 to 82.37 with the p-value of Paired T-Test is 0.002138 < 0.05, meaning that there is a significant influence between threats to the security of the information system technology that implements and does not apply information technology security system recom-

