We investigate the reachability problem for fragments of the Mobile Ambients, a powerful model for dis- tributed and mobile computation. By using a connection with associative-commutative term rewriting, we prove that reachability is decidable in the open-free fragment of pure Mobile Ambients with name restriction and weak reduction semantics. Processes in this model have three sources of infiniteness: depth of ambients, width of parallel composition, and number of restricted names. Our work extends similar results obtained for public fragments of Mobile Ambients.

Expressiveness issues and verification problems for dialects of MA have been studied in [2,10,1,3,5,7,8]. In this paper we focus our attention on the reachability problem: is there a computation from process P to process Q?. This problem has been studied for public (i.e. without name restriction) fragments of MA in [6,1,3]. Specifically, in

In [9] we have studied the relationship between public fragments of MA and a fragment of associative and commutative (AC) term rewriting, we called TUC. Indeed, the computational mechanisms of public MA can be naturally expressed using rewriting systems working on terms with multiset-variables. In [9] we have shown that reachability between ground terms (but for a set of rules with multiset- variables) is decidable for the structure preserving fragment of TUC, called TUCSP . Structure preserving rules cannot remove internal nodes of a tree term. However, they can still produce and consume leaves. In the same paper we have shown that the decidability of reachability in TUCSP generalizes the results obtained for the fragments of Mobile Ambients in [1,3]. Indeed, the semantic and syntactic restrictions for MA studied in [1,3] can be reformulated in a uniform way using a set of structure preserving TUC rewrite rules. Interestingly, TUCSP has a different nature from other fragments of AC rewriting like PRS [12] and AC ground rewriting [11]. Indeed, to express the movement operations of MA, we need rewrite rules (like the one in the previous example) that synchronize tree terms with multiset- variables. This kind of synchronization rules are restricted to ground terms in PRS and ground AC term rewriting (the interested reader can refer to [9] for a more detailed discussion on this point).

To show that the reachability problem for the fragment of pure Mobile Ambients defined in the previous section is decidable, we use a reduction to reachability in a special fragment of AC term rewriting called structure preserving. The latter problem is decidable [9]. We introduce the syntax of structure preserving rewrite rules in the next section.

We consider a restricted class of rewrite rules defined over TR terms and with vari- ables ranging over multisets of terms. For this purpose we first need to define the shape of restricted terms that can occur in the left- and right-hand side of rules RTL and RTR, respectively. Given a denumerable set of variables V = {X, Y,.. .}: ranging over MS-terms:

