advance, while the interval information of uncertain parameters is eas- ier to obtain [17]. Moreover, fuzzy numbers and random variables can be transformed to interval numbers by confidence level and cut set [18], respectively, and the interval numbers have a clear operation criterion. Therefore, IMOPs are receiving increasing attention from researchers in various fields.

The second approach designs IMOEAs by defining interval Pareto dominance relation for the direct solving of IMOPs. This method can avoid losing uncertain information and obtain more accurate solutions. Therefore, this paper mainly focuses on the second approach. Limbourg et al. [25] first defined interval Pareto dominance relation (IPDR) based

hypervolume using interval upper and lower limits, but this approach has high computational complexity. Jiang et al. [26] defined the in- terval probability dominance relationship, subdivided the positions of two intervals into six cases, and provided specific calculations for each. Gong et al. [17] proposed an IPDR using the interval confidence level, and defined an ICD using the midpoint and volume of each interval, and overlap between the two intervals, proposing the II-MOEA algo- rithm. On this basis, Sun et al. [27] designed interval Pareto dominance relationship based possibility degree lower bound through confidence

et al. [32] chose interval confidence as the interval ranking method and proposed interval cooperative multiobjective artificial bee colony algorithm. Sun et al. [18] proposed the IMOMA-II by integrating the lo- cal search into the existing IMOEA. The fitness function of individuals is calculated using the contribution of individuals to the hypervolume and the uncertainty of individuals in the local search stage, so that the individuals with excellent convergence, diversity and uncertainty are more likely to enter the next generation population. Liu et al. [33] defined a new interval crowding distance by the ratio of the distance between two intervals on a certain objective and the distance between the maximum and minimum intervals on this objective, and modified the interval confidence dominance method to compare each individual

In recent years, Sun et al. [35] proposed adaptive interval confi- dence and developed a probabilistic wind power interval prediction model. Xu et al. [36] proposed a hybrid search IMOEA that includes modified gray wolf optimization and pattern search. Zhang et al. [37] modified the calculation of interval distance in interval confidence level and proposed the InMaOEA. Chen et al. [38] proposed a modified IPDR, and ICD calculation with respect to the mixture of real values and intervals, and proposed the interval multi-objective particle swarm op- timization algorithm. Xu et al. [39] designed an angle-based ICD (ICA), providing a new way to calculate ICD. They also defined interval knee point to help decision-makers make decisions, and proposed an inter-

To improve the population distribution and reduce uncertainty, a dual-ranking adaptive weight vector adjustment strategy based on interval sparsity ranking and interval uncertainty ranking is pro- posed. The weights of the rankings are also discussed in detail. In addition, to ensure population convergence on the true PF, an IEP is established to update the contemporary population before adjust- ing the weight vector.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 in- troduces some relevant definitions. Section 3 elaborates the adaptive weight vectors adjustment strategy, the adaptive neighborhoods adjust- ment strategy, and the framework of the proposed algorithm. Experi- mental results and analysis are presented in Section 5. Finally, the main conclusions and future works of this paper are presented.

Since uniformly distributed WVs do not ensure that uniformly dis- tributed optimal solutions are produced on PFs with spikes and low tails [44], and, for irregular PFs, uniform WVs can adversely affect the population distribution [40]. Therefore, to ensure the distribution of population, the WVs need to be adjusted according to their sparsity. In addition, the introduction of uncertain information has a negative impact on the distribution of the population [40]. Therefore, individ- ual uncertainty should also be taken into account when adjusting the weight vector. On the basis of the above considerations, we design an adaptive adjustment weight vectors strategy based on interval spar-

II-MOEA [17]: II-MOEA is a classic IMOEA based on Pareto dom- inance. Interval Pareto dominance relation based interval confi- dence level sorts individuals into different interval Pareto fronts. Then calculate the interval crowding distance according to the lo- cation and volume of the individual in the objective space. And select the optimal solution set based on the above two strategies.

IMOEA/D [40]: An adaptive reference vector-based interval multi- objective evolutionary algorithm in the framework of MOEA/D. Decompose IMOP into multiple subproblems with interval param- eters, and developed an ensemble scheme for evaluating interval individuals. Then, adaptively adjusted reference vectors based on the interval crowding distance.

ing with this problem, the IGD values of IMOEA/D-AWN are all larger than those of the other four algorithms, so this problem poses a chal- lenge for IMOEA/D-AWN. However, IMOEA/D-AWN performs best for other problems with complex features, such as IWFG2-9, IMaF1-2, and IDTLZ1-3, where IWFG2 is a discontinuous PF, IWFG3, IMaF2 are irreg- ular PFs, and these irregular PFs can pose challenges to the algorithm, but IMOEA/D-AWN can deal with these problems well. This means that IMOEA/D-AWN has better convergence and diversity for most test prob- lems compared to other algorithms.

rithm. Although we have selected its appropriate value through com- parative experiments, it may not be optimal. Therefore, how to obtain its optimal value deserves further research. And the number of itera- tions to start adjusting the weight vectors is fixed, different number of generations to start adjusting will have an impact on the performance of the algorithm. Therefore, how to adaptively determine this value deserves further research. Besides, IMOEA/D-AWN can be applied to practical applications to provide more high-quality options for decision makers. However, IMOPs with interval constraints are not uncommon

This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China [Grant NO. 61806138, NO. 61003053]; in part by the China University Industry-University-Research Collaborative In- novation Fund (Future Network Innovation Research and Application Project) [Grant 2021FNA04014]; in part by the Central Government Guides Local Science and Technology Development Funds (Grant NO. YDZJSX2021A038); in part by the Key R&D program of Shanxi Province (Grant No. 202202020101012); in part by the Taiyuan University of Sci- ence and Technology Scientific Research Initial Funding (TYUST SRIF), No. 20232087.

