Deduction Graphs are meant to generalise both Gentzen-Prawitz style natural deductions and Fitch style flag deductions. They have the structure of acyclic directed graphs with boxes. In [3] we have investigated the deduction graphs for minimal proposition logic. This paper studies the extension with first-order universal quantification, showing the robustness of the concept of deduction graphs.

This renaming is not so trivial because it not only involves nodes inside the box but also the x in node 16. But when we rename x in node 16, we also have to rename it in nodes that refer to 16, and propagate that through the graph. This could thus involve any node of G, eventually even nodes 1 and 2. Renaming is hence not just complicated, but it might a priori not even solve the problem.

In Section 2 we give the definition of deduction graphs with universal quantifi- cation, called DGUs, starting from definitions for terms and formulas of first-order predicate logic. The process of cut-elimination is discussed in Section 3, followed by strong normalisation in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 compares DGUs with devel- opments in proof nets.

We formulate a criterion to check relatively easily whether a given closed box directed graph is a DGU (Lemma 2.6). As an important notion for DGUs is the eigenvariable of a box, we need a similar notion for general closed box directed graphs. So, we call a variable u a box-variable of B, if u does not occur in the label of the box node of B, but it does occur in the label of the node that the box node points to. Remark that for DGUs the notion of eigenvariable and the notion of box- variable coincide. We also recall from [3] the notion of a box-topological ordering :

We have a depth-conflict in the DGU G, if G contains a cut with major premiss n and conclusion p at a greater depth, such that there is an arrow from p to n and that is the only arrow to n. In that case the incorporation of G at n, p is obtained by moving Bn, i.e. the box of n, into the box at the lowest depth that includes p but excludes n.

In [5], Girard discusses proof nets of MLL with quantifiers. Note that, as these proof nets do not include the exponential rules, this results in a simpler system. His approach is similar to ours. He replaces some free variables by constants, which reminds of our solution with two kinds of variables. He also insists on uniqueness of the eigenvariable. About renaming he says:

