Despite its apogee in the 20th century, effectiveness was already present in many fields of the human knowledge in Ancient times. In our daily lives there are routines we perform due to cultural heritage, while others are pervasive and encountered in every culture. Such pervasive routines may be considered as universal or natural aspects of our lives. Arithmetic is an example of such an universal aspect, it is present in all known civilizations 4 , and (historically) a great part of our cognitive life (was and) is dedicated to learn and develop algorithms on the basic operations used to calculate with natural numbers and other number systems.

Classical problems as squaring the circle or trisecting an angle using a finite number of straightedge and compass operations can be understood as the search of a method to solve a problem by means of a specialized algorithm. Both problems were proved impossible to solve and it seems that only in mathematics such impos- sibility proofs appear in a definite form. Posterior investigations have shown that constructions with straightedge and compass together with the usual algorithms on the four basic arithmetical operations are not sufficient as the representatives of effectiveness in such problems.

ered as a relationship between inputs and outputs. The last century was successful in characterizing which functions from a set of inputs A into a set of outputs B are effective. A pair of decades after its beginning, partial functions instead of total ones were admitted in the realm of effective functions. Furthermore, realizing that the set of Natural Numbers, presented as a numeral system, should be considered as the universe for the subsets A and B mentioned previously, was also a recent development.

This article follows the model-theoretical approach for defining effectiveness by providing an alternative way to present effective functions using category theory. Our proposal is different from the effective topos ([7]) and from the work presented in a series of articles by prof. Robert Walters (see [16] for a brief and easy introduction on the subject). In the next section we discuss the main motivation of our alternative to the study of effectiveness.

Johnstone, P. T., Sketches of an elephant: A topos theory compendium-volume 1, Sketches of an Elephant: A Topos Theory Compendium-Volume 1, by Peter T Johnstone, pp. 562. Foreword by Peter T Johnstone. Oxford University Press, Nov 2002. ISBN-10: 0198534256. ISBN-13: 9780198534259 1

