The sensor is also known as a transducer. A transducer, often known as a sensor is any device that converts one type of energy into another. A physical occurrence is converted into an electrical impulse that can be interpreted by the sensor or transducer. Also, there are several methods for measuring the same object. The actuator is the second type of trans- ducer. An actuator works in the opposite direction of a sensor. It uses an electrical impulse to execute a physical activity. For example, the temperature sensor can detect the heat. There may be different kinds of

The BSSHM is helpful to observe the physiological condition of a patient. It then sends the monitored healthcare data to the connected health server. At the health server can be used for various purposes, i.e., getting the knowledge about the health of the patient remotely or make some predictions about the health of the patient. Whatever data the smart healthcare devices and health servers exchange that happens in the secure way through the steps of the used authentication and key establishment mechanism of the BSSHM. Therefore, it can protect the system against various possible cyber attacks.

The outline of the paper is as follows. The relevant related work has been discussed in Section 2. We present an architecture associated to the blockchain-enabled secure smart health monitoring system includ- ing the network and threat models in Section 3. We then discuss various phases in details related to the proposed framework in Section 4. We per- form the formal security verification using broadly-used automated soft- ware validation tool, namely Scyther in Section 5. Additionally, a practi- cal implementation of the proposed framework in Section 6 along with the blockchain implementation in Section 7. At the end, in Section 8, some concluding remarks and future research have been discussed.

Access control in smart devices is a very pressing and important topic, and it is also a trending technology to safeguard access and se- cure data. As a result, different studies and surveys in the field of access control have been offered. Rana et.al [17] exhibited an access control approach. They also provided a model in which they indicated that the astute health clinical framework was expected to have a significant in- fluence on the nature of medical care administrations.

the way we live our lives. It has enabled the development of various sys- tems that can be monitored and controlled from remote locations. The proposed scheme utilizes the power of IoT to create a temperature moni- toring device that is based on Raspberry Pi and MLX90614 [5]. Through which the temperature of a subject (i.e., a human user-patient) can be monitored in a smart way without making the physical contact. The

and mouse was used to control the RasSpberry Pi. A Wi-Fi dongle has been used to connect the Raspberry Pi to the Internet in case of any needs. The light-emitting diodes (LEDs) display were used for indicat- ing the status of the device. The breadboard was deployed for prototyp- ing and testing purposes. We also used jumper wires for connecting the components together. There was a power supply (5V,2A/3A) to provide the power supply to the Raspberry Pi and other associated components. It is important to ensure that all components are compatible with the Raspberry Pi and that they are of good quality to ensure the smooth execution of the experiments. A view of implemented testbed of the

The Raspberry Pi is a small, credit card-sized computer designed for educational/experimentation purposes, which has gained popular- ity among developers and hobbyists for its affordable price and im- pressive specifications. It features onboard Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and a pro- grammable GPIO header, making it ideal for learning programming skills, building hardware projects, and even industrial use. Raspberry Pi boards can run a variety of operating systems, including various ver- sions of Linux, Windows 10 IoT Core, and others. They are popular for a wide range of projects, including media centers, game consoles and home automation systems.

Here, the details of the implementation of blockchain phase of the BSSHM are given [31,32]. Since the proposed BSSHM processes and stores the sensitive healthcare data. Therefore, under these circum- stances, it is mandatory to maintain the secrecy of the sensitive health- care data. Otherwise, the sensitive healthcare data may be leaked, or updated in an authorised way. Blockchain is a distributed ledger tech- nology, which maintains the data in the form of blocks and each block contains some information inside them. Due to such mechanism of stor- ing the data in the blockchain, we can store the healthcare data in the form of certain number of encrypted transactions. Due to the encrypted transactions, the revealing and updating of healthcare is not possible for

The smart health monitoring system is an important aspect of health- care as it is used to diagnose and treat various illnesses and conditions. In this paper, an architecture of the blockchain-enabled secure smart health monitoring system was presented. The threat model related to the BSSHM was given. The formal security verification of the BSSHM is done through Scyther tool. It has proved that BSSHM is able to defend various potential attacks. Finally, a testbed of the BSSHM was imple- mented to check its usability in the real-time.

