In this paper, we seek the answer to the previous questions for exploring which indexes can achieve high accuracy segmen- tation whey they performed with KFCM and SKFCM. Our objective is not to improve the segmentation accuracy via enhancing the kernel function, but is to find the indexes with KFCM and SKFCM capable to produce good MRI segmen- tation. For that; the original Euclidean distance in the FCM algorithm is replaced by the Gaussian radial base function (GRBF)-induced kernel, which is shown to be more robust than FCM (with Euclidean distances). This will make a gener- alization of the existing FCM methods. The KFCM and SKFCM algorithms based on Gaussian RBF kernel are de- rived and applied independently on each image. Based on these algorithms, eighteen indexes are implemented to estimate the number of clusters that represents the best structure of a given image. Key existing solutions are evaluated to obtain the clus- ter validity in the domain of image segmentation. A wide num- ber of various validity indexes from the classical and more recent indexes are examined. As segmentation of medical images is of particular interest in our application, the work

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 pre- sents the kernel methods. Several criteria to determine the number of clusters are briefly reviewed in Section 3. Experi- mental comparisons are presented in Section 4. Finally, Sec- tion 5 gives our conclusions.

Euclidean distance as in Ahmed et al. [2]. In the next category, the spatial constraint is only based on membership values as presented in Zhang et al. [6]. The third one, it uses Euclidean distances based on weighted averaging image window as in

The index is computed for values of C greater than 1 and its values range in [0, log C]. The closer the value of PE to 0, the harder the clustering is. As in the previous case, the values of index close to the upper bound (i.e. log C), indicate absence of any clustering structure in the dataset or inability of the algo- rithm to extract it.

ered to be the correct number of clusters. The first factor Dmax is the maximum distance between the prototypes (cluster cen- ters). It will increase with the number C, hence reducing the in- dex as the number of cluster increases. The second factor  1 will try to reduce the index as the number of cluster increases. The

A large PCAES(C) value means that each of these c clusters is compact and separated from other clusters. A small PCAES(C) value means that some of these c clusters are not compact or separated from other clusters. The maximum of PCAES(C) with respect to c, could be used to detect the data structure with a compact partition and well-separated clusters. Thus,  an  optimal  c\  can  be  found  by  solving

average scattering for c classes and Dis(C) is a distance func- tion associated with distance between class centers. The first term represents the compactness and second term the separa- tion. These two terms usually show opposite trends as C is changed. The minimum value of the index is supposed to give the appropriate number of clusters.

This index is based on cross-validation [19], which is an old, standard tool in statistics [41,42]. The data are divided into two sets, one used for determining the clusters and the other one is used to validate the obtained clusters. The underlying idea here is to validate them on a dataset different from the one used for cluster estimation. For the task of image segmen- tation, the two subsets of data can be formed in several ways. One way, which we will follow, is to use an under-sampled ver- sion of the dataset for cluster estimation and the original data- set for validation.

In the previous section, we noted that I, FHV, and AIC indexes always give better results than others. Our tests are fo- cused on applying the standard FCM and most popular SKFCM such as: Ahmed et al. [2], Zhang et al. [6], and Kang et al. [7] with these indexes on T1-weighted MR phantom with nine slices thickness of 1 mm, 3% noise. We set the parameter r = 150 (GRBF kernel width),a = 0.5, m = 2, and NR = 0.5.

In clustering, the role of a validity index is very important. The hope is that the number of clusters within an image can be determined automatically. The aim of this paper was to con- sider the performance of 18 of the most popular indexes by applying them in turn to a range of simulated and real data sets, including 2D and 3D data sets, corrupted with different types of noise of varying levels. To the best of our knowledge, no such comprehensive survey and comparison has been re- ported before in literature.

Overall, on synthetic images, AIC, I and FHV indexes yield the true number of clusters, whereas the FHV index shows bet- ter performance in KFCM compared SKFCM. Furthermore, the tests strongly suggest that the AIC index should be consid- ered as the most robust index for general data and in particu- lar, for determining the correct number of clusters using KFCM and SKFCM for MR medical images. Moreover, our tests prove that one can confide AIC method for determin- ing the correct number of clusters using KFCM and SKFCM for MR medical images. The most recent SKFCM with AIC has obtained good segmentation performance (i.e. up to 90% in synthetic images and up to 80% for MRI images).

This initial investigation should be expanded to consider further testing on different real data sets from a wide range of applications including medical images and reverse engi- neered data. It would also be interesting to consider the effect of systematic and random error noise levels within the data sets to further establish the effect of this error on the performance of the indexes. Further tests should also be carried out on clus- tering improvement of the fuzzy methods using a wide range of validity indexes for automatic clustering algorithms, via the help of specialists within the fields of application.

