out a timeline of the major cyber-attacks launched by using covid-19 as a ruse in one form or the other. The timeline charts cyber-attacks in the world based on how the virus spread. It was observed that on average four major covid-19 related cyber-crime incidents occurred every month. Also, this timeline identifies malicious domains, phishing, scamming, email forg- ing and mobile app spoofing to be the most employed social engineering techniques used during Covid-19. Ransomware, Trojans, and bots were routinely used to exploit systems and resources. This information will help in anticipating and detect- ing potential attacks, thereby enhancing preparedness in case of the next event.

To the best of our knowledge, this work is first of its kind that analyses the impact of Covid-19 on various cyber-security related aspects, outlines the timeline of Covid-19 themed cyber-attacks launched globally, discusses the impact of these attacks, offers a set of mitigation strategies which can be employed to prevent the attacks and proposes a fuzzy logic and data mining-based intel- ligence system for detecting Covid-19 themed malicious URL/ phishing attacks. The remainder of this paper is structured as fol- lows: To extrapolate the significance of our work, Section 2 pre- sents a critical analysis of the most recent, and relevant state-of- art methods discussing their advantages and shortcomings from Covid-19 related cybersecurity perspective. Section 3 sketches out the attack timeline related to Covid-19. Moreover, it reflects how Covid-19 changed the priorities and amplified the need for cybersecurity. It also highlights the effect of Covid-19 on various cyber-attacks, particularly phishing and ransomware attacks. Sec- tion 4 offers the mitigation measures to these attacks for stopping the attack before gaining a foothold of the system/ user credentials. Section 5 proposes a fuzzy logic and data mining-based intelli- gence mechanism to handle any type of malicious/ phishing URL attacks. In section 6, we analyse the efficiency of our proposed sys- tem under the influence of various malicious links. A comparison with the available state-of-art is also shown in section 6 to indicate the stage and reliability of our work. The paper is concluded in sec- tion 7 that also highlights areas of future research.

History stands testimony to the fact that expert cybercriminals have never missed the opportunity to cash on any hot subject, a mega occasion, or a celebrity in their social-engineering tactics. Their approach to the Covid-19 pandemic was no different. They used the disease that killed more than 3 million people [71] (18- April-2021) as a lure. As the virus spreads globally, people are nat- urally searching online for the most up-to-date information about how it may affect them and what they can do to protect them- selves and their loved ones. As one might expect, thousands of reg- istered domains today contain the words like Covid-19, covid19, COVID-19, ncov, and Corona-virus.

User awareness: To prevent any type of attack, it is crucial that users must be made aware of their vulnerabilities, and they must know how to identify trusted and legitimate sources. They must know what happens when certain permissions are given to third-party applications. At this time, users should avoid using public wi-fi spots, and at all times, people should take back-up of their critical data and never share their account details and other credentials via phone or email.

ing firewalls, etc.) but neglect to do the same for outbound con- nections. When any malware infects a device, it must reconnect to its command-and-control centre in order to carry out the attack. If we are successful in preventing this connection, ran- somware will be unable to gain traction in the first place. Hence, any questionable activity must be recorded and examined.

Identify misleading news: We are living in a time when fake news spreads faster than wildfire. Identifying fake, ambiguous or partially accurate news can be a difficult job. The responsibil- ity should be taken up in collaboration by the social, computer, and healthcare scientists to design techniques for identifying covid-19 related fake/misleading news.

SIEM	Downward growth trend.The demand for SIEM projects was strong before Covid, but they take a long time to start up and run. As such, SIEM projects will be pushed back in the times of Covid because the projects that guarantee a quicker return on investment will be favoured.

IGA	Downward growth.IGA comes with a complicated installation process, labour costs, and heavy service investments (almost 150% of what has to be spent on software licenses, 3-year support, and maintenance).In the current world scenario where cash is the king, IGA project investments will be help-up.

Grave analysis of the network by professionals: If the data is extremely valuable, firms should have cybersecurity profession- als do periodic scans of their networks. While the global pan- demic and its widespread ripple effect can seem to be full of nothing but doom and gloom, a silver lining is that many posi- tions in the cybersecurity sector will open up as a result. As IT quickly secures and scales its network to meet new demands, the teams are heavily taxed. For many companies, the move to work-from-home has involved repurposing their cybersecu- rity personnel to manage IT functions, and vice versa. At this point, there is a global shortage of 3.12 million cybersecurity professionals, according to (ISC) 2020 [85]; this workforce, therefore, needs to expand rapidly every year to meet the increasing demand for skilled staff and also to mitigate the potential threats.

Once filtering was done, the domain names obtained from WhoisDS were matched with 1,54,292 malicious COVID-19 related entries present in the domain tools dataset. We considered any URL not present in both datasets as non-dangerous. 5173 such domains were obtained. A total of 6321 COVID-19 related mali- cious domains were identified. This input of 6321 malicious and 5173 legal domains was fed to the fuzzy logic and data mining- based intelligence engine, that is discussed in detail in the follow- ing subsection.

exposing companies to threats that just a few months ago did not exist. Unfortunately, the expanded corporate network now incor- porates notoriously unpatched and unprotected home networks. Understanding these complex patterns is important for security teams charged with detecting threats and properly protecting net- works which only increases the need for filling the skill gap.

To quantify and qualify any of the malicious COVID-19 related URLs, emails, and other malware, we propose the use of fuzzy logic. Fuzzy logic has been used in research for decades to integrate inputs into computer models for a various purposes. Boolean logic accepts input as true or false. Fuzzy logic is the logic of uncertain and imprecise reasoning [68]. Whenever, there is uncertainty and imprecision, precise logic cannot be used. In fuzzy logic, it is possi- ble to describe partial membership in sets to calculate the result. The goal of fuzzy logic is to create a computational paradigm that is based on how humans think because in the real world, most classes of objects do not have clearly defined membership criteria.

We prefer to use the fuzzy logic approach as no distinctive boundaries exist between the legitimate and illegitimate classes in phishing URLs. The significance of fuzzy logic in phishing detec- tion stems from the use of linguistic variables to point-out the pos- sibility of a URL being malicious based on important phishing feature flags and linguistic variables to express phishing signs. The system is designed keeping in mind that false negatives should be very less as it is important to let the user obtain genuine COVID- 19 related information from legitimate sites. The system should neither barge the user from a legal COVID-19 related site nor send important emails containing COVID-19 related keywords into spam.

In layer 2, encryption and JavaScript and source code related features are analyzed. JavaScript has recently become the most popular attack construction language. By analyzing the combina- tion of listed 5 features, most of the malicious JavaScript based attacks can be identified [68]. Similarly, an attack that attempts to manipulate or forge HTTP cookies is called cookie poisoning. Depending on the attack, cookie poisoning can lead to session hijacking, sensitive data exposure, or account takeover. In layer 2, one of the studied features is the unusual cookie. Likewise, the other features have been added to include every type of malicious intent.

Defuzzification. We fuse the results obtained from three layers into a final phishing possibility. Rule evaluation is defuzzi- fied using Mamdani method [87]. An AND operator is used to com- bine these fuzzy rules. The disjunction operator is used when the firing of multiple rules (antecedents) result in the same result. The DoA value is computed by averaging the centroids of gravity of each member function. That is,

In this section, we have checked the applicability of our pro- posed system on COVID-19 related malicious URLs and phishing attempts. We used 5173 legal domains linked to COVID-19 (ob- tained from the WhoisDS dataset) and 6321 malicious COVID-19 related domains (extracted from the domain tools dataset). It must also be noted that Fuzzy logic-based techniques offer the advan- tage of being memory efficient and having a fast inference speed. However, implementation is more involved and complex than heuristic-based methods.

The rules are evaluated using tenfold cross-validation. The data- set is separated into ten groups, with nine of the ten components utilized to train the classifier. The data acquired throughout the training phase is then used to test the tenth group. This is repeated ten times. Each of the groups would have been used as either train-

In the case of phishing attacks related to COVID-19, the reduc- tion of false positives and false negatives is as important as accu- racy or true positives. Our system gives an overall detection accuracy is 98.19%, a False Positive Rate (FPR) of 1.01%, and from 6321 malicious COVID-19 related domains, it called 452 domains as Falsely Negative, i.e., it only gave a False Negative Rate of 2.76%. Therefore, it allows the users to obtain crucial covid-19 related information while at the same time blocking the phishing/- malicious ones.

