Competing for positions and grants, mathematical disciplines have to justify them- selves. From the outside the impact on Applications is often put forward as the relevant criterion. For this reason, titles of Journals, of Conferences, etc., like to take the form

Domain Theory cannot be compared to a field like Number Theory which has a long history, problems that one can explain to non-mathematicians and that is extremely rich with respect to the variety of methods that are used. Domain Theory can be compared to General Topology. General Topology provides a conceptual framework for phenomena that occur allover in Mathematics like space, convergence, nearness, connectedness, compactness, etc., but it has not been developed in order to solve specific problems. Every theory has its internal life and creates its internal problems, but General Topology is mainly perceived as a background theory, and its latest internal developments may not matter to the outside world.

At the birth of Domain Theory, specific problems were waiting to be solved. Do- main Theory provides a conceptual framework for phenomena occurring in various fields combining order and topology. It cannot be justified entirely by its internal problems. Thus, Domain Theory can only remain a lively research field if it interacts with other research areas inside or outside of Mathematics.

Domain Theory has emerged for very different reasons and from various origins. I can see five quite different roots not all of the same impact. Although I have to talk about them in some order, they should be seen as interleaving.

In the 1960ies and 1970ies, Universal Algebra was developing rapidly. A category theoretical version of universal algebra was developed, first under the name of a triple, and now known under the name of a monad. A well known monad beyond universal algebra was the monad of ultrafilters over sets. The algebras of this monad are the compact Hausdorff spaces. It was then natural to consider monad of all filters

Without any doubt, the work of Scott and its inspiration for denotational se- mantics has been the decisive moment for the development of Domain Theory which rapidly expanded from continuous lattices to continuous directed complete posets. Its simultaneous appearance in various fields led to a rapid development of the mathematical theory [2.8]. But what feature of continuous dcpos is it that made it appear in so different contexts? Undoubtedly the fact that the idea of approxima- tion by relatively finite approximands is optimally coded by the way-below relation and the notion of a continuous domain.

In 1998, Th. Mormann [3.11]published a philosophical paper using basic con- cepts of Domain Theory. He presents a solution to a problem in the Whiteheadian theory of regions: Starting with a purely mereological system of regions a topologi- cal space is constructed such that the class of regions is isomorphic to the Boolean lattice of regular open sets of that space. This construction is based on a round ideal completion yielding a continuous Heyting algebra the spectrum of which gives the desired topological space. Thus, the argument of the paper relies on the theories of continuous lattices and pointless topology.

Set-valued analysis seems to be an area where Domain theory can be used prof- itably, not as a tool for solving specific problems but as an appropriate conceptual framework in which problems can be formulated conveniently. Another promis- ing area one should look at is Idempotent Analysis. One could add quite some literature. To begin with, [3.1,3.10] are useful sources of information.

The category of abstract Cuntz semigroups with these morphisms is denoted by CuSgr. In Domain Theory preservation of the way-below relation has only be con- sidered in connection with adjoints. This preservation property is close to the state- ment that f is an open map: The upper set generated by the image of a Scott-open set is Scott-open.

One may have noticed that at several places in this paper abstract bases are mentioned which are extensively used in [2.1]. I feel that this notion deserves more attention and, for this, another name may be helpful; I propose to call them predo- mains. Thus a predomain is a set P with a relation  that is transitive and has the

