Social virtual reality (social VR) platforms gained popularity among users over the last few years. They provide users with a sense of social presence, potentially stimulating social interaction in distance education. Insights on how VR enhances the social aspects of learning are scarce, however, and past examinations often focused on the effects of short usage times of self-developed VR learning applications. To analyze the potential of a simple-to- apply off-the-shelf social VR environment in distance education, in this qualitative study, a sample of 35 mas- ter's students employed the AltspaceVR platform for university seminars and group work over a six-week while campus access was restricted due to the covid-19 pandemic, and 23 of them were interviewed to examine their perception of the technology. The results show that social VR facilitated feelings of social presence, a more natural and spontaneous way of communicating with peers and teachers, and an increased sense of community in the classroom, compared to the alternative of videoconferencing. Participants reported high acceptance of the technology for teaching and learning tasks, particularly for interactive activities (e.g., workgroups) in small groups, but also identified limitations related to aspects such as image resolution, lack of note-taking tools, or the feeling of dizziness and fatigue after prolonged use. These results highlight the potential advantages of social VR for stimulating the social dimensions of online education, as well as the remaining challenges that need to be addressed to enable its use in higher education.

exploring new information and communication technology (ICT) tools (Peters et al., 2020; Strielkowski, 2020). This move to ICT converged with the advent of virtual reality (VR) technology, which could poten- tially facilitate social interactions among students and between students and teachers in online teaching. Previous research has shown how VR technology is well-suited to elicit illusions of being physically co-located with others in a virtual space. It enhances feelings of social presence (Kreijns, Xu, & Weidlich, 2022; Oh, Bailenson, & Welch, 2018), which, in turn, is considered a central component of satisfactory online learning experiences (Richardson, Maeda, & Caskurlu, 2017; Sung & Mayer, 2012). Currently, existing social VR platforms (e.g., AltspaceVR, Mozilla Hubs, Engage, Horizon Worlds) offer virtual environments where users can interact with each other embodied in avatars that reproduce their movements in real-time in a way that mimics face-to-face (FtF) in- teractions (Maloney & Freeman, 2020). Since in-person interactions may help forge social bonds to a greater extent than computer-mediated in- teractions on a 2D-screen (Sprecher, 2014; Sprecher & Hampton, 2017),

The current study takes a step in this direction. We report the results of a qualitative study conducted from October to December 2020, while most on-campus activities (including teaching) at the host university were suspended due to the covid-19 pandemic. The study integrated a VR classroom, implemented in a social VR platform (AltspaceVR), in the teaching activities of a master course in Communication Science. We used the VR classroom for workshops over six weeks, and 35 students (plus two teachers) accessed it simultaneously from home using VR headsets. Students' acceptance of the platform, perceived advantages and disadvantages compared to other options (in-person classes and video- conference), and perceived effects on social connectedness and feelings of community were examined using a qualitative, exploratory approach. The results allow us to evaluate the impact of an easily applicable social VR environment on a relatively large group of students and over a more extended period than most of the studies carried out on the subject (Luo et al., 2021), adding new insight into the potential of social VR as a novel

In recent years, VR technology has reached maturity and started becoming accessible to the large public (Bailenson, 2018). Modern VR headsets, like the Oculus Quest or HTC Vive Cosmos, are increasingly penetrating the market (IMARC Group, 2021). Some even claim that VR technology may revolutionize how we interact with each other, as other technologies like the internet or smartphones did before (Bastug, Bennis, Medard, & Debbah, 2017; Rosedale, 2017), although it is still an open question whether or not VR will genuinely become a mass medium.

much less research has explored the impact of VR on the social dimensions of education. In the current study, we, therefore, focus on the social impact of using VR in distance education. More specifically, we examine how using a social VR application in teaching affects social presence, communication between students, and feelings of connectedness and community. We explore these questions in a context in which social needs among students were particularly thwarted, due to covid-19 re- strictions (Aristovnik et al., 2020), and in which, therefore, a technology that might enhance social presence and feelings of connectedness among students might be particularly valuable.

Several influential educational theories (e.g., from constructivism to social learning theory) acknowledge the critical role of social processes in learning. Education scholars have shown great interest in how online learning may affect students' social interactions and how the social setting impacts learning experiences (Hill, Song, & West, 2009; Jonassen, Davidson, Collins, Campbell, & Haag, 1995; Tu, 2000). Much of this educational research has revolved around social presence (Whiteside, Dikkers, & Swan, 2017). Researchers have found relevant associations between experiences of social presence and factors like online course retention, final grades, the perceived value of online courses, and stu- dents' perceived learning and satisfaction (Edwards, 2021; Kim, Kwon, & Cho, 2011; Liu, Gomez, & Yen, 2009; Richardson, Maeda, Lv, & Caskurlu, 2017; Richardson & Swan, 2019).

Social VR technology appears promising in enhancing the social as- pects of distance education by boosting feelings of social presence, particularly when social needs are thwarted (e.g., in lockdowns during the covid-19 pandemic). Some early research has started exploring this potential. In the study conducted by Holt, Heim, Tessens, and Walker (2020), ecology students used the VR platform Mozilla Hubs to present their research projects to their peers in an interactive session, using av- atars to interact with others. Students pointed out that the shared (vir- tual) space facilitated interactions and engagement among peers. However, in this and other studies on the topic (e.g., Gomes de Siqueira,

VR (e.g., Mozilla Hubs) spaces were used as virtual environments, the participants did not necessarily use VR head-mounted-displays (HMDs) to access them (they were free to use the desktop version). This likely minimized the immersive aspects of the experience and the associated feelings of spatial and social presence.

Finally, to understand the impact of social VR in education in a broad sense, it is also necessary to consider the specific context of its use. We conducted our study while FtF activities at the university were suspended due to the covid-19 pandemic, which was likely to elicit feelings of isolation in many students (Aristovnik et al., 2020; Son et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020). It is, therefore, interesting to explore to what extent social interaction in our classroom in social VR can contribute to students feeling more connected to the educational community. Our third RQ is as follows.

19 pandemic, almost all the teaching and learning activities were happening exclusively online in this university. The course was part of the M.Sc. program in Communication Science, and it was taught by two of the authors. The study obtained approval from the Research Ethics Review Committee at the Faculty of Social Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam.

The course consisted of a combination of lectures and workshops. The course lectures were conducted using a videoconference tool (Zoom), while a combination of this tool and the social VR platform (AltspaceVR) was used for the workshops. The pedagogical goal of the workshops was that students learn to conduct experimental research on the psycholog- ical aspects of VR as a communication tool, from a media psychology perspective. To achieve this goal, students carried out a student project: in groups of four or five, they were asked to design and conduct a pilot experimental study about a specific psychological effect of VR. At the same time, the workshops would allow the students to get familiar with social VR and provide the scenario to examine our RQs.

headset and the AltspaceVR platform, and it also included a first visit to the virtual classroom. Health and safety measures were discussed. During this session, students had time to practice the different aspects of VR (e.g., how to use the controllers, how to interact with other users, how to move across different spaces and worlds, etc.) and the two teachers were present to help solving issues. After the initial session, students were encouraged to keep exploring and getting familiar with the platform. They were asked to visit at least one world within AltspaceVR and attend some event on it before the next session. In the second session of the workshops, these experiences were discussed, and students' remaining technical issues were addressed. After this point, all students were reasonably familiar with the platform and able to use it.

Overall, participants did not report many technical or practical dif- ficulties with the use of the system at home. The only remarkable aspect was that some participants (6) reported not having enough space at home to physically walk inside the VR environment (i.e., when actual walking in the living room is translated into walking through the VR classroom). Instead, they needed to use other available alternatives to move within the VR classroom (e.g., using the controllers' joystick). However, this solution was not perceived as interfering with the user experience in a relevant manner ("I don't have space to walk with it in my room, but it didn't prevent using it [sitting]", P16, woman).

Taking into account these limitations, as well as cybersickness and comfort issues after prolonged use, most participants (18) considered that social VR platforms can be beneficial for learning activities involving higher level of interaction for a relatively short duration, and a relatively low number of participants (e.g., meetings of about five students in working groups) but they are not optimal for activities involving mostly one-way communication and complex or information-rich content ("I really liked VR for group discussions, like discussing in small group with the teacher", P3, woman; "I would prefer VR for everything but theo- retical lectures", P12, man).

contributed to making the learning experience vivid and enjoyable ("The presence of the other students around you; I really enjoyed that", P4, woman). Participants also reported that the sensation of social presence enhanced their connection with others ("socially and emotionally closer"; P5, man). One participant said that the seeming co-presence of her team members made her feel less nervous during the poster presentation. Another participant, however, reported that the presence of others was overwhelming and distressing, since she felt that others came too close to her.

Many participants (14) stressed that interactions in VR feel more natural than in videoconferencing applications (like Zoom) and are even, to a certain extent, comparable to FtF interactions ("It's like actually speaking FtF"; P3, woman; "It felt close to being FtF", P6, man). Students stressed that VR allows for behaviors that mimic those in the real world, like just approaching and talking to specific others instead of, for instance, always talking to the whole group in a Zoom session or a text- chat ("In VR you can just walk to someone and talk to just a person; you don't need to say it to the whole class, like in Zoom", P11, woman). Students also mentioned that the spatialized sound and the ability to observe the others' nonverbal behavior (e.g., head and hands' movements of the avatars, blinking) made them perceive the communication in VR as natural.

Given these specific benefits of VR as compared to videoconferencing, but also the technical limitations of VR (see section 4.1.1), most partic- ipants (18) agreed that they would prefer VR for interactive activities with a relatively short duration (e.g., workgroup meetings), but that videoconferencing works better for activities involving a more

Students (with only one exception) designed their avatars to make them recognizable, trying (as much as possible with the system options) to make their avatars look like themselves. Many of them (11) high- lighted that they were also able to recognize their classmates from their avatars. In some cases, since the students did not have many opportu- nities to interact with others FtF, some of them even reported that, when thinking about some of their classmates, they rather thought of the classmates' avatars than their actual faces. Various participants (7) stressed that mentally matching the image of the avatar and the real image of the others facilitated social presence, or made the interaction feel more realistic or of better quality. Thus, knowing the other person behind an avatar, and even recalling one's natural appearance, played an important role for most of the participants.

Some participants (6) also reported feeling "protected" while being embodied in an avatar when interacting with others: "I would be a little bit less shy in VR [than in the real world]" (P9, woman); "It's less scary to make a presentation in VR than in real life; people just see your avatar, not yourself" (P11, woman). For some participants (10), the use of ava- tars also contributed to making the classroom more informal and casual than a classroom setting in the real world (e.g., because of the teachers being represented with cartoonish avatars).

Our third research question addressed how VR platforms may affect students' perceived connectedness and feelings of community in the class. The majority of the interviewees (19) highlighted a positive effect on feelings of community. For one group (9) this effect was not very intense, but for others (10), it was clear and pronounced ("You really get the feeling that you are a part of a class", P23, woman; "It definitely changed something about the bond between my classmates and me", P22, woman). The enhanced community feel was attributed to various factors, including the feeling of being in a shared space, that allows to sense the

social presence of others, but also forbids hiding (e.g., by turning off the camera, as many usually did on Zoom), and the perception that VR fa- cilitates more natural and casual social interactions with other classmates (as compared to Zoom, see section 4.2.2). Another important factor in this context was the novelty of the technology, which stimulated joint activities like exploration (e.g., visiting together different VR worlds) and communal learning about how to use it (e.g., exchanging knowledge about details on how to perform actions in the VR environment).

Despite the enhanced feelings of community, the majority (15) did not think that the use of VR in the classroom impacted their overall feelings of loneliness or well-being. The most common explanation for this was that either participants did not feel lonely during the pandemic or that the use of VR was too short overall to impact how they felt. However, a smaller group of participants (8) reported some positive ef- fects on feelings of loneliness, either because of the illusion of leaving their home ("It contributed to the feeling of not being only at home studying in your room. It makes you feel like you are going somewhere"; P11, woman) or because of the casual chat with other students sparked in VR ("I do not really meet many people right now with the pandemic, and I noticed that I really enjoyed random conversations with my classmates"; P5, man). Interestingly, two students also mentioned that social VR had an unexpected negative impact on their perceived loneliness, because in VR the contrast between those students who know each other already and mingled in a group and themselves, who did not, became apparent.

Our results also align with theories that have addressed social pres- ence in online education, such as the Community of Inquiry framework (Garrison et al., 1999). In this approach, social presence in learning is characterized by three factors: open communication, group cohesion, and emotional expression. Our results suggest that, among these factors, social VR technologies may facilitate open communication (through a more natural and FtF-like form of interaction, as compared to video- conferencing) and group cohesion (through the possibility of performing activities together). Again, the poor facial expression of avatars would limit the capacity for affective expression, making social presence in VR more limited than in FtF meetings.

Some previous research had already suggested the potential of social VR to increase social presence in online education and its potential impact on community feeling (e.g., Ripka, Grafe, & Latoschik, 2020, Seufert et al., 2022), but with very small samples of participants, and short periods of use. Our study contributes to confirming these results with a larger sample of participants (35 students in the class, of which 23 participated in the interviews) and over a more extended period (six weeks). Yet, our study also explored new aspects that only become apparent in large groups of participants, and in prolonged use. Firstly, difficulties appear in large groups that are not obvious in smaller groups, such as the problem related to noise because of multiple users speaking at the same time or specific technical problems (the poor visibility of the screens in VR when the participant's avatar is more remote due to a larger crowd). The larger sample also helped to reveal issues that, even though they occur among a minority of the participants, may be relevant. For example, although social presence was appreciated by most students, a few students perceived certain negative aspects of feeling of co-located with others, like that others felt "too close" or that they became pain- fully aware that others, in contrast to them, already (spatially) mingle in groups. In a similar vein, while most students reported some positive effect on feelings of social connectedness and community, several did not perceive that the present VR classes significantly impacted their overall well-being or feelings of loneliness during the lock-down, suggesting that the potential benefits of such social connectivity are rather limited beyond the classroom.

the increased social presence produced by VR does not necessarily always result in a better learning experience for all learners. In this respect, approaches to mediated communication, such as the Differential Sus- ceptibility to Media Effects Model (Valkenburg & Peter, 2013), underline the need to understand the individual antecedents that may determine different media effects for different users. This perspective should be considered when investigating the experiential effects of social VR which, as our results show, may vary significantly among students.

the perception of the avatars and their use over time. They were first perceived as "awkward" while students afterwards habituated and responded more naturally to them. Thus, the greater naturalness in communication that is facilitated by avatars (which, as mentioned above, contributes to social presence) is only reached, for many participants, after some habituation period, which is unlikely to be captured in studies of very short duration.

Another crucial aspect that emerged in our results is the role of ava- tars' features in fostering social interaction and feelings of community. The absence of facial emotions and, in some cases, the lack of similarity between the avatar and the real person, pose barriers to the development of richer and more natural social interactions. However, recent techno- logical advances might soon help overcome these limitations. For example, there are already devices that can track user's facial expressions and incorporate them into the avatar in real-time (https://www.vive.com

As any study, also the present study was not free of limitations. First, we only examined one social VR platform, and hence we do not illumi- nate the potentially unique effects of different existing social VR plat- forms. Also, for practical reasons, the present study included only one group of students in a single course. Although the sample size and duration of the sessions were much larger than in other comparable research, the results obtained should be contrasted with other samples in future studies.

Our study did not analyze how social presence might benefit other VR applications or uses of VR beyond what we examined in the present study (e.g., in interactive simulations; Pottle, 2019; or in field-trips to places of interest; Fung et al., 2019). The combination of both dimensions (i.e., social interaction and interactive simulations/field trips) is where social VR can perhaps make the strongest impact. In addition, future work could examine how some of the negative effects noted by some of our participants (e.g., overwhelming social presence, or feeling socially excluded) could be overcome.

which might foster both positive (e.g., excitement) and negative (e.g., usability problems) effects, and therefore also plausibly influenced the findings of the present study. Future research should analyze to what extent the present findings persist among users accustomed to social VR. Finally, in future studies on using social VR in education, we recommend analyzing other aspects not covered in the present study, such as concerns about privacy that have been raised about VR (e.g., De

