diabetic patients worldwide. In the Middle East and North Africa, 1 in 10 adults have diabetes. Egypt is one of the top 10 countries in the number of people with diabetes (7.5 million in 2013) and the number is expected to increase to 13.1 million by 2035 [1]. Diabetes is characterized by hyperglycemia resulting

Type 2 Diabetes, which accounts for 90e95% of diabetic cases, is largely caused by social and lifestyle factors that can be readily controlled [1,2]. Obesity leads to an increase in the adipose tissue mass. This in turn triggers insulin resistance in fat, skeletal muscle, and liver leading to T2D [4]. A medical approach is not always sufficient for T2D management and lifestyle modification should be considered.

anti-inflammatory, and lipid lowering effects, suggesting a possible beneficial effect in management of T2D and its complications [5,6]. Several animal studies have shown that administration of the u-3 fatty acids, eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), prevented the devel- opment of insulin resistance, obesity, and dyslipidemia [6e8]. These effects are mediated via interaction with peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor a (PPAR-a) [9]. PPAR is a nuclear receptor that plays important roles in adipocyte differentia- tion, lipid and carbohydrate metabolism through transcrip-

Fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21) is a recently identified hormone that has an important role in glucose and lipid ho- meostasis [17e19]. Rat FGF21 is a circulating protein derived from a 208-amino acid mature protein encoded by the FGF21 gene located in chromosome 1 [20]. FGF 21 is detected in plasma, so it is proposed to be secreted into circulation acting as a true hormone. Its activity depends on binding to FGF re- ceptors (FGFR) and a cofactor called b-Klotho, a trans- membrane protein whose expression is stimulated during development of preadipocytes to adipocytes [21]. The cofactor b-Klotho is predominantly expressed in metabolic organs including liver, white adipose tissue, and pancreas [22]. FGF21 has glucose-lowering effects through several mechanisms. It stimulates glucose uptake in differentiated adipocytes via the induction of glucose transporter-1 (GLUT1) [17,23,24]. Glucose uptake induced by FGF21 is additive and independent of in- sulin. It has also been reported that FGF21 might act on glucagon metabolism, leading to decreased hepatic glucose production, and increased liver glycogen [25]. Finally, FGF21 was shown to preserve b-cell function and survival [26].

Experimental rats were maintained on a high fat diet (58% fat, 25% protein and 17% carbohydrate, as a percentage of total kcal) ad libitum. The high-fat diet (HFD) was prepared and composed as described by Srinivasan et al. (2005) [30]. After 1 month on high fat diet, experimental rats were injected intraperitoneally with freshly prepared STZ (35 mg/kg body weight) in 0.1 M citrate buffer (pH 4.5) after an overnight fasting [30]. Control rats were injected with citrate buffer only. Rats were continued on high fat diet until the end of study. To overcome the hypoglycemia during the first 24 h after STZ injection, diabetic rats were given 5% glucose solution instead of drinking water. Only animals with persistent blood glucose levels higher than 250 mg/dL for 7 days after STZ adminis- tration were considered diabetic.

were recovered from the aqueous phase by isopropyl alcohol precipitation and resuspended in nuclease-free water (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). A total of 1 mg of RNA was used for c-DNA synthesis using Maxima First Strand cDNA Syn- thesis Kit for RT-qPCR (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.), ac- cording to the manufacturer's instructions. The resulting c-

p < 0.01) and serum triglycerides (r = 0.775, p < 0.01). A sig- concentration and its mRNA expression (r = 0.448, p < 0.05). As nificant positive correlation was found between hepatic FGF21 for HOMA-IR, it is positively correlated with serum total

as insulin sensitizer [41]. u-3 fatty acids significantly decreased fasting blood glucose, but still in levels higher than normal ones. In a rat model of T2D, treatment with menhaden oil did not significantly change blood glucose levels, compared to untreated diabetic rats [38].

strong synergistic triglyceride-lowering effect. This is in accordance with a previous study that showed an additive effect with higher pioglitazone doses [34]. In the current study, u-3 fatty acids significantly lowered total cholesterol and tri- glycerides, compared to the untreated group. u-3 fatty acids exert potential hypocholesterolemic effect through inhibition of key enzymes related to cholesterol synthesis and transfer such as 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl reductase and acyl-

CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase [42]. u-3 fatty acids selec- tively lower triglycerides by increasing glucose flux to glycogen, increasing mitochondrial b-oxidation, and decreasing triglycerides synthesis, an effect that is mediated partially by PPAR-a activation [43]. Pioglitazone was found to significantly lower total cholesterol and triglycerides concen- trations, compared to diabetic rats. PPAR-g activation controls a variety of genes involved in different pathways of lipid metabolism such as fatty acid uptake, fatty acid oxidation, lipolysis, and lipoprotein assembly and transport [44e46].

resistance. Evidence from animal-based studies suggested that FGF21 possesses beneficial effects on carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, improving obesity and diabetes [17,47]. As well, administration of recombinant FGF21 has been shown to reverse hyperglycemia, hyperinsulinemia, and dyslipidemia in ob/ob and diet-induced obese mice and in diabetic monkeys [48e50].

Consistent with our results, many studies showed that circulating FGF21 concentrations are elevated in insulin- resistant states, such as glucose intolerance and T2D [51e54], indicating a possible compensatory increase of FGF21 to over- come insulin resistance. PPAR is a pivotal regulator of hepatic FGF21 [27,55]. A recent study showed that FGF21 could be regulated by PPAR-g activation in pancreatic islets of mice [56]. We investigated the possibility of regulating FGF21 con- centrations in serum and liver and its gene expression by

diabetic group, while its hepatic concentration was decreased. This discrepancy may be due to the contribution of adipose tissue and other tissues in circulating FGF21 concentration. Hepatic mRNA expression of FGF21 showed significant decrease in diabetic group, which correlated positively to he- patic FGF21 concentration. Consistent with our results, Oishi and Tomita (2011) showed that pioglitazone significantly increased hepatic FGF21 mRNA expression in mouse liver and in cultured hepatocytes [62].

In agreement with our results, recent studies of Jin et al. (2014) and Lin et al. (2014) found that circulating FGF21 was significantly and positively correlated with fasting blood glucose concentration and HOMA-IR [63,64]. Also, we have found a significant positive correlation between serum FGF21 and both serum total cholesterol and triglycerides, which is consistent with Matuszek et al. (2010) [59].

Oh PC, Koh KK, Sakuma I, Lim S, Lee Y, Lee S, et al. Omega-3 fatty acid therapy dose-dependently and significantly decreased triglycerides and improved flow-mediated dilation, however, did not significantly improve insulin sensitivity in patients with hypertriglyceridemia. Int J Cardiol 2014;176:696e702.

Murakami K, Tobe K, Ide T, Mochizuki T, Ohashi M, Akanuma Y, et al. A novel insulin sensitizer acts as a coligand for peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor- alpha (PPAR-alpha) and PPAR-gamma: effect of PPAR-alpha activation on abnormal lipid metabolism in liver of Zucker fatty rats. Diabetes 1998;47:1841e7.

An SY, Lee MS, Yi SA, Ha ES, Han SJ, Kim HJ, et al. Serum fibroblast growth factor 21 was elevated in subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus and was associated with the presence of carotid artery plaques. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2012;96:196e203.

Samson SL, Sathyanarayana P, Jogi M, Gonzalez EV, Gutierrez A, Krishnamurthy R, et al. Exenatide decreases hepatic fibroblast growth factor 21 resistance in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in a mouse model of obesity and in a randomised controlled trial. Diabetologia 2011;54:3093e100.

