Little is known about the effect of soil disinfection on bacterial communities. Soils were treated with an effective chemical fumigant chloropicrin and biofumigant mustard greens (Brassica juncea). While mustard greens did not affect the soil bacterial community struc- tures very much, chloropicrin greatly reduced soil biomass and bacterial species richness. Chloropicrin also influenced the bacterial community structure, making the phylum Firmicutes dominant by occupying about 75%. In more than two months, the proportion of Firmicutes was reduced to the basal level, and the phyla Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria became domi- nant. Since mustard greens worked as carbon sources for soil reduction, soils were treated with wheat bran and a low concentration of ethanol. Soil reduction with wheat bran and ethanol did not influence the soil bacterial community structures. Beta diversity analyzed by Principal Coordinate Analysis showed that bacterial communities in the soils except chloropicrin-applied soils formed a cluster. All together, biofumigant mustard greens, a prob- able substitute for chloropicrin, were demonstrated to cause much less damage on soil bacterial community than chemical chloropicrin.

2.1.2.	Analysis of soil physicochemical properties Physicochemical properties of soil were analyzed with the fol- lowing methods. Soil samples were air-dried and passed through a sieve with 2 mm mesh. Soil particle size was determined by the pipette method with sodium hexametaphosphate as dis- persing agent. Soil pH was determined in water in a soil solution ratio of 1:5 using the glass electrode. Total carbon and nitro- gen contents were analyzed using an NC analyzer (JM1000CN, J-Science). After fresh soil samples were passed through a sieve with 4 mm mesh, soil organic carbon was extracted with a 0.5 M K2SO4 solution in a soil to solution ratio of 1:5 and the C con- centration was determined by a TOC meter (TOC-VCPH, Shimadzu) [19].

Plastic containers containing approximately 45 kg of soil were used for the experiment. The soil was sampled from the farm of Education and Research Center for Subtropical Field Science, Kochi University. Each treatment was conducted in five repli- cates. 1.4 kg of small pieces of shoots and 100 g of roots from two-month-old mustard greens (Brassica juncea) were mixed with soil (mustard greens). Soils were mixed with 0.24 kg of wheat bran (wheat bran) and 2% ethanol (ethanol). Containers were covered by plastic sheets and submerged in water for about one month for soil reduction disinfection. Soils were treated with 4 ml of chloropicrin in two holes and covered by plastic sheets for 10 days (chloropicrin). Two tomato seedlings were planted in each container after the first treatment. Soil samples were

(Nippon Gene). 0.5 g of soil was disrupted at 5500 rpm for 45 seconds using a Micro Smash MS-100 (Tomy Seiko). The ex- tracted DNA was diluted, sonicated for 5 min, and used as PCR template. The hyper variable V4- and V5-region of 16S rRNA gene was PCR-amplified. The forward primer F563-LXA contained a

Chloropicrin is a toxic gas, which directly kills the soil living organisms and decreases the biomass [26]. Chemical fumi- gant disrupts the cell walls of microorganisms [5]. Since Firmicutes forms spores, the spore form could be resistant to chloropicrin and survive even after chloropicrin treatment. Al- though we did not test the effectiveness of chloropicrin on the pests, no weeds grew on the soils. Chloropicrin is demon- strated to be effective against several weeds in a commercial strawberry field [27]. Even three months later after chloropic- rin treatment, the bacterial community structure did not go back to the original state, although Firmicutes was no longer dominant. All together, we conclude that chloropicrin com- pletely disturbs the bacterial community structure.

The bacterial community structures of the soils were not affected by soil reduction with several carbon sources, wheat bran, ethanol, and mustard greens. Soil reduction consumes oxygen in the soil, so the eukaryotes such as fungi cannot survive in such reduced atmosphere, although we did not measure the number of eukaryotic microorganisms. Many of the soil bacteria are facultative anaerobic and could survive even after soil reduction with carbon sources. This is why the bacterial compositions in the soils treated with wheat bran, ethanol, and mustard greens were almost similar to that in the control soil. Weeds grew in the wheat bran-applied and mustard greens-applied soils (data not shown), indicating that wheat bran and mustard greens are not as strong as chloropicrin, which completely inhibited weed growth, at least for weed control.

Mustard greens work as biofumigant as long as carbon sources for soil reduction. A biotoxic element isothiocyanate is formed from the Brassica plants decomposition [28,29]. Volatiles released from chopped leaf materials of Brassica plants inhibit growth of a variety of plant pathogenic fungus of potato, including Rhizoctonia solani, Phytophthora erythroseptica, Pythium ultimum, Sclerotinia sclerotiorum, and Fusarium sambucinum [30].

B. juncea and B. rapa contain 2-propenylglucosinolate and 3-butenylglucosinolate as main glucosinolates, respectively. The biocidal activity of these glucosinolates is comparable with the efficacy of synthetic pesticides and antibiotics gentamicin [31,32]. In this sense, synthetic pesticides, such as methyl bromide and chloropicrin, could be replaced by Brassica plants. Brassica plants are attractive materials for both soil reduction and biofumigation.

