Jania rubens and Sargassum dentifolium macro-algae were col- lected by hand picking from the red sea in Hurghada, Egypt during May 2015. Healthy algal samples were cleaned from epiphytes, extraneous matter and necrotic were removed. Samples were washed thoroughly with sea water then sterile distilled water, air dried, cut into small pieces and then ground in a tissue grinder (IKA A 10, Germany) until reaching fine powder shape. Dried seaweed powder (1 g) was mixed with 100 ml of distilled water and heated

to light purple) within 1 h, indicating the formation of Ag-NPs. For complete reaction, the obtained solution was left under stirring for a further 4 h. The Ag-NPs/J. rubens and/or S. dentifolium formed were separated from the residual seaweed by collecting the pellets after centrifugation at 6000 rpm/min for 10 min. The pellets were again suspended in double-distilled water and adjusted by adding

est concentration of NPs that prevented color change as described earlier [36]. Growth was defined by an at least 2-fold increase of the OD595 compared to the negative control (TSA only). Next, MBC testing was performed, the bactericidal effect was defined as a 99.9% decrease in CFU (3 logs) in the starting inoculum during a 24 h incubation. The MBC was determined by transferring 50 ml

static stabilization. This might be achieved by the help of high repulsive and attractive forces between nanoparticles [50]. Nega- tive charge on surface of nanoparticles results in repulsion among the nanoparticles leading to stability of nanoparticles in cell cul- ture media [51].

(B) Ag-NPs/Sargassum dentifolium were determined by measuring OD600 nm for MIC by tetrazolium reduction assay (gray) and were confirmed as MBC by colony count (white). Shown are the medians from at least eight independent measurements. The error bars indicate the interquartile range.

[65] using different bacterial extracts. The coated nanoparticles on the surfaces, surfactants, and enzymes inhibited the bacterial biofilm formation [66] Same results were recorded earlier as against Vibrio cholerae and enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli using Ag-NPs synthesized from Calotropis procera [13]. Noteworthy, bac- terial biofilms cause chronic infections because they show increased resistance against antibiotics, chemicals and phagocyto- sis [67]. Thus, the failer of antibiotic penetration within the bacte- rial biofilm matrix resulted to the bacterial biofilms resistence against these antibiotics [68]. The above-mentioned attributes of bacterial biofilms place them along with the most dangerous prob- lems, which medicine is currently challenged. The results implicate that the biofilm formation was possibly inhibited at the beginning of the adherence stage at various concentrations of Ag-NPs tested. Consistent with our results, Ag-NPs have been recently shown to inhibit and reduce biofilm formations of several bacterial species [69].

