The label of a node is a concatenation of its parents label and its own label. For any two given nodes u and v; u is ancestor of v iff label (u) is a prefix of label (v). There are two prefix schemes: an integer based [10] and a binary string based [11]. Prime Number schema, Wu et al. [5] proposed a novel ap- proach to label XML trees with prime numbers. The label of the node is the product of its parent label and its own label. For any two nodes u and v; u is an ancestor of v iff label (u)% label (v) = 0; where % is the modulus operator.

Definition 2 (Divisible property). If an integer A has a prime factor which is not a prime factor of another integer B, then B is not divisible by A. This property can be applied on graph nodes, such that, for each two nodes u and v in DAG with labels L(u) and L(v), the node u is ancestor of the node v if and only if L(u) is dividable by L(v), otherwise, u is not an ancestor of v or there is no reachability.

Proof. This means that the label L(v) assigned to the node v is a factor of the label L(u) assigned to node u. Now assume that u is not an ancestor of v. Let pv be the unique prime number assigned to node v. As L(u) mod L(v) = 0, we must have L(u) mod pv = 0. As pv is unique to v, and it was not associ- ated with u during the initialization step, pv must have propa- gated from one of the nodes v1 which is a child of u. Continuing the same argument for v1 and v, pv must have prop- agated from one of the children v2 of v1. Continuing the same argument we reach at the conclusion that there is a path from u to v as without v the number pv could not have propagated to u which is a contradiction. Hence, it is proved. h

According to Definition 1, any parent k of node v will enter L only after v enters L. Now for the edge (k, v) we will compute N(k)= L.C.M (N(k), N(v)). We have L(Parent)= L.C.M (N(Parent), N(Child)) i.e. L(Parent) mod L(Child) = 0. Hence, L(k) mod L(v) = 0.

Hypothesis. Let P be a set of ancestors of v. Then all nodes in P will contain the unique prime number associated with v. Iteration step: Now any node m which is a parent of any node p in P must have L(m) mod L(p)= 0. Also from the hypothesis N(p) mod L(v) = 0, So, L(m) mod L( v) = 0 . Therefore the result is true by induction.

As a real-life example of XML data with links, the Internet Movie Database (IMDB) [37] is used. The general characteris- tics of this data are as follows. The center file of the IMDB has a list of movies, each with a unique identifier. The actors of those movies are listed with their roles in a distinct file. All directors are listed in an independent file, with a number of important producers, writers, and cinematographers. The IMDB is used because it was identified as a highly cyclic data- base likely to stress the path-indexing algorithms.

Now, the generation of linked XML documents from this data. A small subset of movies and all people (actor, directors, etc.) associated with these movies is randomly chosen. One XML document for each movie is generated and an XLink to the actors and the director for the underlying movie is added. The portion of the used database is organized around movie elements and elements for classes of people who appear in mo- vie credits, for example, actor, director, composer, etc., as well as a wide variety of information about movies. Cyclicity arises since each movie element is serviced as ID references and has pointers to individuals who acted in the movie, and each ele- ment representing an individual pointer to the movies in which she or he acted. This datasets consists of 40,211 nodes and 44,349 edges, among which 2718 are of type IDREF.

