Section 3 details the existing approaches available and Sec- tion 4 proposes a novel algorithm, Least and Most Significant Bit Arbitration Algorithm. Detailed simulation set up is pre- sented in Section 5. To validate the accuracy of simulation re- sults, M/G/1 queueing model is suitably identified and its detailed narration is mentioned in Section 6. The results of the simulation experiments conducted on existing algorithms and proposed algorithm are detailed in Section 7. Section 8 concludes the paper.

Ryu et al. [26] combined QT algorithm with a slotted random back-off mechanism. He also proposed an enhanced HQT algorithm, which uses the slotted back-off with the AQS algo- rithm [26]. Shin et al. [27] proposed two algorithms that use a combination of QT and Framed Aloha protocols: Framed Query Tree algorithm and Query Tree ALOHA algorithm [27].

The algorithm is based on a slotted ALOHA CDMA tech- nique along with tag set partitioning. The algorithm partitions the tags into a certain number of groups by taking advantage of different power levels received from the continuous wave form of the RFID reader to power-up passive tags, which then backscatter accordingly with varied signal strengths [28,29]. Nevertheless the implementation of SPSC, in turn raises the cost of system bandwidth and complexity.

The RFID reader begins the cycle by informing tags in the region that a reading cycle is about to begin. Tags in the re- gion backscatter their ID bit by bit. Based on the response, the reader builds the initial tag response query. LaMSBA looks out for a common prefix pattern as followed by B-Bit Pooling and informs the tags, if a prefix match is found. If the length of the initial tag response query is received without

rence of an idle response is limited, thus saving appreciable en- ergy and identification time. This increase in the identification time also contributes to the benefit of avoiding missed tag reads. The pseudo code for Least and Most Significant Bit Arbitration algorithm is presented herewith.

Since it is assumed that the reader emits waves until all tags are identified, the moments E(R) and E(R2) is assigned as 0. In addition, due to successful commencement and the assumption of non-break down (repair) state of the reader, a and d are as- signed as 1. With reference to c*(k), the value depends on the retrial rate from the orbit (inactive state).

In the process of reducing the number of bits transmitted, LaMSBA has helped in saving energy while scanning by 58.68% when compared with AQS. On the other hand, the reduction in transmission of bits from tags has allowed the reader  to  spend  556.01 milli  joules  when  AQS  spent

The introduction of Improved Least and Most Significant Bit Algorithm (LaMSBA) can be considered as one of the better alternatives to minimize the number of idle responses that is experienced by the RFID systems. In conventional Query Tree based algorithms, tags respond from the left to the right of the query or from the right to the left of the query as followed where as tags in LaMSBA respond the collided bit from left and right simultaneously. This approach has brought in signif- icant improvement in the tag identification process, which is confirmed by the extensive simulation experiments conducted. The simulations also assure that the repeated generation of idle responses is minimized, which is always found to be one of the prime causes for the increase in identification delay and energy consumption. For the identification of 1000 tags, the number of collisions incurred is found to be 945, total bits transmitted is 3,073,812 bits, and the total energy spent is 2612.26 milli joules. The total time spent on identification is 17.09 s, repre- senting an increase in identification efficiency by 74.20% when compared to the existing AQS.

