Abstract The backbone of ad hoc network design is energy performance and bandwidth resources limitations. Multi-rate adaptation architectures have been proposed to reduce the control overhead and to increase bandwidth utilization efficiency. In this paper, we propose a multi-rate protocol to provide the highest network performance under very low control overhead. The efficiency of the proposed auto multi-rate protocol is validated extensive simulations using QualNet network simu- lator. The simulation results demonstrate that our solution significantly improves the overall net- work performance.

channels conditions are sufficiently clear so as to improve the network throughput and to increase the bandwidth efficiency. In this paper, we propose a novel solution for efficient net- work operations in ad hoc networks by introducing multi-rate algorithm with Multi-level power save protocol to achieve high network throughput with low overhead. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the multi-rate in ad hoc networks. Section 3 explains the multi-level power save protocol for MANET. Section 4 introduces the related work. Section 5 discusses the proposed auto multi-rate proto- cols performance. Simulation parameters and results with respect to our proposed protocol are briefed in Section 5. Finally we end up with some concluding remarks in Section 6.

The key idea is to allow a wireless station to based on the link quality between itself and the receiver selects the most en- ergy-efficient transmission strategy, which consists of transmis- sion rate, transmit power and/or data payload length. In a typical 802.11 MANET, some stations may be far away from their neighbor and the quality of their radio transmissions is low, and some stations may be near their neighbor and experi- ence better wireless channel condition. As a result, different wireless stations may choose different transmission strategies to communicate with its neighbors. To elaborate, we note that the distance between sender and receiver is the primary factor of channel quality in wireless network.

Based on the above guidelines we propose three power saving protocols. For each PS host, it divides its time axis into a number of fixed-length intervals called beacon inter- vals. At each beacon interval, there is a subinterval called ATIM interval. During the ATIM interval, the PS host should turn on its receiver to listen to any packet and take proper actions as usual, and if the station has packets to send it will contend to send its ATIM frame to its neighbor. If the station is in ATIM window without any activity; it will send beacon frame periodically to its neighbors to syn- chronize the network stations. After ATIM interval, a PS host with no packet to send or receive may go to the sleep mode.

be constant bit rate sources, each of which generate 512-byte data packet to a randomly chosen destination at a rate of 10 packets per second for 100 s. The network uses ad hoc on- demand distance vector routing for each constant bit rate source to discover a route to the destination. The 802.11 Mac and physical wireless parameter were modified to match the specifications of Cisco Aironet 802.11A/B/G wire- less CardBuss Adaptor.

In this paper, we have investigated the possibility of reducing energy consumption by exploiting multi-rate in 802.11 wireless networks. We have proposed the auto multi-rate protocol, studied its impact on the multi-level power save protocols and compared it with the three issues of IEEE 802.11-based power save protocols. Simulation results have shown that by using auto multi-rate protocol the performance will increase and the consumed power will decrease. This will enhance the overall channel characteristics and then the active node can send more data at shorter time due to power for longer time. We strongly recommend activating an auto multi-rate protocol

