Abstract Many approaches were presented recently for developing Textual Case-Based Reasoning (TCBR) applications. One of the successful approaches is SOPHisticated Information Analysis (SOPHIA), which is distinguished by its ability to work without prior knowledge engineering, with- out domain dependency and without language dependency. SOPHIA is based on the distributional document clustering approach, which facilitates an advanced and rich knowledge discovery frame- work for case-based retrieval.

This paper contributes to propose enhancements to SOPHIA approach that aims to enhance the retrieval efficiency and increase the precision degree. It also aimed to grantee that all results will have the same subject of the user query. The enhancements include performing an automatic clas- sification to the case-base before the clustering step in the indexing stage, and include performing an automatic classification to the user query before the retrieval stage. Moreover, proofing that SOPHIA approach is a domain and language independent by applying it in the domain of Islamic jurisprudence in Arabic language.

A typical application area of TCBR is a Question Answer- ing (QA) system that may be inspired from the hotline support or help desks. In such systems, user submits his inquiry then gets the closest answer to his inquiry. As a scientific definition, Question Answering (QA) is an application area of Computer Science which attempts to build software systems that can pro- vide accurate, useful answers to questions posed by human user in natural language (e.g., English) [5].

Patterson et al. [6] presented SOPHIA; a new approach for TCBR stands for SOPHisticated Information Analysis for TCBR (SOPHIA-TCBR), based on the distributional docu- ment clustering approach [7]. It facilitates an advanced and rich knowledge discovery framework for case-based retrieval. It is based on the conditional probability distributions of terms within documents. It then intelligently discovers important themes within the case-base and organizes cases into a large number of clusters, which have these themes as attractors. This process of forming clusters, allows both a very efficient and competent case retrieval process. In addition to the automated discovery and utilization of textual cases, it discovers similarity knowledge, which allows the semantic meaning of the cases to be considered, thus enabling more meaningful similarity com- parisons among cases. (This means that cases that are on the same or similar subjects but use different terminology can be recognized as similar.)

Han et al. [10], introduced a Q&A system. They put for- ward an interactive and introspective Q&A engine, which uses keywords of the question to trigger the case and sorts the results by the relationship. The engine can also modify the weights of the keywords dynamically based on the feedbacks of the user. Inside the engine, they use feature-weight mainte- nance algorithm to increase the accuracy. They also extend the 2-layer architecture of CBR to a 3-layer structure to make the system more scalable and maintainable. They split this rep- resentation into three levels: a feature level corresponding to feature values F, a problem description level corresponding to P and an answer level corresponding to S.

on the primary knowledge structure that is a dynamically gen- erated taxonomy. Once taxonomy was created can be used during the retrieve and reuse stages of the CBR cycle. They are interested in gathering taxonomy to capture the semantic knowledge in textual cases that cannot be obtained through statistical methods alone. Firstly, they propose to guide the taxonomy generation process using a novel CBR specific disambiguation algorithm.

Patterson et al. [6] presented SOPHIA; a new approach for TCBR stands for SOPHisticated Information Analysis for TCBR (SOPHIA-TCBR), based on the distributional docu- ment clustering [7] approach of SOPHIA, which facilitates an advanced and rich knowledge discovery framework for case-based retrieval. It is based on the conditional probability distributions of terms within documents. It then intelligently discovers important themes within the case-base and organizes cases into a large number of clusters, which have these themes as attractors. This process of forming clusters, allows both a very efficient and competent case retrieval process. In addition to the automated discovery and utilization of textual cases, it discovers similarity knowledge, which allows the semantic meaning of the cases to be considered, thus enabling more meaningful similarity comparisons among cases. (This means that cases that are on the same or similar subjects but use dif- ferent terminology can be recognized as similar.)

First option is a keyword search, which does not depend on TCBR. This option matches only terms of question with terms of cases in the case base after applying stemming step on both of them. The matching result will be ordered by number of matched words and difference in terms count between them. Second option is the similar cases search which depends on TCBR. In the same manner, JS Divergence function is used to determine to which cluster the question will be assigned, and then check the most similar cases.

Edition was used for the database and C# 2010 for the forms. For the first experiment; execution time ranges from 19 to 30 s depends on the size of cluster that contains the result. However in the second experiment; execution time ranges from 2 to 3 s depends on the size of cluster that contains the result.

