Monitoring heating demand is not as simple as electricity meters and the meter for heat is not widely used today. As mentioned in many pieces of research, the real demand data for heat is not easily accessible. It can be found that not all buildings have advanced building automation systems. Also, the heating is always provided by different technologies and multiple sources, which increases the difficulty of measurement. As real data on the heating demand of district heating systems are more accessible than in a national area, forecasts of heating demand are mostly concentrated on district heating systems. The availability of high-resolution data at the district level is a contributing factor to this phenomenon. Also, construction data of buildings, such as wall and window insulation, is comparatively easier to collect at the district level. Nonetheless, it should be noted that not

all district-level heating systems have monitoring systems installed, leading some studies to rely on the construction of physical models to obtain high-resolution data. In many investigations, therefore, training data is derived from building simulations, especially for the early design of a building. Singaravel et al. designed a data-driven model for the design stage of buildings, in which specific data from similar circumstances can be reused [4]. Singh et al. proposed that enrichment is more effective than increment to decrease the generalization for early-stage building energy prediction and develop an efficient data collection approach [5]. However, high- resolution models are often used for small areas, such as a campus. There is not sufficient data for long-term forecasts for large areas such as a city or country. Large-scale heat demand estimations, such as national demand, are always based on economic data which can only calculate the annual demand. However, as decarbonisation is being implemented and the interaction of different energy sectors deepens, it becomes apparent that long-term forecasts based on economic models are not sufficient.

The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 describes the methodology of the model. Section 3 provides the application of the model to Scotland. Section 4 presents the results and discussion. Section 5 is the conclusion of the study.

Sensitivity analysis is the study of the importance of different inputs to a model and measures the effect of changes in the inputs on the output. Typical sensitivity analysis is divided into local and global sensitivity analyses. The one-way method is a type of local sensitivity analysis where one parameter is changed at a time and the change in output is observed to determine the effect of the input on the output. Although local sensitivity analysis does not consider the interactions between inputs, it is a simple and intuitive way of explaining the effects of inputs. Hence, the local sensitivity analysis method is a common approach in engineering research.

often lead to different sensitivity rankings. The Morris method is a global sensitivity analysis method developed based on the local derivative-based sensitivity method, which incorporates the advantages of both local and global sensitivity analyses. Morris method approximates this derivative using a finite difference scheme [46].

As previously stated, the absence of monitors for heating demand has resulted in a scarcity of actual heating data. In an expansive region like Scotland, obtaining hourly heating data is not as readily available as data for electricity demand. The evaluation of the model involves two crucial elements to verify the reliability of the model. Firstly, a comparison is made between the annual heating demand obtained from the DesignBuilder and the official data obtained from the government. Secondly, a comparison of the hourly heating data in this paper with the data obtained from the building simulation is conducted.

The performance of the improved ANN improves in both NMBE and CV-RMSE by removing the inputs that have the least impact on the ANN prediction. The improved ANN demonstrates better performance than its predecessor, as evidenced by a shift in NMBE values from -0.4 to 0.8 before the improvement to approximately

*23+	Y. Parfenenko, V. Shendryk, S. Vashchenko, and N. Fedotova, "The forecasting of the daily heat demand of the public sector buildings with district heating," in Information and Software Technologies: 21st International Conference, ICIST 2015, Druskininkai, Lithuania, October 15-16, 2015, Proceedings 21, 2015, pp. 187-198: Springer.

