TiO2 anatase photocatalyzes the oxidative transformation of diphenylamine (DPA) to N- phenyl-p-benzoquinonimine (PBQ) in ethanol. The PBQ formation increases with increase of [DPA], TiO2-loading, airflow rate and light intensity. The catalyzed formation of PBQ is larger with UV-C light illumination than with UV-A light illumination. The catalyst is recyclable. The photocatalytic reaction mechanism has been proposed and the kinetic parameters deduced. ZnO and ZnS enhance the TiO2-photocatalyzed DPA oxidation sug- gesting interparticle charge transfer in mixed semiconductors.

Semiconductor-photocatalysis for environmental cleanup has been extensively studied [1,2] and reports on the application of this process for selective organic transformations are also available [3e5]. The photocatalytic technology is benign and TiO2 is widely employed as a photocatalyst for both applica- tions [2,3,5]. On band gap excitation, TiO2 produces electro- nehole pairs; electrons in the conduction band (CB) and holes in the valence band (VB) [2]. In the presence of moisture and air, the photoproduced charge carriers generate reactive oxidizing species (ROS) such as hydroxyl radical, which mineralize the organic pollutants. The VB hole oxidizes the water molecule and hydroxide ion adsorbed on the TiO2

surface to produce hydroxyl radical. The oxygen molecule adsorbed on TiO2 picks up the CB electron to form superoxide radical, which through a series of reactions yield hydroxyl radical. But in non-aqueous media formation of hydroxyl radical is unlikely and the VB hole directly oxidizes the adsorbed substrate and hence photocatalyzed organic trans- formations are carried out in non-aqueous media. TiO2 selectively oxidizes alcohols to aldehydes or ketones and functionalized nitroarenes are selectively reduced by N-doped TiO2 [4]. Propene and cyclopentene are transformed into the corresponding epoxide using TiO2eSiO2 as photocatalyst [4]. TiO2 Degussa P25 selectively photocatalyzes the oxidation of benzyl amines to the corresponding imines [5]. However, significant amounts of  aldehydes are produced  on  the

ethanol was prepared afresh and taken in wide cylindrical glass vessels of uniform diameter. The entire bottom of the vessel was covered by the catalyst powder. Air was bubbled using a micro pump without disturbing the catalyst bed. The volume of DPA solution was 25 mL and the loss of solvent due to evaporation was compensated periodically. The formed PBQ was estimated spectrophotometrically.

even under clear sky. Hence, the solar experiments at different reaction conditions were carried out in a set so that the quantity of sunlight incident on unit area remains the same. This makes possible comparison of the solar results. A pair of solar experiments carried out simultaneously under

early with the amount of TiO2 suspended. This is because of the high catalyst loading. At high catalyst loading, the surface area of the catalyst exposed to light does not commensurate with the weight of the catalyst. The amount of TiO2 employed is beyond the critical amount corresponding to the volume of the reaction solution and reaction vessel; the whole amount of TiO2 is not exposed to illumination. The photocatalytic reac- tion lacks linear dependence on illumination intensity; less

semiconductor to another is possible in coupled semi- conductors. This separation of charges leads to improved photocatalytic efficiency and examples of coupled semi- conductors are many [20]. In coupled semiconductors, both the semiconductors exist in the same particle and the charge separation takes place within the particle. But what we observe here is enhanced photocatalytic transformation of DPA to PBQ on mixing ZnO or ZnS powder with TiO2 powder.

CB of one semiconductor (SC1) to the VB of the other (SC2) is very remote; the very low population of the excited states makes the electron transfer between two excited states highly improbable. A possible reason for not observing the maximum photocatalytic transformation at 50% wt. composition for the semiconductor mixtures is the densities and particle sizes of the semiconductors and also the aggregation.

