Quasi-uniformities arise from uniformities, as quasi-pseudo-metrics from pseudo metrics, by dropping the symmetry condition. These spaces were first studied in relation with topological groups (see [11] for a recent survey). They have also become a center of interest for computer science since the pioneer- ing works of Smyth and Sunderhauf [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21]. From a technical point of view, a huge challenge is to define a correct theory of non symmetric space, that is, together with a well defined notion of non symmet- ric convergence. From this perspective, there is a hope that the analogy with enriched categories - which are essentially non-symmetric objects - should be fruitful. In this spirit, the connection established in the present paper enables the transposition of the categorical Cauchy-completion to the topological bi- completion.

It is fair to cite at this stage the recent work [3] that treated nicely (pb1). Nevertheless it is not obvious (at the moment for the author) that the general framework developed in the later paper may describe naturally the Cauchy completion. On that point our works may actually differ.

The last difficulty was to find the good change of base functors, i.e. they should induce the morphisms of a 2-category of enrichments over different bases that admits a Cauchy-completion. Their definition was found by a care- ful inspection of the changes of base induced by quasi-uniformly continuous maps.

The rest of paper is technical and presents the above results. It is is organized as follows. There are two sides, one being enriched category theory, the other one topology, and the purpose is to reunify them. We start from enriched categories and do half of the way. Then start again from the quasi- uniformities and do the other half. The (canonical) abstract quasi-uniformities stand at the meeting point.

Section 2 recalls basic elements of quasi-uniformity theory. We introduce quasi-uniformities and their morphisms - that we call for short uniformly con- tinuous maps. We point out that the set of uniformly continuous maps between two given quasi-uniformities may be preordered and hence quasi-uniformities and their morphisms form a locally preordered 2-category QU nif . Cauchy filters and the notions of separation and completeness for quasi-uniformities

In chapter 4, we define a 2-category of enrichments over different bases. Here again, we only consider the case where the base monoidal categories are partial orders. We introduce the super monoidal functors between monoidal biclosed complete partial orders. They serve to define the 2-category Enr(H),

This chapter recalls a few very basic elements of enriched category theory. All the results presented are well-known or belong to folklore. They are re- produced for completeness and to fix notations. This chapter introduces the Cauchy-completion of categories enriched over monoidal closed partial orders. Quite surprisingly this notion is accessible without referring to deep results in enriched category theory (Yoneda, indexed colimits, free cocompletions). We refer the reader to [9] for a general presentation of enriched category theory.

In this chapter (4.1 and 4.2) we shall develop a 2-category of enrichments over different bases that will allow us to code quasi uniform spaces and their mor- phisms. As in the previous section we only treat enrichments over monoidal closed complete partial orders. We shall omit to recall the peculiar nature of the base monoidal categories.

Proof. First note that the map A above defines an abstract quasi-uniformity. Then let us consider the enrichments C(A) and C(A) corresponding respec- tively to the canonical abstract quasi-uniformities isomorphic to A and A. We show that C(A) is isomorphic to the Cauchy-completion C(A) of C(A).

