Abstract The distributed data warehouse is mainly based on how the data are being processed and distinguish between dynamic and physically distributed systems. Finding the relevant information from a huge database is a very laborious process and consumes more time. This conflict is addressed using a query scheduling process in the distributed data warehouse is very compact to accomplish these tasks within a few seconds. In this paper, Dynamic Fault Tolerant Dependency Scheduling (DFTDS) algorithm has been proposed to schedule the queries based on their dependency and it automatically allocates the resources by checking the status of the virtual machine based on its acknowledgment. That is, reply to client/user queries in distributed data warehouse systems. Dem- onstration of the proposed DFTDS algorithm shows a significant reduction in query processing time and memory utilization compared to existing algorithms.

data warehouses. Computing the huge volume of data is a sig- nificant task now a day. The existing scheduling algorithms are not possible to retrieve the exact information from the single repositories. In order to get the exact information from a dis- tributed data warehouse and share the large number of data from various repositories, a new algorithm based on grid scheduling has been proposed.

(GFJS) and Heuristic Algorithm (HA). ORC algorithm [6] applies Round Robin (RR) and Best Fit algorithms to dis- tribute the tasks for available processors. GFJS algorithm [7,8] is based on resource characteristics also integrated with Greedy and FCFS algorithms to improve the fine-grained jobs. Then group of fine-grained jobs are used to develop the coarse-grained tasks. The grouping strategy proposed by [9], provides a real grid computing environment and re- duces the waiting time of the grouped tasks. Grace et al., used a HA in their proposed framework for calculating and minimizing the processing time [10]. HA shows better output for large size problems.

To increase the efficiency of resource management the prin- ciples obtained from three existing grid based algorithms have been combined and used namely, Research on Novel Dynamic Resource Management (RNDRM), New Resource Mecha- nism with Negotiate Solution (NRMNS) and Virtual Comput- ing Grid using Resource Pooling (VCGRP). RNDRM algorithm is an exemplar, to integrate agent technology with grid computing based applications [11]. NRMNS algorithm is an agent based resource management system model [12]. It provided a surrogate solution at the time of a resource discov- ery glitch. VCGRP algorithm [13] is used to exploit the ideal computing power with less effort.

In distributed data warehouse, when the data to be fetched in- crease, more number of resources have to be added to the net- work and many joint and split operations have to be performed. To address this conflict existing grid based schedul- ing algorithms have been proposed and the results have been compared and analyzed. This helps to generate reports faster and easier. The proposed task scheduling algorithm concen- trates to allocate queries to appropriate resources based on query dependency. The proposed resource scheduling algo- rithm focuses on checking the status and management of

The above mentioned performance metrics have been used to evaluate the performance of the proposed DFTDS method with other existing methods. In this paper, processing time and memory utilization are evaluated by executing a different set of queries in the interval of 25 (25,50,75,100,125,150) and various group of resources in the interval of 10 (10,20,30,40,50,60,70). The processing time, memory utilization, scalability, replica- tion metric, error free execution and query cost metrics for 25 cycles are measured. Each cycle evaluates the same set of queries and resources. The aggregated results are outlined in the following plot.

But sometime the existing scheduling algorithms could not produce the complete query result and could not send any er- ror message when 100 queries were sent at a time. Hence our proposed DFTDS algorithm has been executed on different query size ranging between 25 and 150. The lower processing time of DFTDS algorithm is obtained by automatic creation of new VM in case of any failure. Error rectification is per- formed within 5 to 10 s depending upon the size of information retrieved.

In this paper, online and non-preemptive DFTDS algorithm has been proposed for the distributed data warehouse environ- ment. The proposed DFTDS algorithm schedules queries by considering their dependency and resource status and then recycles the virtual machines to avoid the failures. Our pro- posed DFTDS is compared with three scheduling algorithms namely, WINE, DTDS and VMFTRS under various parame- ters, using different sizes of query sets and resource groups.

The DTDS and VMFTRS proposed by us previously are job and resource scheduling algorithms. WINE is the existing data warehouse algorithm, based on queries and updates. The aver- age performance evaluation in terms of processing time, mem- ory utilization, scalability, error free execution, replication metric and query cost have been obtained. The results ob- tained show that, our proposed DFTDS algorithm is 20.58%, 1.25%, 13%, 3%, 3% and 28% outperforms than WINE. In future we will model online and preemptive sched- uling algorithm for task prediction, resource classification.

