between the circuit lines and the ground while non-zero ESR of capacitances causes DM noises. There are many studies in the liter- ature showing that CM noise is much higher than DM noise. There- fore, CM noise has a greater effect than DM noise when examining EMI [23,6].

When the literature is examined in terms of efficiency, it is seen that double active bridge (DAB) DC-DC converters have an impor- tant place in DC-DC converters used at high power [30,19,7,10]. However, DAB circuits are complex since they have 8-switching control structure, and also their EMI values are high due to their output capacitance values [13]. DAB circuits are controlled by four different phase shift modulation methods: single phase shift (SPS), dual phase shift (DPS), extended phase shift (EPS) and triple phase shift (TPS) modulation. Although it is seen that SPS is widely used in the literature [11], especially the TPS modulation method main- tains its importance in terms of efficiency and in-depth control. In addition, there are studies in the literature showing that the EMI values of the DAB circuits used with the SPS switching method are higher than the circuits with different topologies [13].

When we read this state-of-art papers we can notice that no one analyzed the effect of phase shift modulation techniques on EMI however, these techniques are quite important. Because if you need to reduce EMI, you could suppress using analyzed phase shift modulation methods without making a hardware process such as gate drive control and EMI filter design. In this paper, the effects of SPS and DPS methods on EMI are analyzed on the same DAB circuit.

In this study, two DAB circuits using Si and SiC MOSFETs with power rating of 1 kW and 80 V output voltages are designed. These designed circuits controlled by SPS and DPS modulation techniques separately were analyzed at LTspice program, and then EMI ana- lyzes of the circuits were carried out experimentally. In section II, four DAB circuits designed with Si and SiC MOSFETs controlled with SPS and DPS modulation methods are explained. In section III, the operating parameters of DAB circuits which are leakage inductance current, input power, power loss and efficiency are compared with each other. In section IV, EMI of the designed cir-

In this study, VHV is 200 V, VLV is 80 V, D3 is 0.15 and Nps is 2 in order to accomplish soft switching for both of bridges. However, it should be noted that the loss may not be at the minimum when the circuit operates with soft switching [24].

When the current waveform and RMS values are compared for circuit Type1 and Type2, it is seen that the average value of the cur- rent on the leakage inductance is higher in circuit Type2. In addi- tion, since the current waveform is sawtooth rather than square wave, its peak value has reached 11A at circuit Type2. These will cause more stress on the switching elements because of EMI emit- ted by the parasitic components. As a result, for circuit Type2, it is expected that EMI is to be higher.

A. Kumar, A.H. Bhat, P. Agarwal. Comparative analysis of dual active bridge isolated DC to DC converter with single phase shift and extended phase shift control techniques. 2017 6th International Conference on Computer Applications In Electrical Engineering-Recent Advances (CERA), 2017. Roorkee, India.

B.M. Kumar, A. Kumar, A.H. Bhat, P. Agarwal. Comparative study of dual active bridge isolated DC to DC converter with single phase shift and dual phase shift control techniques. 2017 Recent Developments in Control, Automation Power Engineering (RDCAPE). Noida, India, 2017.

