The interaction primitives of PEP are inspired by endocytosis (the process of in- corporating external material into a cell by engulfing it with the cell membrane) and exocytosis (the reverse process). A relevant feature of such primitives is bitonality, a property ensuring that there will never be a mixing of what is inside a membrane with what is outside, although external entities can be brought inside if safely wrapped by another membrane. As endocytosis can engulf an arbitrary number of membranes, it turns out to be a rather uncontrollable process. Hence, it is re- placed by two simpler operations: phagocytosis, that is engulfing of just one external membrane, and pinocytosis, that is engulfing zero external membranes.

The primitives of MBD are inspired by membrane fusion (mate) and fission (mito). Because membrane fission is an uncontrollable process that can split a membrane at an arbitrary place, it is replaced by two simpler operations: budding, that is splitting off one internal membrane, and dripping, that consists in splitting off zero internal membranes. An encoding of the MBD primitives in PEP is provided in [5]. Cardelli also observed that the reverse encoding does not exist, if the encoding must preserve the nesting structure of membranes. The reason is that in MBD the maximum nesting level of membranes cannot grow during the computation, while this property does not hold for PEP.

As far as MBD is concerned, in [1] we showed that universal termination is a decidable property. Such a proof of the decidability of universal termination is based on the theory of well-structured transition systems [8]. The decidability of universal termination for MBD provides an expressiveness gap between MBD and PEP, as a deterministic encoding of Random Access Machines can be provided in the second calculus, but not in the first calculus. As a corollary, we get the impossibility to provide an encoding of PEP in MBD that preserves the universal termination property.

The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we present the syntax and the semantics of the two calculi, and Section 3 contains the deterministic encoding of Random Access Machines in PEP. The decidability of universal termination for MBD is presented in Section 4. In Section 5 we present the non-deterministic encod- ing of RAMs in MBD with interleaving semantics, while the deterministic encoding of RAMs in MBD with maximal parallelism semantics is reported in Section 6. Section 7 is devoted to conclusive remarks.

We recall the standard, interleaving semantics. At each computational step, a single reaction is chosen and executed. The next definition provides the set of generic reaction rules that are valid for all brane calculi, while the reaction axioms are specific for each brane calculus; the reaction axioms for PEP and MBD will be provided in Definitions 2.5 and 2.7, respectively.

The second calculus, also proposed in [5], is inspired by membrane fusion and split- ting. To make membrane splitting more controllable, in [5] two more basic oper- ations are used: budding, consisting in splitting off one internal membrane, and dripping, consisting in splitting off zero internal membranes. Membrane fusion, or merging, is called mating.

In this section we show how to model RAMs in PEP. The modeling of RAMs is based on an encoding function, which transforms instructions and registers independently. The basic idea for modeling the natural numbers contained in the registers is the following: the natural number n is represented by the nesting of 2n + 1 branes. The increment is performed by producing a new membrane that performs a phago on the representation of n, while a decrement is performed by executing an exo of

Given a system P in normal form, it is possible to define a quasi-order on the derivatives of P (and a quasi-order on brane processes) that turns out to be a wqo compatible with the reduction relation on normal forms. Hence, by exploiting the results in Section 4.2, we obtain decidability of termination.

The encoding satisfies the following property. If the RAM terminates, then the encoding has at least one terminating computation; otherwise, no computation of the encoding terminates. Hence, even if the RAM terminates, it may happen that a run of the encoding diverges. This is due to the fact that it is not possible to perform a test for zero on the (representation of the) contents of registers. When a DecJump instruction is performed, one of the two branches (decrement or jump) is chosen non-deterministically. If the right branch is taken, then the encoding behaves correctly. On the other hand, if the wrong branch is taken, then a system is reached such that any computation starting from such a system will diverge.

where the loop membrane LOOP (||) ensures that the system will diverge if the wrong branch of the encoding of a DecJump instruction is taken. If a membrane mateloop(| ... |) is produced, then such a membrane may fuse with the loop membrane,

In [2] we showed that the above encoding enjoys the following property: the RAM R with program (1 : I1),..., (m : Im) and initial state (1, c1,..., cn) termi- nates if and only if the system [[(1, c1,..., cn)]]MBD has a terminating computation.

In [2] we showed that the above encoding is deterministic and enjoys the fol- lowing property: the RAM R with program (1 : I1),..., (m : Im) and initial state (1, c1,..., cn) terminates if and only if the (unique) computation of the system

The comparison of a (non-deterministic) model with its deterministic fragment is an interesting topic in automata theory, that has recently attracted the interest of the research community working on membrane computing (see, e.g., [11] and the references therein). From the results recalled in this paper, we deduce the following:

In the present paper we showed that universal termination is a decidable prop- erty for MBD. The technique employed to prove the decidability of universal termi- nation is based on the theory of well-structured transition systems: besides universal termination, such a theory permits to analyse other interesting properties, such as, e.g., control state maintainabiliy, inevitability and boundedness [8]. In [3] we pro- vide the decidabiliy of some of these properties (i.e., the properties whose analysis relies on the so-called tree saturation methods) for a relevant fragment of the full Brane Calculus, i.e., the calculus comprising all the membrane interaction primitives but phago, and extended with molecules, molecule-to-molecule and membrane-to- molecule interaction primitives. In [4] we discuss the use of such decidability results for the analysis of the LDL Cholesterol Degradation Pathway [12].

