In this work we present an extension of Petri-PDL to deal with Stochastic Petri Nets, the DS3 logic. This system is an alternative to model performance evaluation in a compositional and structural approach. We discuss about its soundness, decidability and completeness regarding our semantics and present a proof of EXPTime-completeness of its SAT problem. A usage example is presented.

In section 2 we present the theoretical and conceptual background motivating our proposal and briefly compare it with other approaches. Section 3 presents the technical Petri Net background; section 4 presents the DS3 logic and discuss its soundness, decidability and completeness with respect to our semantics and section 5 presents the two-person corridor tiling game reduction. A usage example is presented in section 6 and the conclusions and further work are in section 7.

There are some other well-known stochastic approaches to PDL, but we be- lieve that the fact that the probabilistic feature present in each of these formalism was added in a non-structured way. We say that a probabilistic formalism is more structure than other, whenever the first has cleaner Markovian structures than the other. In this sense, the system P-Pr(DL) [6,7] which has no finite axiomatiza- tion, do not allow boolean combination of propositional variables and is defined only for regular programs is the less structured. Pr(DL) [8] which has the same limitations as P-Pr(DL) and is undecidable compares to the former. The system PPDL [16] computes the probability of a proposition being true in some state but the program is replaced by a measurable function, that is, its stochastic component is not compositional. Finally, PPDL> r [32] can only describe situations where

In the two-person corridor tiling game, two players (Eloise and Abelard) must place square tiles in a grid so that colours match (each tile side may have a different color). The players begin with a finite amount of tiles (colours randomly defined) and the beginning of the grid has a special colour (say white) and there is a special tile for Eloise that if placed on column 1 then Eloise wins. When the game begins Eloise should put a tile in the column 0; in his turn, Abelard must place a tile in the following position on the grid. After the end of the row (for an instance n of the game, the game has n columns), the player must place a tile in the next row, column

