summarization can be categorized into extractive summary, which includes the selected sentences from the original text without any modification on the sentence structure, and abstractive summa- rization, which depends on retrieving the meaning of the sentences without adhering sentence structure. In addition, it can be divided into general or query-based summary. The general summary returns sentences without any consideration to any question or relation with the title. While, the query-based summary is returned due to the relation between the summary and the asked question or the relation between the sentence and the document title [1].

Nouns directly affect the importance of the sentence [5]. More nouns in the sentence gives the sentence more importance. According to the complexity of Arabic language, Al-Khalil morpho- logical analyzer is used to analyze the Arabic sentence and then extract the nouns from each sentence in the document [6].

This paper investigates a new approach that depends on com- bining graph theory and nouns count in sentences to extract Arabic text summarization. This approach starts by applying the following preprocessing techniques: normalization, tokenization, stemming, stop words removal and morphological analyzes techniques. Then extracting the needed features, building the graph, then applying the Modified PageRank algorithm (MPR) and finally extracting the summary and remove redundancy.

In the final stage the Modified PageRank algorithm [7] is applied, then sentences are sorted depending on its final score, and then the summary is extracted and redundant sentences are removed. The average performance of the summary got 67.98 in F-measure metrics when 10,000 iterations are used. Later in this paper related works will be discussed in Section 2. Motivation and problem of statement in Section 3. Graphs in Text summariza- tion in Section 4. PageRank algorithm is discussed in Section 5. Modified PageRank algorithm is discussed in Section 6. In Section 7 proposed approach is discussed. Then results and conclusion are discussed in Sections 8, 9 respectively.

Machine learning approaches depend on one or more algorithm from machine learning algorithms like genetic algorithm, or parti- cle swarm and so on. Al-Abdallah and Al-Taani [14] proposed a sin- gle document extractive Arabic text summarization approach based on particle swarm optimization algorithm. This approach combined informative and semantic scoring to enhance the perfor- mance of summarization process.

This approach uses graph theory principles. In this approach the document is represented as a graph and the sentences represented as the vertices of the graph. Belkebir and Guessoum [12] proposed an approach that uses multi-graph represented by different met- rics depending on number theory and probabilities to calculate the importance of the text partition. Al-Taani and Al-Omour [15] is another approach for extracting Arabic text summarization based on graph theory, in this approach PageRank algorithm is used alongside multiple basic units like word, stem and n-gram to determine the final score for each sentence. Also in [15] they did not use nouns in the initial rank for the algorithm. On the other hand, they used EASC corpus as a standard data set and the follow- ing performance metrics: precision, recall and f-measure. Alami et al. [16] is another research in graph based Arabic text summa- rization, which build the document as a graph with sentences in vertices and the edges between two vertices is the cosine similarity between these sentences, if the similarity between two nodes is less than some threshold, it is assumed that these two sentence is not connected, Khoja stemmer as stemming algorithm was used. In the evaluation process, the authors collected 25 documents from the internet, the summary was manually produced by an Arabic expert, which makes it difficult and unfair to compare because there is no standard corpus. In [16] 1 was assigned as initial rank for all the sentences in the graph then, iteration starts on the graph until the difference between the new rank and old rank is 0.001 for

all nodes. [16] use TF-IDF, sentence position and indicative expres- sions as features and did not using part of speech to enhance the performance using the power of nouns. Malallah and Ali [17] pro- posed an approach for text summarization based on Linear Dis- criminant Analysis(LDA) and modified PageRank, this approach is for multilingual documents contains on the Arabic and English lan- guage, this approach done by applying the LDA classifier first to classify sentences to important and non-important according to a specified threshold, then the page rank algorithm is applied on the class of important sentences. TAC-2011 was used as a dataset

TextRank is a single document, graph-based ranking approach, derived from Google PageRank algorithm [7]. TextRank is a undi- rected connected graph represents sentences as nodes, and the similarity between them as an edge weight. TextRank is used to extract both sentences and key words. After applying TextRank sentences are sorted depending on its score and the highest ranked sentences are selected as a summary.

Morphological analysis. In this step Alkhalil morphological [6] is used as a morphological analyzer because its accuracy exceeded 98% [6]. In this process every word in the sentence takes a tag representing its Part of Speech (POS) position in the sentence [21]. The position of the words may be a noun, verb, preposition,

Summary extraction. In this step nodes are sorted depending on its final rank. Sentences are extracted one by one and added to the summary until the compression ratio is reached, if the overlap- ping between the selected sentence and any other sentence in the summary is very high then, this sentence is neglected to prevent redundancy.

Removing redundancy. In this step after summary is extracted, redundant sentences are removed from the summary. The redundant sentences is recognized depending on sentence overlapping. when the overlapping between sentences is greater than 90% the last sentence is removed from the summary.

Choosing and comparing the pre-generated summary files. In this step a pre-generated summary is chosen from the corpus to evaluate the performance of the summary. There are five pre- generated summaries in the corpus. The resulting summary is compared with them. Algorithm 2 shows the pseudo code for the proposed approach that starts with reading document, then pre- processing, features extraction and graph building, the PageRank, summary extraction, and removing redundancy stages are applied.

The comparison shows that the results returned from the Mod- ified PageRank is better than PageRank, LexRank and TextRank algorithms. When the number of iterations is changed the perfor- mance is enhanced until the number of iterations reaches 10,000 after that the performance stabilizes. Also the performance is enhanced because of using Alkhalil morphological analyzer which returns the best analysis of nouns.

Arabic language suffers from the problem of finding the noun in the sentences because of the absence of capital and small letters in Arabic in addition to the absence of diacritics in the written text. So morphological analyzers are used. This research tries to enhance the performance of the generated summaries by applying Modified PageRank algorithm with multiple number of iterations. Al-Khalil morphological analyzer is used to overcome the problems of Arabic structure complexity and to extract nouns to use it in the process of building the graph as initial rank, and cosine similarity was used to weigh the edges between sentences. In summary extraction to prevent redundancy, if the overlapping between the selected sen- tence and any other sentence in the summary is very high then, this sentence is neglected. A Modified PageRank algorithm was used to extract the summary, this algorithm was used by making the initial rank of the sentence as the number of nouns it has, and the weight of the edge is the cosine similarity between the connected nodes. LexRank, TextRank and Modified PageRank were used under the same circumstances to extract the summary and evaluate the performance of the system.

