The Qarara Formation consists mainly of shale at the base and overlain by limestone at the top. The formation is Middle Eocene (Lutetian) in age. Three sections located at the eastern bank of the Nile River in El-Minya Province have been measured, described, and sampled. These sections from north to south are: Gebel Qarara, El-Sheikh Fadl, and Gebel El-Ahmar. The main microfacies identified in the studied sections are: silty claystone, silty shale, fossiliferous glauconite, glauconitic (green) sand, glauconitic fossiliferous ironstone, glauco- nitic bioclastic wacke-packstone, glauconitic bioclastic lime-mudstone-wackestone. These

Interpretation: Glauconite forms exclusively in marine en- vironments. McRae [18] stated that the accumulation of glauconite in large quantities indicates a low rate of sedimen- tation with normal marine salinity and weakly reducing environments. Because glauconite is slow to form, it is usually common with a transgression of relative sea level [19].

Shale and claystone in the studied Qarara Formation were de- posited in a quiet water environment. The presence of glauconite represents a condensed setting in an overall calm environment [23,24]. The carbonate microfacies are depos- ited in inner ramp settings because of the presence of larger foraminifera and bivalves [22].

(C) Glauconite grains separated from El-Sheikh Fadl section (SF07). Notice the abundance of fractured grains (arrows), whereas smooth grains are also recognized. (D) Photomicrograph showing echinoderms, miliolid foraminifera, gastropods, ostracods and bryozoans that embedded in a hematitic cement, Gebel El-Qarara section (GQ13), PPL. (E) Photomicrograph showing well rounded, well sorted glauconitic grains and large gastropod tests which are floated in a hematitic cement,

From these cycles and facies changes, the deposition of the three sections has been affected by initial stages of sea level rise. The Gebel Qarara section was deposited under deeper con- ditions than El-Sheikh Fadl and Gebel El-Ahmar sections due to the presence of glauconitic bioclastic lime-mudstone- wackestone microfacies. This is in line with the concept of sea transgression during the Eocene period, as Gebel Qarara section lies in the north (i.e. deeper than the other two sections).

Excellent preservation of nummulite foraminifera, El-Sheikh Fadl section (SF18), PPL. (D) A cavity shows geopetal-like structure, Gebel El-Qarara section (GQ16), XPL. (E) Biserial bryozoan and miliolid foraminifera embedded in a micritic matrix, Gebel El-Qarara section (GQ14), PPL. (F) Fine sand-sized grains, glauconite pellets and small nummulite, Gebel

Shale and claystone of the studied Qarara Formation de- posited in quiet water settings. The presence of glauconite represents a condensed setting in an overall calm environ- ment. The carbonate microfacies are deposited in inner ramp setting because of presence of the larger foraminifera and bivalve fragments.

