The first effort in that direction can be found in [2]. Recall that a graph is locally chordal when the neighborhood of every vertex induces a chordal graph. A family of subtrees of a graph H is said to be 2-acyclic if the union of every pair of trees of the family is acyclic. A family F of sets is Helly if for every subfamily of F consisting of pairwise intersecting sets F1, F2, ..., Fn, the intersection of these n sets is not empty. It turns out that locally chordal graphs can be characterized as the intersection graphs of a Helly 2-acyclic family of induced subtrees of a graph H.

When we work with a chordal graph G and we wish to represent G as the intersection graph of a family of subtrees of a tree T , the possibilities for what T can be are infinite. However, it is more interesting when T has as few vertices as possible. If the number of vertices of T is the smallest possible, it is not difficult to verify that the vertices of T correspond to the maximal cliques of G, thus giving rise to the concept of clique tree.

Suppose that G is a graph such that V (G)= V (F) and every set of F induces a subtree in G. Let Gj be the graph such that V (Gj)= V (Fj), G is a subgraph of Gj, every set in Fj with exactly two elements is an edge of Gj, xivi is an edge of Gj for every i between 1 and n and Gj has no edge other than the ones implied by the previous conditions. It is not difficult to verify that every set in Fj induces a subtree in Gj.

Clique representations were introduced in an attempt to generalize clique trees of chordal graphs. However, there are several properties of clique trees that clique representations do not have. To make things harder, the problem of determining whether a graph has a clique representation is NP-complete.

In view of these limitations, the most reasonable research path consists in study- ing intersection graphs of induced subtrees of special types of graphs. This paper considers the intersection graphs of induced subtrees of some classes of bipartite graphs. It would be desirable to consider the intersection graphs of induced sub- trees of other graphs for future work.

