Very recently, the Maker-Breaker domination game was introduced in [12]. The game is played on a graph G with two players named Dominator and Staller. These names were selected to emphasize the domination nature of the game and to be consistent with the usual domination game where these two names are standard by now. (The domination game was introduced in [4] and further studied in dozens of papers, cf. [6,11,22,23,24].) The players alternatively select a vertex of G that was not yet chosen in the course of the game. Dominator wins if at some point, the vertices he has chosen form a dominating set. Staller wins if Dominator cannot form a dominating set. Note that the Maker-Breaker domination game is a Maker- Breaker game. Indeed, if for a graph G we build a hypergraph F with the same set of vertices as G, and in which the hyperedges are the dominating sets of G, then Dominator wins the Maker-Breaker domination game on G if and only if Maker wins the Maker-Breaker game on F.

If G is a graph, then we say that the residual graph R(G) of G is the graph obtained from G by iteratively removing pendant paths P2 until no such path is present. By a pendant P2 we mean P2 attached to G with an edge. Hence, when such a pendant P2 is removed, exactly two vertices and two edges are removed. When G = P2, we can also remove it and obtain the empty graph.

Proof. (i) H has a perfect matching and is a forest by Lemma 3.2(i). Let S-game be played on G and consider the following strategy of Staller. By Lemma 3.3 she can play on each tree of H and play last on the vertex of this tree adjacent to R(G). Dominator has to reply on the matching (otherwise Staller wins the game). Thus, Dominator makes (at least) n(H) moves on H. Moreover, Staller plays on vertices adjacent to R(G), hence no vertex in R(G) will be dominated by the time Staller makes her first move in R(G). Next, Staller is the player to make the first move

Let d1 be the vertex Dominator plays in his first move, let T be the connected component of H containing d1 (recall that T is a tree), let P be the shortest path between d1 and R(G) in T , and let M be the unique perfect matching of T (cf. Lemma 3.2(i)).

In this case, Staller first applies her strategy from Lemma 3.3 on all the other trees of H, playing the vertex adjacent to R(G) as her last move on each tree. Next, Staller applies her strategy from Lemma 3.3 on the edges from M , which are not incident with P . Additionally, she plays last on the vertices closest to

Let u be an undominated vertex adjacent to P . Staller plays on its neighbor on P , forcing Dominator to reply on u. Staller does so on each such vertex. After that, the only undominated vertices lie on P , moreover, up to now, at least one move of Dominator was played on each already completely dominated edge from M .

Appending to G some trees with perfect matchings, where at least one of them is attached to u, we get graphs that attain the lower bound from Theorem 3.4(ii). To conclude the section we apply the residual construction to determine the Maker-Breaker domination number of trees. This contrasts the domination game

This fundamental result was first obtained in an unpublished manuscript [20]. The result appeared for the first time in press in the paper [19], where an alternative proof is given. For the total domination game, parallel results were obtain in [10]. The latter paper investigates the total domination game on paths and cycles only. So the (total) game domination number of cycles is far from being straightforward. Here we determine the Maker-Breaker domination number of cycles, a task that turned out to be less involved.

Using Lemma 1.1 and Fact 1.2 it is easy to see that Dominator has a winning strategy on even cycles. By observing that removing the neighborhood of any vertex of an odd cycles leaves this graph with a perfect matching we can also see that Dominator has a winning strategy on odd cycles. However it is interesting to remark that Dominator cannot do better than these strategies.

