Feature selection is the method of how to select the best subset of the document occurring in data core for using it in purposes of data mining or applications. In this paper, we introduced a new technique using topological spaces for developing Information Retrieval System (IRS). First, we introduced the definition of topological information retrieval systems (TIRS) as a generalization of the information retrieval system. Second, we applied some topological near open sets to these systems for feature selection. Indiscernibility of keywords in these systems are discussed and their applications are given. We suggested and examined the order relation that representing the relationships among documents of the document space.

The concepts of topological space (near open sets) are one of the recently mainly powerful tools of data analysis. Many researchers have appeared lately, they are applied the near open sets in their fields, for instance information analysis in chemistry and in phy- sics. The principle of the present work is to put a starting point using topological structures for the applications in information retrieval. Rough set theory is a mathematical tool introduced by Pawlak in 1982 [7], it supports the uncertainty reasoning although qualitatively. The basic concepts and relations of this theory have been studied in [8,9].

In this paper, we proposed the topological information retrieval system based on the notion of some topological near open sets. The knowledge used in these systems consist of an information retrie- val system. In this system, each document is represented by its values on a finite set of keywords. We defined the topological bases on the set of keywords of this system. With the topological infor- mation retrieval system, we can able to perform approximate retrieval. We introduced the basic mathematical operations on topological systems based on general topology. We suggested

and examined the order relation that representing the relation- ships among documents of the document space. The approximate retrieval is carried out by the reduction of the unique query. This is finished using topological methods, such as topological near open sets and their generalizations.

Many of feature selection methods contain relied greatly on the analysis of the character of a particular data set through statistical or information-theoretical procedures. For text learning tasks, there are mainly calculation on the vocabulary-specific character- istics of given textual data set to spot excellent term features. Even though the statistics itself do not care concerning the meaning of the text, but these methods are useful for text learning tasks [19]. Many feature selection methods described a statistical feature selection algorithm call RELIEF that uses instance base learning

In information retrieval content, precision and recall are defined in expressions of a set of retrieved documents (e.g. the list of doc- uments created by a web search engine for a query) and a set of related documents (e.g. the list of all documents on the internet that are relevant for a certain topic), cf. relevance.

