Although the idea behind higher inductive types is simple, a comprehensive account of their syntax and semantics is still lacking. There is work on their cate- gorical semantics [13,24] and on the semantics of some examples in cubical sets [3]. However, neither of these works answers the question of what a general notion of higher inductive type is. We quote the HoTT book [22, p 179]:

We now ask ourselves what introduction rules for points and paths look like in general. We also construct a setoid model for such a general notion of 1-hit. As mentioned above we are looking for a schema for hits in the style of the schema for inductive families [5,4]. The obvious first try is to stay as close as possible to that schema and stipulate that the type of a point constructor for a hit can have the same form as the type of a constructor for an inductive type; and the type of a path constructor for a hit can have the same form as the type of a constructor for a binary inductive family.

definition. However, we prefer not to complicate the metatheory - after all the theory of inductive-inductive definitions is complex [20,19]. For this reason, we choose here to restrict to the simpler case of finitary hits which still cover most hits in the HoTT-book [22], see Section 5.3. As the reader will see, already the theory of finitary 2-hits is quite complex, and we think that it is preferable to leave the additional complexity of generalized inductive definitions to future work.

We emphasize that this simplification is only a matter of presentation. It is routine but verbose to generalize this simplified form to the general form for constructors for ordinary hits. (The general form is of course necessary to get interesting hits.)

We interpret the schematic hit H as the inductively generated groupoid (H0, H1, H2) the constructors of which will ensure that the types of the point, path and surface constructors in the theory of 2-hits are interpreted as appropriate depen- dent functors between groupoids. The key observation is that all the constructors thus obtained have types which are instances of the general form of a type for a con- structor of a finitary inductive family [5]. Hence we conjecture that the groupoid model of 2-hits can be developed inside a core extensional type theory extended with a schema for these finitary inductive families.

The present paper is only a step towards a general theory of hits. There are several possible generalizations, for example, to 3-hits and their interpretation as weak 2-groupoids, to hits with generalized induction, and to hits with a more general class of constructor point and path expressions. In order to get a general theory of hits in cubical type theory [3], a useful step might be to reformulate our theory of 1-hits and 2-hits using degeneracies and restriction maps.

