Abstract Multi-constrained QoS routing deals with finding routes that satisfies multiple indepen- dent QoS constraints simultaneously. This paper proposes a Fuzzy cost based Multi constrained Quality of service Routing (FCMQR) protocol to select an optimal path by considering multiple independent QoS metrics such as bandwidth, end-to-end delay, and number of intermediate hops. This is based on multi criterion objective fuzzy measure. In this method all the available resources of the path is converted into a single metric fuzzy cost. Mobility prediction is done to find the lifetime of the path. The path with the maximum lifetime and minimum fuzzy cost will be considered to be the optimal one and used for transmission. Simulation results show that the proposed FCMQR provides an accurate and efficient method of estimating and evaluating the QoS routing stability and cost in dynamic mobile networks.

maintaining group membership function and building optimal multicast tree is challenging in wireless MANETs. The provision of QoS guarantee is of utmost importance for the development of the multicast services since it can improve performance and allow critical information to flow even under difficult conditions [4]. The QoS routing in MANETs is difficult because the network topology may change constantly due to node mobility and the available state information for routing changes dynamically [5]. A survey of QoS aware routing protocols for MANETs show that most of them take into consideration one or two metrics. But this is not sufficient since the topology of the MANET is determined by many factors such as link stability, node mobility and battery power of the mobile devices [6]. All of these factors are correlated. Thus, consideration of only one or two factors is not sufficient for choosing an optimal path.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the related works. Section 3 describes the de- sign of multiple selection parameters and Section 4 explains about the fuzzy logic inference engine. Section 5 explains the mobility prediction mechanism and Section 6 describes the cost effective life time prediction of a path. Section 7 describes about the route discovery process of the proposed protocol. Simulation results are discussed in Section 8. Section 9 de- scribes the conclusion.

A large number of routing protocols already has been proposed for mobile ad hoc networks. Proposed protocols are often subdivided into three categories, namely; Proactive, reactive and hybrid [2]. Proactive routing protocols need to maintain routes between all nodes pairs all the time, while reactive routing protocols only build and maintain routes on demand. Studies have shown that reactive routing protocols perform better in terms of packet delivery ratio and incur low- er routing overhead especially in the presence of high mobility. Over the last few years, many reactive routing protocols for MANET have been proposed. Hybrid routing protocol combines the features of both proactive and reactive protocol. In the literature very few routing algorithm exists for MANET using fuzzy logic. In this section Fuzzy Logic Wireless

Assume that l is a routing path and (l1, l2,..., lk) is the set of all the links along each hop l. The path stability (Pst) is the minimum of the LETs along the path and can be written as the following

In the proposed system the QoS aware routing problem is formulated as maximizing the link stability and lifetime of the routing path while minimizing the cost. Fuzzy rule base is developed to combine the various metrics such as band- width, end-to-end delay and number of nodes to generate a single cost value, which is used for route selection. Our pro- posed protocol outperforms than the existing FLWMR and FLWLAMR protocol. The simulation results have shown that the proposed FCMQR enhances packet delivery ratio, incurs less end-to-end delay and increases the path success ra- tio. The proposed FCMQR formulates a tradeoff between

