Abstract In the analytic network process (ANP) a hierarchy or network is created to represent a decision and establishes a matrix containing the pair wise comparison judgments for the elements linked under a parent element. A priority vector of relative weights for these elements is derived. Then all the priority vectors are appropriately weighted and summed to obtain the overall priorities for the alternatives of a decision. In this paper we will develop an efficient fuzzy ANP model which helps decision makers to choose among the alternatives for the Egyptian scenarios of electrical power generation.

variables and Gaussian fuzzy numbers as a pair-wise compar- ison scale for deriving the priorities of different selection attri- butes and sub-attributes. In the last step, the priority weights for main attributes, sub-attributes and alternatives are com- bined to determine the priority weights of the alternatives. The alternative with the highest priority weight is selected as the best alternative.

Fuzzy set theory offers a possible means of managing these kinds of data or information. On the other hand, ANP offers a means for dealing with different preferences made to different decision alternatives. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, an overview on fuzzy sets, linguistic variables, Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP), and fuzzy AHP applications in literature are given. In Section 3, Analytic network process (ANP) is illustrated. FANP based approach is discussed in Section 4. Gaussian fuzzy ANP (GFANP) pro- posed model to select the best alternative is developed and the steps of each stage of the procedure are explained in detail in Section 5. In Section 6, results which are produced from the model are discussed, and the paper ends with concluding re- marks in Section 7.

Let X = {x1, x2,..., xn} represents the elements of the alter- natives as an object set, and let U = {u1, u2,..., um} represents the elements of the criteria as a goal set. Therefore, m extent analysis values for each object can be obtained with the follow- ing signs:

Although the AHP technique removes the deficiencies inherent in the measurement and evaluation steps of the problem anal- ysis, it does not measure the possible dependencies among fac- tors. The AHP method assumes that the factors presented in the hierarchical structure are independent; however, this is not always a reasonable presumption. The possible depen- dency among factors can only be determined as a result of internal and external environmental analyses.

In the proposed model it is possible to benefit from the advan- tages of both interval and fixed value judgments. Shortages caused by each of them can be avoided. GFANP model pro- vides expert judgments the flexibility of using interval values in their preference matrices instead of crisp values. Gaussian fuzzy numbers are used instead of triangular numbers. By using them the case of zero weights will never exist. We recom- mend decision-makers in the Egyptian government to build more nuclear power stations to cover 25% of the generated electricity in Egypt. We also recommend them to construct so- lar power stations to cover 5% of the generated electricity.

