We cannot replicate all definitions and proofs from these two large papers in this conference paper but we hope that it will be entirely obvious to the reader how this could be done. We do not claim to make the work above trivial. However, we do claim that using our formulation, game semantics can be carried out more quickly, more accurately, and more transparently.

This is important for more than good practice: we speculate that by our formu- lation, implementation and mechanisation of game semantics proofs are significantly easier. The reader can compare the definitions in this paper with the original versions [19,14] and judge which would be easier to work with, in a prover like Isabelle. Furthermore, game semantics can provide theoretical foundations for pro- gram verification and for hardware synthesis, where the pen-and-paper style of much previous work must be augmented by machine-checked proofs, because of scale, or for safety, or both. Here, the compositionality, computational, and symmetry properties enumerated and discussed above really count. Finally, game semantics can reconcile the compositionality of denotational semantics with the effectiveness of operational semantics via communicating abstract machines [16]; here, the con- ventional representation of pointers is arguably actively counterintuitive, whereas the use of names as tags for messages carries immediate computational intuitions.

We now examine the impact deletion has on the legality conditions of Defini- tion 2.15. Legality is not preserved by arbitrary deletions, but deletion is usually used in a controlled way which ensures preservation. For instance deletion of moves forming an entire sub-tree in the arena, preserves legality properties. Other kinds of deletions can be dealt with similarly.

In [19, Definition 5.2] Hyland and Ong must write in English about the manipu- lation of pointers, and that this has to be done throughout their work (and this is typical of similar papers). We propose nominal techniques as a way to deal with this quickly and elegantly.

We can read this paper as an exciting, if only partially articulated, commentary on semantics. The issue of dangling pointers and compositionality has not been properly addressed in the games literature and it remains to understand where the nominal model will take us. The nominal model of this paper exists in a larger context of nominal sets, substitution models, and some sophisticated logical and semantic theory [7,9], including abstract treatments of metavariables and renaming [8,11] and even e.g. trees with pointers [4]; the fruit of applying this theory, remains to be discovered.

