are called (generalized) closed sets. Viewed in this way, the closed-set system of a Topological System is just a special case of this generalized Closure System. Other applications of the Closure System include Formal Concept Analysis [8], Matroid and Anti-Matroid/Learning Space [4,6], in which the generalized closure operator is enhanced with an additional exchange axiom (for matroid) or anti-exchange (for anti-matroid) axiom. Closure Systems also play an important role in Category Theory [1,2,14] and also in Domain Theory, e.g. [9].

In the present work, we provide a complete answer to the above question. We provide an axiomatic system for the suite of generalized operators. Some of the generalizations are straightforward, for instance, the generalized interior and gen- eralized exterior operators can be linked to the generalized closure operator in a direct, immediate fashion (which involves only set complement). Others are more involved. After carefully analyzing the axiomatization schemes for the topological boundary operator and for the topological derived set operator [7,10,12,13], we ob- tain a generalization of boundary, derived set, co-derived set operators from the setting of Topological System to that of Closure System, such that the relationships between themselves and the closure/interior/exterior operators mimic those in the topological context. In doing so, we obtained a full axiomatic characterization of relevant operators in a Closure System.

The remaining part of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the various axiomatization of topological set operators, while at the same time highlighting some important properties of the boundary operator and derived set operator. In Section 3, starting from the generalized closure operator, generalized interior operator, and generalized exterior operator, we provide a generalization of the boundary operator (Section 3.2), and a generalization of derived set operators (Section 3.3) and co-derived set operators (Section 3.4). We close our paper with a short summary and discussion (Section 4).

Having the generalization of the complete suite of topological operators allows us to extend the topological semantics to those in Closure Systems in general. This could be useful because there are other non-topological closure systems, such as matroid/independent system and anti-matroid/accessible system. Our results are also significant for axiomatic operators on lattice (posets which are closed with respect to meet and join operations), because closure system correspond to complete lattices. Our axiomatization of set operators will shed new lights to the interplay of topology, lattice, and logic [2,3].

