Nuclear Factor kappa B (NF-kB) is a key transcriptional regulator that plays important roles in the pathogenesis of hepatic inflammation and fibrosis in chronic liver diseases. NF-kB activation leads to production of pro-inflammatory and fibrogenic cytokines. Glycyrrhizin (GL) is reported to suppress liver fibrosis and cirrhosis. Omega-3 fatty acids

Thioacetamide (TAA) fibrotic model. We investigated the effects of GL and u-3 on liver inflammation and fibrosis in rats and clarified the effects of these natural compounds on NF-kB level. 50 male Wistar rats randomized to 5 groups: Control group and 4 groups received TAA 200 mg/kg i.p. twice weekly for 8 weeks: TAA group, GL group (received GL 25 mg/kg daily by oral tube), u-3 group (received u-3150 mg/kg daily by oral tube),

Chronic liver diseases are an increasing cause of morbidity and mortality in more developed countries [1]. Most chronic liver diseases, including viral hepatitis (B and C), alcoholic liver disease, and biliary diseases, ultimately lead to liver fibrosis [2]. Liver fibrosis is the wound-healing response of the liver to many causes of chronic injury. Iterative liver injury causes inflammatory damage, matrix deposition, paren- chymal cell death and angiogenesis leading to progressive fibrosis. The scar matrix typically accumulates very slowly but once cirrhosis is established the potential for reversing this process is decreased and complications develop [3].

(EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) are bioactive dietary compounds. Marine-derived food sources such as fatty fish, seaweed, shellfish, microalgae and krill are rich in u-3 [13,14]. u-3 supplements are reported to be used in hepatic injury and steatosis [15]. EPA and DHA protected against arachidonic acid produced pro-inflammatory molecules through conversion to less inflammatory mediators, so EPA and DHA have anti-

injuries. The inflammatory process passes through distinct stages, including acute, adaptive, and resolution, and more- over, inflammation may become a chronic condition as in autoimmune diseases [19]. The NF-kB system plays a vital role in regulating the innate immunity responses and cellular stress in different cell types [19,20]. NF-kB remains in the cytoplasm in unstimulated cells as a complex with inhibitory- kappaB proteins (I-kB) that prevent their translocation to the nucleus. During cell activation, I-kB is phosphorylated and dissocaited, which exposes the nuclear translocation sites of NF-kB leading to translocation of NF-kB to the nucleus and DNA binding [21,22]. NF-kB composes of p65/p50 heterodimers in macrophages and binds to the promoter region of various pro-inflamamatory genes leading to gene transactivation. NF- kB plays an important regulatory role in hepatic macrophage expression of pro-inflammatory mediators [22].

Liver fibrosis was induced according to the method of Esmat et al. [23] and Furtado et al. [24]. Fourty two male Sprague- Dawly rats were intraperitoneally (i.p.) injected with freshly prepared TAA (200 mg/kg of body weight) in 0.2 ml sterile saline twice weekly (days 2 and 6) for 8 consecutive weeks.

Rats were distributed randomly to five groups: Control group (8 rats): injected i.p. with 0.2 ml sterile saline twice weekly (days 2 and 6) for 8 consecutive weeks, TAA group (12 rats): TAA-induced fibrotic group, GL group (10 rats): hepatic fibrosis treated with GL (25 mg/kg/day by oral tube dissolved in

For immunohistochemistry, mouse NF-kB/65 Rabbit Poly- clonal Antibody antibodies (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, USA) were applied to deparaffinized and rehydrated sections. After removal of the unbound primary antibodies by rinsing with PBS, slides were incubated with secondary antibody. The analysis of antibody binding was performed with a dia- minobenzidine (DAB) kit, and hematoxylin was used as the counterstain. The slides were then observed by light micro- scopy. Expression of NF-kB was detected in the cytoplasm of liver tissue and inflammatory cells at the areas of inflamma- tion and fibrosis (according to manufacturer instructions). Expression in different groups was compared as regards to the distribution and intensity (compared to endothelium as an internal control) and distribution of positive areas.

differences between groups. P values of less than 0.05 were considered significant. The analysis was carried out using Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) version 18. Graphs were performed with GraphPad Prism V 5.02 (Graph- Pad Software Inc., San Diego, CA, USA).

Liver fibrosis is considered as the main complication of chronic liver diseases and a range of chronic inflammatory diseases [2]. Chronic inflammation is followed by accumula- tion of collagen which resulted from a cascade of events that involves cytokines produced by both liver resident cells and circulating immune cells. These inflammatory stimuli cause activation of quiescent hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) to myofi- broblast like cells to produce collagen [30,31]. When hepatic fibrosis occurs, collagen (mainly types 1 and 3) proliferation accounts for 50% of the total protein in fibrotic liver [32]. With

In our study, TAA intoxication caused an intense oxidative stress as evident by the dramatic increase in the hepatic MDA level. MDA is a toxic product of peroxidation of biological membrane polyunsaturated fatty acids. Therefore the mea- surement of MDA is used as an indicator of oxidative stress [33]. TAA is a potent hepatotoxin, so it is used in producing hepatic injury showed lesions similar to those seen in most cases of human liver disease. TAA causes cytotoxic injury through a two-step bioactivation mediated by the microsomal cytochrome P450 isozyme E1 and/or flavin-containing mono- oxygenase systems. TAA converts to TAA-sulfoxide and further to a reactive metabolite, TAA-S, S-dioxide, which responsible for lipid peroxidation at the plasma membrane level [34].

liver from the oxidative stress caused by TAA as they decreased significantly the elevated liver MDA. GL and u-3 act as scavengers of free radicals, so they decrease the oxidative stress. A decrease of lipid peroxidation mediated oxidative stress may be a potential and effective strategy for the pre- vention and treatment of hepatic failure [35].

prevented the increase in NF-kB, so they prevented the development of liver fibrosis and necroinflammation. We also found a positive correlation between liver NF-kB level and lipid peroxidation, so oxidative stress has a positive effective role in liver inflammation and fibrosis in TAA group. The anti- oxidant properties of GL and u-3 have also an effective role as anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic.

MDA, as they significantly decreased when compared with TAA group. These results may confirm the anti-inflammatory, anti-fibrotic and anti-oxidant effects of either GL or u-3. Studies supposed that GL binded to HMGB1 directly to sup- press HMGB1-induced injury, inhibit TLR-4 pathway, lower NF-kB concentration and inhibit the production of inflam- matory cytokines [40e42]. u-3 reduced the inflammation by lowering NF-kB concentration. Lowering NF-kB inhibited the production of inflammatory cytokines including TNF-a and IL- 1b, reduced arachidonic acidederived eicosanoids and pro-

hepatoprotective effect of glycyrrhizin and omega-3 fatty acids alone or in combination against liver fibrosis as they decreased both the fibrotic areas and the necroinflammatory scores. The mechanism behind hepatoprotective effects of glycyrrhizin and omega-3 fatty acids included suppression of oxidative stress and Inhibition of NF-kB. So the hepatoprotective effects of glycyrrhizin, omega-3 fatty acids and their combination against TAA-induced fibrosis appear to be mediated via its antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic properties. We advise to fulfill some clinical studies on these natural compounds as nutrient to protect against liver fibrosis.

Lozano R, Naghavi M, Foreman K, Lim S, Shibuya K, Aboyans V, et al. Global and regional mortality from 235 causes of death for 20 age groups in 1990 and 2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study. Lancet 2010;2012(380):2095e128.

