The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a review of existing and related works of IoT node authen- tication using blockchain. Section 3 discusses the proposed frame- work in detail. Finally, the simulation process and discussion are presented at the end of this paper (Section 4), followed by conclud- ing remarks.

Meanwhile, the authors of [24] proposed a blockchain model based on hypergraphs. This model aims to reduce storage con- sumption and to solve additional security issues. In the model, the hyperedge is used as the organizer of storage nodes and con- verts the entire networked data storage into part network storage. The author presents only two levels for the chain and the applica- tion is set towards data storage security and does not address the device authentication.

However, the proposed work uses existing blockchain technology to store and share public key values. In [30], a blockchain based trust system is proposed to deter malicious data reporting parties in the network. The proposed application uses the blockchain for only data storage. Similarly, authors of [31] presented a module to detect and isolate malicious devices in IoT network. The authors used the network capable devices as blockchain clients that deter- mine whether a device is complaint to the security parameters or not. Blockchain is used as a database to store the status of the IoT devices.

The authors of [32] proposed a blockchain based access control module for medical IoT applications where the medical data is shared and managed by smart contract in blockchain environment. In a similar way the authors of [33] used smart contract in block- chain to authenticate and manage the resource allocations within the IoT network. Both works used the blockchain as a secure decentralized data base that can be accessed and managed by sin- gle points of access.

blockchain (NodeID). This eliminates the need for a centralized key generating service and at the same time provides anonymity to the nodes in the network. It is worthwhile to highlight that based on the clustering process each node has two parameters namely, the public key of the node (NodeID), and the public key of the cluster head node (CHID).

described in Algorithm 3. The process is repeated for other nodes in other clusters in the network. Moreover, the same procedure is repeated for the CHL1 and CHL2 nodes in the networks to create a number of blockchains that authenticate multiple levels of the network.

As described previously, the proposed framework consists of two main parts. The clustering mechanism to group the IoT devices in clusters, and the blockchain structure used for the authentica- tion of the IoT devices in the network. The simulation and testing processes are conducted in two steps.

512 MB RAM and two raspberry pi 3B + with Broadcom BCM2837B0, Cortex-A53 64-bit SoC @ 1.4 GHz 1Gbyte of RAM. All raspberry Pi devices running Raspberry Pi OS. In addition, we are using a computer with a 1.8 GHz Intel dual-core CPU with 2 Giga Byte of RAM running Ubuntu 18.04 LTS in addition to A laptop with Intel i7-10510U CPU @ 1.80 GHz up to 2.3 GHz and 16GByte of RAM running Windows 11.

Decentralization: The proposed framework uses a distributed blockchain branch where each branch is independent from the other. The authentication decision is based on the consensus of each branch and is distributed via the authentication list. This ensures a decentralized authentication management of the nodes in the network.

Also, a lightweight and fast consensus algorithm where the nodes are validated based on their public key value and their related cluster head public key value is presented. This new con- sensus algorithm depends on the direct verification of the devices and the validation of the new blocks within each cluster. The pro- posed method had shown to be fast and lightweight without com- prising the immutability characteristics of the blockchain.

