This work centers around a malicious packet-dropping attack, in which a node maliciously drops the packet as an alternative to forward- ing it. Network throughput will decrease significantly in the presence of malicious nodes. In this paper, a host-based misuse detection system using game theory approaches is implemented to perceive the malicious nodes and furnish security to the network.

In this paper, a portion of the vulnerabilities, explicitly assaults against AODV such as malicious packet drop is analyzed. To distinguish attacks on AODV, a solution using the neighbor monitoring technique and game theory is proposed. To give optimal strategies for anomaly- based intrusion detection systems, the game theoretical analysis method is proposed.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 illus- trates the related work for MANET that is based on game theory. Section 3 explains the proposed Intrusion Detection System using Game theory. Section 4 gives the results and discussion of the proposed work. Section 5 gives the conclusions and future enhancements.

Watchdog and Path rater are two extensions to the DSR algorithm, proposed by Marti et al. [8]. The misbehaving nodes are identified by the watchdog by monitoring the next node transmission. The path rater uses the data from the watchdog extension to choose a path that is most probable to deliver packets. The path rating is computed by averaging the rating of the nodes in the path, where every node maintains a rating for all the nodes it knows in the network. The principle drawback is that the misbehaving nodes are not rebuffed and there are no incentives for the nodes to coordinate.

CONFIDANT protocol and a range of enhancements are presented by Buchegger et al. [9]. Each node monitors the conduct of its next- hop neighbors. The data is given to a reputation system which updates the rate of the nodes. Based on the rating, a trust manager makes deci- sions about providing or accepting route information, accepting a node as part of a route, and similar decisions. A node notifies its friends by forwarding an ALARM message if it assumes its neighbor node to be misbehaving. The information is transmitted to a path manager if the rating of the node is intolerable. All the routes containing the intoler- able node are deleted from the path cache. The principle disadvantage of this methodology is the spreading of false reputation ratings by ma- licious nodes present in the network.

Sen [14] presents an in-depth survey on a variety of security and privacy-related problems in Wireless Mesh Networks. Das et al. [15]. proposed a game-theoretic model which identifies selfish nodes in MANETs. This model guarantees secure data transfer at a low cost in minimum idle time. This model failed to consider the existence of mali- cious nodes.

Taheri et al. [16]. presented an approach that detects malicious nodes using game theory. The malicious nodes are identified by game components, sent and received data as well as considering the data which has been stored in different stages. Wang et al. [17]. proposed a novel Mean Field Game Theoretic approach to enhance security in cog- nitive radio MANETs. This approach improves the lifetime of MANET and also reduces the possibility of compromising.

Janusz et al. [21]. presented the commonly used algorithms such as swarm intelligence, evolutionary algorithms, artificial immune systems, and evolutionary games to improve cyber security in MANETs. This pa- per also discusses the basic defense mechanisms in MANETs for intru- sion detection and prevention. Subba et al. [22] proposed a framework that identifies malicious nodes by using lightweight neural networks and specification rules. A reputation update and expulsion mechanism based on Shapley value and Vickery Clark Grooves (VCG) have been proposed to support cooperation and discourage malicious behavior among mon- itoring nodes. This approach has achieved a higher detection rate over several attacks.

Ganapathy et al. developed a new intelligent Conditional Random Field (CRF)-based feature selection approach to develop a novel intru- sion detection system that optimizes the number of features [31]. Fur- thermore, to accomplish classification with these reduced data, an ex- isting Layered Approach (LA) based method is applied. To distinguish and classify anomalous behavior from normal behaviors in the Internet of Things depending on the type of attack, Reddy et al. proposed an

Nodes in the network calculate the trust value for their neighbor pe- riodically. Trust value is the ratio of the number of packets forwarded by the node to the number of packets sent to it. A Trust class is assigned to each node based on the trust value computed previously. If the for- warding rate is greater than THRESHOLD1 (0.7) then the trust class of the node is one (CLASS 1). If the forwarding rate is between THRESH- OLD1 (0.7) and THRESHOLD2 (0.3), then the trust class of the node is

False positives are also less. In the case of 5 nodes, this condition applies. Whereas in the case of 25, 40, and 55 nodes more nodes are closer to each other and they are within the transmission range of the intruder. As a result, the false positives are also high. In the same way,

