completely positive maps. I introduced the CPM construction as a way to pass from the pure to the mixed setting. One technical detail of the CPM(C) construction is that it does not preserve biproducts. Therefore, to obtain an interpretation of classical types such as bit = I  I, one must work in the free biproduct

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the definitions of various classes of dagger categories that appeared in [7]. In Section 3, we discuss basic properties of idempotents and self-adjoint idempotents and their splittings. Section 4 recalls the CPM construction, and introduces the view of classical types as self-adjoint idempotents on quantum types. Finally, Section 5 delves into various technical properties of idempotents in dagger categories. We conclude with the, per- haps unexpected, observation that the category CPM(FdHilb) of Hilbert spaces and completely positive maps does not satisfy the square root axiom of positive operators.

In the previous section, classical types were added to CPM(C) by taking its biprod- uct completion. We now show that there is an alternative method for completing CPM(C) with classical types, namely by splitting idempotents. In light of Re- mark 3.5, this gives an operational interpretation and an implementation of the type of classical bits in terms of quantum bits.

The unique square root axiom holds in FdHilb, and is the reason for many regular- ity properties of that category. It also has a physical interpretation: If the evolution of nature is broken into discrete time steps, then one can continually half the step size. Nature therefore evolves continuously.

The category CPM(FdHilb) continues to be an interesting object of study. It plays a fundamental role in finite dimensional quantum mechanics, and the basis of denotational semantics of quantum programming languages and protocols. The interplay between classical and quantum entities is particularly interesting, both at the level of morphisms (mixed vs. pure, completely positive vs. unitary) and at the level of objects (tensor vs. biproduct, simple vs. composite).

In this paper, we have made some progress towards understanding the internals of this category, by showing that classical data types can be identified with certain self-adjoint idempotents on purely quantum types. To this end, we have studied the theory of self-adjoint idempotents and their splittings in the setting of dagger categories. It turns out that many of the properties familiar from projections in Hilbert spaces are true in this more general setting. However, there are important differences; for example, properties that rely on the square root axiom will be true in FdHilb, but not necessarily in CPM(FdHilb), where the square root axiom has been demonstrated to fail.

