Assume we want to define meaning as the potential to change states of infor- mation, instead of the conditions under which something is true. If meaning is to be explicated in terms of information change, there are two levels under which temporal reference operates. First temporal references must describe how the world changes over time. But secondly they have also to explain the way the information about the world changes over time.

Information states and sets of them are essentially non-temporal structures. Information states and their ordering into sets of possible extensions give a gods- eye, atemporal view of the world. But if information states are atemporal the same cannot be said for English sentences. The role of the past and present tenses can be seen as one of tying the time varying nature of sentences down to the static assertions found in the information states. We need to show how, via the tenses, the temporarily varying update potential of sentences maps onto the temporally fixed relations in information states.

Our information states consist of sets of assertions. We now divide the assertions contained in an information state into verified and unverified assertions at time t. As time goes by more unverified assertions become verified, but no verified assertion can become unverified.

What is to verify an assertion and what is the difference between verified and unverified assertion? To answer this it helps to note an obvious asymetry between the future and the past. While we can have knowledge about both past and future, the origin of our information about the past is quite different from the origin of our information about the future. With information about the past there is usually some causal chain linking a past event to present information. As for information about the future, at best, one can extrapolate on the basis of what one knows about the past and the present.

With verified information, it is normally assumed that there is some causal chain linking the information to what the information is about. When a causal chain is involved, verification of information about an event cannot precede the occurrence of the event. However, there are some cases where verification is not causal in origin. In particular, a case where a degree of prescience seems to apply is in talking about plans or pre-determined events. When talking about plans, it is not really the world that we are discussing but what is laid out in the plan. Of the plan, we have a gods- eye view, so that we can survey in a glance which events are supposed to happen when. If the plan provides our source of information about these events, then we can verify that certain events will occur, according to the plan, well in advance of the time at which those events are supposed to occur. When one says

Here, a stands for the assertion time and v for the verification time. An assertion p(tp) is verified in a state s at a time v if p(tp) is contained in the set of assertions that count as verified in s at v. (If we represent states as sets of assertions, at any one time this set will be split into two subsets of verified and unverified assertions).

