grape skins [6]. Many studies focused on the application of plant growth regulation (PGRs), abscisic acid (ABA), auxins, cytokinins, ethylene and gibberellic acid (GA3). These hormones all have dif- ferent functions and peak at different stages during vine and berry development as they are responsible for the regulation of growth and ripening can further inhibit coloring [7].

Berry firmness was recorded using fruit texture Effegi- penetrometer supplemented with a plunger 2 mm diameter pene- trator and separation force was measured using a hook instead of a plunger. Firmness and separation force of berries were expressed an N. The Berry shattering percentage and rachis browning index was recorded as described by [15]. Water loss percentage was recorded [15]. The color was recorded according to [18], and there- after, all images were analyzed by using software ImageJ Ver. 1.43u USA to get RGB signals to calculate hue angle of clusters as reported to [19].

Taken as a whole these results show that the physical quality attributes can be affected differ. It seems plausible that B12 control water loss during shelf life. Basically, berries have a somewhat, thick epidermis which covered with waxes layer on berries surface, acting as a protective layer against dehydration [15]. It could be that the highest B12 treatment at 9 mM increases waxes during berries development. Moreover, the responses of berries to B12

[25]. Since the last vitamins are considered as antioxidants which play a role to scavenge active oxygen species during shelf-life [8,26]. The important roles of these vitamins are to maintain the right functions of the cell membrane of cells/tissue of berries. How-

The visual appearance of the stem and pedicel of berry was no detected with vine treated by high B12 before the 4th day of shelf life. It could be suggested that the B12 protected plasma mem- branes from peroxidation lipid process by reacting directly with reactive oxygen and nitrogen species during shelf life [8]. So, the plant cell reserved by keeping water in cluster tissues resulted in less water loss and berry shattering percentages.

time was observed. The changes in b-Car and TAC during shelf life are noticed owing to the continued synthesis of b-Car and TAC which occurred for a limited period at all B12 treatments at 2nd day of shelf life. Therefore, in b-Car and TAC which were then fol- lowed by a decrease in up to end shelf life time.

up to 2nd day and then decrease up to end experiment time. It could be due to the effect of high concentration of B12 (9 mM) activates many metabolic processes are enhanced which are diverted towered the lipid-soluble vitamin A [32]. Also, the increases TAC at 2nd day of shelf life can be related to activat- ing major precursors of anthocyanin are responsible for increas- ing TAC such as cyanidin, peonidin and the acylated derivatives in berry skin and pulp [3,6]. Continuously, the degradation of chlorophyll might be due to senesce of berry and deterioration during shelf life period, thereafter, TAC was more appearance [2].

