Computer-aided structure-activity based prediction studies in drug design helps to treat diseases with novel biomarkers. Predic- tion of activity spectra for substances (PASS) database comprised 46,000 biologically well-known active drugs and screening are per- formed before the establishment of an in vitro experiment. PASS gives the significant bioactivities of chemical compounds as Pa (Probable activity) and Pi (Probable inactivity) values to mention the compounds, whether they are active are inactive. The Pa values higher than 0.7 indicated this compound would be active in exper-

iment and Pi values indicate theirs inactivate possibilities. The admetSAR chemoinformatics based tool used to predict absorption, metabolism, excretion, and toxicity of the particular compound. Based on these criteria, the outcomes of an in vitro experiment will lower the risk of negative results [13,14].

CLC-Pred Tools performed to predict cytotoxicity of tumor cell lines, and it is based on structure-cell line cytotoxicity relation- ships designed by PASS special training sets with leave-one-out cross-validation procedure. The accuracy of in silico prediction results significantly 96% matches with the results of in vivo exper- imental. The efficiency of compounds against cancer could be found and optimized using this PASS based CLC-Pred database in the future to develop potential anti-cancer drugs. Predicted cyto- toxicity gives results against various human cell lines represented with Pa values if Pa value is >0.5 the probability of action is consid- erably high and whereas Pi value indicates inactivity [23].

The individual with most use-reports was considered as com- mon medicine for a particular ailment treatment. Based on the use-reports collected from ethnic people use value (UV) was calcu- lated to highlight the usage priority, importance, recommendation and sharing medicinal knowledge about the particular species among the informants. In this study Abutilon indicum (L.) Sweet,. (UV-0.60), Lawsonia inermis L., Lycopersicon esculentum Mill

wound healing agents and also in the treatment of cancer based on the traditional reports, particularly Nyctanthes arbor-tristis, Butea monosperma; Tribulus terrestris predicted cytotoxicity activity sig- nificantly correlated with the literature survey. The selected com- pounds from reported plants revealed significant anticancer activity in CLC-Pred prediction and PASS tools. This study entirely draws the appreciable output on the relationship of anti- inflammatory plants in cancer and moreover, the in silico studies assessed extremely the presence of anticancer activity. This study showed the possibility to correlate ethno pharmacological thera- pies to develop new pharmaceutical drugs thus can accelerate the interpretative analysis of the ethnic anti-inflammatory plants in the development of anti-cancerous drugs.

