The bat algorithm is one of the recent nature-inspired algorithms, which has been emerged as a powerful search method for solving continuous as well as discrete problems. The quadratic assignment problem is a well-known NP-hard problem in combinatorial optimization. The goal of this problem is to assign n facilities to n locations in such a way as to minimize the assignment cost. For that purpose, this paper introduces a novel discrete variant of bat algorithm to deal with this combinatorial optimization problem. The proposed algorithm was evaluated on a set of benchmark instances from the QAPLIB library and the performance was compared to other algorithms. The empirical results of exhaustive experiments were promising and illustrated the efficacy of the suggested approach.

or sub-optimal solution. Moreover, the most metaheuristic algorithms are based on swarm intelligence, biological systems, physical and chemical systems [4]. In particular, the swarm- intelligence algorithms have shown their promising performance and they have been gaining much popularity in solving many engi- neering optimization problems; such as particle swarm optimiza- tion [5], spider monkey [6], cuckoo search [7], bee colony optimization [8], firefly algorithms [9] and in the last years the bat-inspired algorithm [10,11].

improve the convergence and accuracy of both algorithms [31]. Fister et al. incorporated two mechanisms within the original BA algorithm in order to obtain the hybrid self-adaptive BA, the first one is self-adaptation of control parameters, and the second is the hybridization of the self-adaptive BA using four DE strategies as a local search heuristics [32]. Mirjalili et al. used the sigmoid function to propose a binary version of BA to solve unimodal, mul-

The QAP is an important issue in combinatorial optimization problem. This problem was originally introduced by Koopmans and Beckmann in 1957 [47] and classified as a NP-hard problem [12]. The QAP is described as a problem to allocating a set of n facilities to a set of n locations in such a way that each location is designated to exactly one facility and vice versa. For each pair of facilities versus locations assignment costs are known. The

The crossover operation was firstly introduced in genetic algo- rithms to produce a new population. The idea behind the crossover is to benefit the best characteristics from each of the parents when producing the new generation. In the literature, there is a variety of crossover operators proposed to solve the quadratic assignment problem such as the ordered crossover (OX) [52], the cycle cross- over (CX) [17], the multiple parent crossover (MPX) [53], the swap path crossover (SPX) [54], the partially mapped crossover (PMX) [55], the cohesive crossover (COHX) [56], the one point crossover (OPX) [57], and the uniform crossover (UX) [58]. In order to increase the diversity of the population and to avoid the premature convergence toward undesirable regions in the search space, we propose some modification of the uniform crossover (UX) [58]. In this paper, the modified uniform crossover (UX) is used to enhance the search strategy of BA. Like the standard crossover (UX) process, the order of scanning each parent is from left to right, and all items assigned to the same position in both parent individuals are copied to this position in the offspring. The unassigned items are grouped

tion rate from best solutions of 0.00% value shows that the solu- tions found over 50 runs are similar to the best-known solutions. Therefore, we can discern from these experimental results that DBA is an efficient algorithm for solving easy instances likewise hard instances of QAP problem in a reasonable time.

the computing time. Our future research will be mainly focused on the application of DBA algorithm in other combinatorial opti- mization problems such as scheduling models, logistic network models, vehicle routing models, etc. We will also try to enhance the current algorithm in order to obtain even better results by involving hybrid approaches and by using other discretization methods to switch between the continuous and the discrete search space.

