disturbance tradeoffs and which, as we shall see, rules out classical theory, and the impossibility of instantaneous signaling between systems (which is built into the notion of composite system used in our version of the ordered linear spaces frame- work). We will also present some results on bit commitment in our framework, to the effect that all nonclassical theories that lack entanglement permit exponen- tially secure bit commitment, and some results on how the presence in a theory of certain kinds of entangled states can defeat the bit commitment protocol we used for the unentangled case. Closely related states can permit teleportation, another information-processing task whose possibility helps distinguish between classes of nonclassical theories in our framework. We summarize some of our recent work with Barrett and Leifer on multipartite composite systems and teleportation in the ordered linear spaces framework. In particular, we report necessary and sufficient conditions for a composite of three systems to support a conclusive teleportation protocol, and interesting sufficient conditions for deterministic teleportation.

Rather than building categories of processes from (categories of) abstract state spaces, one might start from the opposite direction, by treating categories of pro- cesses axiomatically. A natural starting point for such an effort would be to consider categories enriched over ordered linear spaces, or over abstract state spaces. This paper ends with a sketch of this idea. We envision such categorical formulations as a first step toward comparing the necessary and/or sufficient conditions for various information processing protocols or informational properties of theories, obtained in the convex framework, with properties such as compact closure, dagger com- pact closure, non-cartesianity and so forth that have been used in the literature on categorical descriptions of information processing. This section of the paper has benefited from discussions with Abramsky, Armstrong, Coecke, and others and may be viewed as describing work early-in-progress in collaboration with at least some of them.

In future work, this definition will be elucidated in more detail. We intend it, and related categorical formulations of convex operational theories that we and collaborators are embarked on, to enable the comparison of the categorical formu- lation of information-processing centred around dagger compact closed categories, with the convex operational formalism. In the convex formalism, we have been concerned with obtaining necessary and/or sufficient conditions for the possibility of particular kinds of information processing, such as the ones we have reviewed in this paper. In some cases, it appears these conditions may be weaker than those employed in existing categorical constructions. We hope that the project of cat-

