A partially purified protein from the roots of Raphnus sativus (R. sativus) and low-molecular- weight heparin (LMWH) were tested for their abilities to inhibit the growth of Ehrlich as- cites carcinoma cells (EAC) intraperitoneally implanted in albino mice. 90 mice were randomly divided into 6 groups. The antitumor effect of the partially purified protein and LMWH were assessed by estimating serum transforming growth factor (TGF-b1) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Also, tumor volume, median survival time (MST), and total lipids, DNA and RNA in liver tissues, liver function tests and the redox status were estimated. Serum TGF-b1 & VEGF levels were highly significantly increased (p < 0.005) in the tumorized mice compared to control group and restored to their normal

Oxidative stress is caused by an imbalance between the pro- duction of reactive oxygen and a biological system's ability to readily detoxify the reactive intermediates or easily repair the resulting damage. Oxidative damage to DNA strands followed by mutation and alterations in gene expression are the prin- cipal mechanisms by which ROS contribute to carcinogenesis [1]. Therefore, protective and beneficial roles of superoxide dismutase (SOD) have been demonstrated both preclinically and clinically in combating a broad range of diseases, including ischemic-reperfusion injury, inflammation, and cancer [2]. Cells are normally able to defend themselves

oxygen and hydrogen peroxide, was discovered approxi- mately 40 years ago. SOD was presumably the most potent anti-ROS and was initially thought to be potentially a dream drug. In humans three SOD enzymes exist, SOD1 is a cyto- plasmic Cu/Zn-SOD, SOD2 is a mitochondrial Mn-SOD and SOD3 is an extracellular Cu/ZnSOD. Many studies report the purification of Mn-SOD from animal blood and plants like watermelon, pea, garlic and pearl millet [4]. The tumor cells were inhibited by the addition of these exogenous isolated Mn-SODs[4]. Manganese superoxide dismutase (Mn-SOD) is one of the major enzymes responsible for the defense against oxidative damage due to ROS in the mitochondria [5].

Heparin and low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) are commonly used for the prevention or treatment of thrombo- embolic complications in cancer patients [10]. Based on earlier observations linking the anticoagulant therapy with heparin to an improved survival of cancer patients, several prospec- tive clinical trials were launched with the aim to test heparin as a potential anticancer treatment [11]. Preclinical analysis of heparin provides evidence for its anti-metastatic activity in a variety of animal models [12]. Heparin is a member of a class of acidic polysaccharides called glycosaminoglycans and consists of alternating residues of uronic acid and hexos- amine covalently bound to serine residues of the serglycin core protein [13].

About 300 g of root tissues of R. sativus were homogenized with 1 L ice-cold tris buffer pH 7. The resulted supernatant was precipitated with 80% ammonium sulfate and the precipitated protein was passed through calcium phosphate gel, which then eluted with serial concentrations of NaCl solutions. The protein after elution with 0.4 and 0.8 M saline solution was dialyzed against distilled water and then concentrated using polyethylene glycol. The concentrated partially purified enzyme was reconstituted with Tris buffer and applied onto sephadex G100 column. The purified protein concentration and its SOD activity were assayed according the methods of Lowry et al. [15] and DeChatelet et al. [16] respectively.

[23] and RNA content was measured by the orcinol procedure described by the method of Mejbaum [24]. Total lipids in liver tissues were determined by the method of Knight et al. [25]. Serum Alanine transaminase (ALT) was colorimetrically determined by the method of Reitman and Frankel [26]. Serum albumin concentration was determined by the method of

(p < 0.005) compared to group III. Group I: Normal mice saline-treated (control): Group II: Normal mice-treated with the partial purified SOD: Group III: Normal mice-treated with low molecular weight heparin (LMWH): Group IV: EAC-bearing mice saline treated: Group V: EAC-bearing mice treated with the purified SOD: Group VI: EAC-bearing mice treated with low molecular weight heparin.

MDA, the end product of lipid peroxidations was reported to be higher in carcinomatous tissue than that in the non diseased organs. The level of MDA reflects the extent of membrane lipid peroxidation and hence cell membrane damage and correlated with advanced clinical stages and the impairment is related to tumor progression. Moreover, it has been claimed that MDA acts as a tumor promoter and co- carcinogenic agent because of its high cytotoxicity and inhibitory action on protective enzymes. Low levels of MDA indicate inhibition of lipid peroxidation. The biochemical determination of MDA serves to indicate lipid peroxide for- mation. Zhang et al., reported that, low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) could significantly decrease MDA content and increase SOD activity in ischemic brain [43]. It is clear from this study that R. Sativa inhibits lipid peroxidation and provides protection by strengthening the antioxidants effect by glutathione [44].

All of the interactions between the hemostatic system and tumor cells are involved in the promotion of angiogenesis [45]. Furthermore, several of the steps in the development of angiogenesis can be suppressed by UFH (UnFractionated Heparin), LMWH, and non-anticoagulant molecules [46]. The complex interactions of these various mechanisms were recently reviewed by Ruf [47]. Thus prominent roles in angiogenesis involve the release of growth factors such as VEGF (VascularEndothelial Growth Factor) [47].

Ghosh et al. indicated that tumor volume and its growth rate increase with increasing angiogenesis and VEGF level of the host and the rate of VEGF secretion is positively correlated well with tumor volume [50]. The present results agree with these observations. After treatment, the tumorized mice which were treated with the partial purified protein with SOD like activity andLMWH (groups V and VI),VEGF levels showed a highly significant decrease compared to that of the tumorized untreated mice. The latter result confirms the anti-angiogenic properties of the LMWH in addition to their antithrombotic properties. This is because short heparin fragments have been shown to inhibit the binding of VEGF to its receptors on endothelial cells[51].

tional cytokine that regulates cell proliferation, differentiation and extracellular matrix production [52]. Also, TGF-b1 may contribute to tumor pathogenesis by direct support of tumor growth and influence on local microenvironment, resulting in immunosuppression for all cells of the immune system, in- duction of angiogenesis, and modification of the extracellular matrix [53]. Vozenin-Brotons et al. reported that, SOD could significantly reduce TGF- b 1 expression, thus demonstrating that SOD might be proposed as a potent antagonist of this

Most experimental models and cell culture studies have concluded that SOD has anti-proliferative and tumor sup- pressor effects [56]. This may be one of the mechanisms by which R. sativus extract kill the EAC cell line. Furthermore, El- Sayed reported that, SOD activity was enhanced after treat- ment of the tumor cells with metal complexes having SOD- like activity, such type of treatment expresses excessive amount of H2O2 which implicated in EAC cell killing but not the normal cell because the latter cell contains sufficient

From the above observations one can conclude that, the naturally and the partially purified protein from R. sativus roots and the LMWH (fraxiparine) can be used to inhibits EAC cell growth possibly by many mechanisms including their antioxidative and anti-angiogenic effects which was observed in serum of the tumor bearing mice. The mechanism may involve protection of the tumor suppressor genes from the toxic effects of free radicals. Moreover, the role of R. sativus extract in the enhancement of the immune system function cannot be neglect.

a pronounced activation of blood phagocytes. Moreover, Habib et al. extracted a similar metalloprotein with MnSOD-like ac- tivity from the roots of R. sativus and showed that, such extract can activate the immune system to kill the EAC cell line [58].

Liu et al., showed the effects of heparinesuperoxide dis- mutase conjugate (heparineSOD) on carbon tetrachloride (CCl4)-induced acute liver failure and hepatic fibrosis. Biochemical indicators, such as glutamic pyruvic trans- aminase (SGPT), GSH (glutathione), and malondialdehyde (MDA) were determined 24 h after CCl4 treatment. The development of CCl4-induced acute liver failure altered the redox state with a decreased hepatic GSH and increased formation of lipid peroxidative products, which were partially normalized by treatment with heparineSOD or heparin + SOD. Compared with non-treated groups, the acute

Kalaiselvi M, Narmadha R, Ragavendran P, Ravikumar G, Gomathi D, Sophia D, et al. In vivo and in vitro antitumor activity of jasminum sambac (linn) alt oleaceae flower against daltons ascites lymphoma induced swiss albino mice. Int J Pharm Pharm Sci 2011;4:145e7.

