This paper reviews and extends previous work on the domain-theoretic notion of Machine Devel- opment. It summarizes the concept of Developmental Computation and shows how Interactive Computation can be understood as a stepping stone in the pathway from Classical to Developmen- tal Computation. A critical appraisal is given of Classical Computation, showing in which ways its shortcomings tend to restrict the possible evolution of real computers, and how Interactive and Developmental Computation overcome such shortcomings. The idea that Developmental Compu- tation is more encompassing than Interactive Computation is stressed. A formal framework for Developmental Computation is sketched, and the current frontier of the work on Developmental Computation is briefly exposed.

Example 2.5 One sees that any process whose effect is the printing of strings of characters satisfy the constraints. The same apply to processes that gen- erate strings of any other kind of objects, like partial results of counting pro- cesses.

5 Finiteness and finitarity are not synonyms. Finiteness concerns the total resources avail- able to a computation: a finite computation can only involve a finite amount of resources. Finitarity concerns the finiteness of the resources used in each step of a computation: the sum total of the resources involved in a finitary computation may well be infinite. Devel- opmental computations, as interactive computations, are conceived as finitary, not finite.

Thus, the essential step towards DC is not a technological step, because the historical analysis of Computer Science in [5] was able to show that the main technological ingredients for that step have all been there, for decades. The essential step towards DC is a conceptual, epistemological step. It consists in the superseding of the basic notions of the CC (like machines, programs and algorithmic computations), by the basic notions of a general theory of complex dynamical systems (like organization, development and adaptation).

To be able to perform such step, one such general theory of complex or- ganized dynamical systems should be adopted. In [5], the general theory of biological organisms that Jean Piaget exposed in [19] was adopted. That the- ory, more than a general biological theory, is in fact a general cybernetic theory of complex, interactive and developmental dynamical systems, and that is the real reason for its adoption.

For the sake of illustration of the idea of machine development, we introduce here a tentative model of steps of machine development. The model is tentative because it is incomplete in many senses, as will be explained. However, it seems to be clear enough to allow the grasping of what we think is essential about the idea machine development.

In this paper we have presented a summary of our ideas about DC and how it can open new ways to further the evolution of computing machines. The full theory of DC is yet to be developed. We hope that the formal framework introduced above can give some indication on at least the main features that we expect the theory to have. Of course, the main issue that still has to be clarified is the notion of material exchange between machines and environments, so better models of developmental can be obtained. DC introduces also many other issues, the most central of them being:

