This sentence refers to the same concepts treated in (1) and (3), besides a new concept M of a good amount in the set of all my friends. Since concept M seems to have a second-order flavour, there is no obvious way to represent (5) using the apparatus sketched in Example 1.1. In fact, assuming we have a way to differentiate the sets that contains a good amount of my friends from the sets that do not have this property, (5) may be represented as

It is easy to see that, in passing from Example 1.1 to Example 1.2, we indeed made a generalization. In fact, F and F are both particularizations of qF as follows. Given the set W of individuals at hand, consider the families E and A of subsets of W , defined by:

Here, we set the basics of the system PNL, extending the idea of a basic modal system to PNL, and show how the systems presented in [4,2,8,1] can be constructed as simple instances of our formalism. More specifically, we exemplify the use of PNL by presenting simple versions of results in [8,1], obtained by applying the general strategy sketched above of extending PNL and apply general versions of basic results. This gives insight into the essential features of these systems as well as brings to light the many relations between these systems.

Mathematically, the results we present here can be viewed as direct applications of some known techniques when transported to a more general setting. Our main contributions are conceptual. On the one hand, the generalization to multi-modal and poly-modal setting is useful because it shows how many known systems can be captured in a unified way. On the other hand, the fact that complicated new techniques are not needed shows how natural this framework is.

Example 2.1 Consider again the sentence (5) from Example 1.2, which was formal- ized as qF l, by using the unary modal operator qF , indexed by F . Alternatively, we can adopt a binary modal operator q and formalize sentence (5) as q(f, l), where f is the set of all my friends, i.e., the image of me under the relation F and l is the set of all logicians. In this particular case, the proper reading of the formula q(f, l) should imply that the relation me H q(f, l) holds when the set of all my friends that are logicians contains a good amount of the set of all friends.

Systems of modal logic with neighbourhood semantics [4] are generalizations of basic modal logic [3]. Here, we generalize neighbourhood semantics, since neigh- bourhood formulas and meaning definitions of [4] are just very special cases of Definitions 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, and 2.5, in which the similarity type consists of a single unary operator.

The basic modal logic is a particular case of modal logic with the neighbourhood semantics, as shown in [4]. Here, we reproduce the argument, for the sake of com- pleteness. This section also can be viewed as an warm up to the work in Section 4. The basic similarity type has just one modal operator  of rank 1. So, it is

In this paper, we started the study of polymodal neighbourhood languages. We provided a completeness result for the basic polymodal neighbourhood system and showed how some important systems based on neighbourhood like semantics can be simulated as special cases of our system. A lot of work remains to be done.

