Asia [1,2]. Moreover, the Northeast region of India is consid- ered as a biodiversity hotspot for flora and fauna, particularly of economically important microbes, that are yet to be ex- plored [3]. The fish and meat are the important source of food across the world. The ethnic people of Assam traditionally

used as probiotic bacteria in procurement of yogurt and cheese [20]. The microbiota of fermented fish and meat, the ethnic food of Assam, India is almost next to untouched. Thus, an attempt was made to identify potent indigenous probiotic candidate in traditionally prepared fermented fish and meat products through a comprehensive approach which would originally con- sider the safety features of the strain and potential application of the isolated strain and finally its ability to survive through the entire GIT in order to deliver the health benefits.

Chemicals and consumables used in the study were pur- chased from Merck India Pvt. Ltd., and all the microbiological media were purchased from HiMedia India Pvt. Ltd. Bacterial growth was monitored at 600 nm wave length using UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-1800, Japan). Centrifuga- tions were carried out in Sigma 3-30K centrifuge, Germany.

Bacterial cell surface hydrophobicity was measured by deter- mining the microbial adhesion to hydrocarbons using the protocol described by Crow et al. with minor modification [27]. Briefly, overnight bacterial culture was centrifuged at 10,000X g for 5 min. The pellet was washed twice in phosphate buffer saline (PBS) and suspended in 3 mL of 0.1M KNO3 solution. The absorbance was measured (A0) at 600 nm. 1 mL of toluene was added to the cell suspension in order to form a two-phase system. The two-phase system was vortex for 2 min after 10 min of pre-incubation at room temperature. After 30 min of incu- bation at room temperature, the water and toluene phases got separated. The aqueous phase was then carefully separated and the absorbance was measured at 600 nm (A1). The percentage of the cell surface hydrophobicity (H) was calculated using the following formula [28]:

The isolates were screened for nonpathogenic strains on the basis of their susceptibility against standard clinically sig- nificant antibiotics. The most potent isolate was found to be sensitive against all the antibiotics used in the study. The can- didate probiotic strain was not found to be producing bacteriocin. As far as direct pathogen inhibition is apprehen- sive, many probiotic LAB have been observed to produce antimicrobial substances, and mainly organic acids, espe- cially lactic and acetic acids, etc. [29]. The antagonistic property of the potent probiotic candidate was checked against the most common GI tract bacterial species E. coli (MTCC40). The MIC and MBC values of the potent probiotic candidate were found

