The categorical concept of a monad (see e.g. [19, Ch. VI]) has found multiple appli- cations in mathematical foundations of programming science, and they have become an important design pattern in languages such as Haskell [12, 33] or Scala [27]. De- pending on the context, monads can be viewed as abstract notions of computational effects [26, 34], or as collections to gather computed values [24], or as structures of values to be computed upon [3]. These perspectives are not mutually exclusive: for example, the (covariant) powerset monad  can be seen either as a very simple kind of unstructured collections, or as a carrier of nondeterminism as a computational effect.

(1) preserves preimages and (2) admits what we call a nontrivial idempotent term, then there is no distributive law of T over	(both considered as pointed functors). This contrasts with (but does not contradict) some known positive results about the existence of distributive laws. In [13, Sec. 4] it is proved that every functor that preserves weak pullbacks admits a distributive law over the monad	. By [25, Thm. 2.9], every analytic functor has a distributive law over every commutative monad. (	is commutative, and although it is not analytic, it is easy to find an analytic functor that satisfies our conditions (1) and (2) above.) Finally, [15, Lem. 8] shows a very simple distributive law of any monad over the underlying functor of another monad, provided that the two monads are linked by a monad morphism. In all these works, distributive laws of the functor-over-monad or monad-over-functor shape are constructed, whereas we show the lack of distributive laws of pointed

This is essentially the same proof as in [32, Prop. 3.2] for the probability distri- bution monad taken as T , in that the same sets A, U and functions f, g, h are used there. Here we distilled assumptions so that the proof covers also the case of T   .

is a monad morphism. Both our T and TT arise from monoids as in (8), and monad morphisms between such monads correspond to homomorphisms between the corresponding monoids. However, the only monoid homomorphism from Z2 to our M is trivial and therefore non-injective. This gives a contradiction, since by

Proof. We use the same situation with sets A, U and functions f, g, h  A  U as in (5) in the proof of Theorem 2.4, but we analyse it some more. We remark that this idea is not unexpected. Indeed, in the recent work [7] it is stated that

