Abstract Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) demand reliable and energy efficient paths for critical information delivery to sink node from an event occurrence node. Multipath routing facilitates reli- able data delivery in case of critical information. This paper proposes an event triggered multipath routing in WSNs by employing a set of static and mobile agents. Every sensor node is assumed to know the location information of the sink node and itself. The proposed scheme works as follows:

(1) Event node computes the arbitrary midpoint between an event node and the sink node by using location information. (2) Event node establishes a shortest path from itself to the sink node through the reference axis by using a mobile agent with the help of location information; the mobile agent collects the connectivity information and other parameters of all the nodes on the way and provides the information to the sink node. (3) Event node finds the arbitrary location of the special (middle) intermediate nodes (above/below reference axis) by using the midpoint location information given in step 1. (4) Mobile agent clones from the event node and the clones carry the event type and dis- cover the path passing through special intermediate nodes; the path above/below reference axis looks like an arc. While migrating from one sensor node to another along the traversed path, each mobile agent gathers the node information (such as node id, location information, residual energy, available bandwidth, and neighbors connectivity) and delivers to the sink node. (5) The sink node constructs a partial topology, connecting event and sink node by using the connectivity information delivered by the mobile agents. Using the partial topology information, sink node finds the multi- path and path weight factor by using link efficiency, energy ratio, and hop distance. (6) The sink

In traditional WSNs, sensor nodes periodically gather data and report to the sink node by using the multihop communica- tion. During data gathering, sensors have the ability to per- form in-network aggregation of data packets enroute to the sink node. Using conventional methods of data gathering and processing in WSNs may lead to some of the limitations like excess energy consumption, redundant data transmission, increased latency, and bandwidth overheads. The critical issue in a WSN is the network lifetime which is mainly dependent on the energy of sensor nodes [6].

sented in [10]. Selecting the Bezier curve control points is one of the crucial tasks between the source node and the sink node. The construction of the routes based on Bezier curves can be done locally with a small overhead in terms of transmitted parameters; each relay node can decide who should be the next hop along that particular route toward the sink. The major overheads in using Bezier curve for multipath routing is entire trajectory points are to be encoded with the every transmitted packet from source to sink node.

A distributed, scalable, and localized multipath search pro- tocol to discover multiple node disjoint paths between the sink and the source node is presented in [16]. The distributed mul- tipath routing protocol is capable to search multiple node dis- joint paths. The load balancing algorithm aims to optimally allocate the traffic rate to each path.

An energy efficient multipath routing protocol designed for WSNs is presented in [18]. This protocol tries to utilize the relaxation technique of batteries to maximize the battery life- time and hence increases the overall lifetime of the sensor net- work. Relaxation periods enable the battery to recover a portion of its lost power. It uses a link cost function that de- pends on current residual energy, available buffer size, and link quality (in terms of signal-to-noise ratio) to predict the best next hop during the path construction phase. It routes data across multiple paths to balance the energy consumed across multiple nodes, increase the throughput and minimize packet end-to-end delay.

Non-agent based multipath routing (NABMR) and agent based multipath routing (ABMR) as hazard aware multipath reliable routing algorithms are presented in [19]. Algorithms have considered many of the sensors as well the environment parameters such as sensors energy, reliability, and hazard. ABMR is used for comparing our work; hence, a brief idea on its working is given as follows.

ABMR considers sensor nodes with their sensed parameters such as residual energy, distance, channel reliability, and importance of the sensed data to compute multiple paths from source node to destination/sink node. Mobile agents are trig- gered from source node, which traverse in the network to reach the destination based on sensed parameters. At each node, mo- bile agents migrate to neighbor nodes to gather the sensed information. The mobile agents return back to the sender and select the best node among the neighbor nodes based on sensed information and importance of the data. Once the best node is selected among the neighbors, the best node triggers the mobile agents to its neighbors to perform the task of select- ing a best node. Thus, the process of best node selection con- tinues until destination/sink node is reached. Multiple paths are computed at the destination/sink node based on paths brought by agents.

Some of the drawbacks of existing routing techniques are as follows: lack of intelligence in path discovery and path con- struction, lesser flexibility in relay node selection mechanisms, lack of robust mechanism for critical information transmis- sion, etc. We have proposed an agent based intelligent multi- path discovery scheme by using location information. The cost may seem to increase by including GPS (Global Position- ing System) module (to obtain location information) in the sensor node. However, lot of research work has been done in the area of localization of sensor nodes by using few sensor nodes embedded with GPS modules. Use of localization tech- nique will reduce the cost by implementing GPS modules in se- lected few sensor nodes. The position information advantages are much more compared to GPS module cost.

Rest of the paper is organized as follows: Brief introduction of software agents is discussed in Section 2. Proposed scheme LEDMPR is discussed in Section 3. Simulation model for pro- posed scheme and the result analysis are presented in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes the work and briefs future work.

We briefly describe the comparison of mobile agent based approach with simple message passing. Message passing is a form of communication used in concurrent computing, paral- lel computing, object-oriented programming, and inter process communication. Mobile agent allows processes to migrate from computer to computer where processes split into multiple instances that execute on different machines and return to their point of origin. Mobile agent computing, considered as a spe- cial case of message passing, attempts to move computations as close as possible to the data and makes efficient use of the bandwidth and energy by considerably decreasing the number of messages exchanged between cooperating applications.

for event detection, if an event is detected, it computes the arbitrary midpoint and SINs with the reference axis between the event triggered node and the sink node as discussed in Sec- tion 3.3.2. NMA creates PDA and MKRB. NMA uses MKRB to update the path information. NMA makes the node to oper- ate in sleeping and active mode. In sleeping mode, node does not transmit any data. If residual energy is decreasing, then NMA sends the status of the energy to its nearest sensor node.

directions. First PDA traverses with almost zero degree angle until it reaches the sink node. The second one traverses until it reaches the SIN node with rising angle and from SIN node, it migrates with falling angle to reach the sink node. The third PDA traverses until it reaches the SIN node with falling angle and from SIN node, it migrates with rising angle to reach the sink node. Finally, PDAs deliver the collected partial topology information to the sink node.

to choose more than one path. Multipaths are prioritized based on path weight factor. If event is critical, multipath is used to send PSAs. Each PSA traverses on one path. To reduce the overheads, we have considered maximum of three best dis- joint paths.

Path Setup Agent (PSA): it is the mobile agent triggered by the SMA. It gets the path information from the SKB and tra- verse to the event node to verify the nodes on the path for the considered parameters. After reaching the event node, it up- dates the MKRB with path information.

To test the performance effectiveness of the proposed work, we have simulated the proposed scheme for various network sce- narios using C programming language with a confidence inter- val of 95%. A comparison of the proposed scheme with the existing agent based (ABMR) multipath routing scheme [19] is perform. In this section, simulation model, performance parameters, and result analysis are presented.

communication range. The disjoint paths increase with increase in number of nodes and transmission range. This happens due to agents moving in three different directions and collects the third degree neighbor information. Higher the degree of neighbors, probability of getting more disjoint paths increases.

The proposed scheme presented a location aware event trig- gered disjoint multipath routing in WSN by employing a set of static and mobile agents. An event node triggers the path discovery mechanism by computing the special intermediate nodes between event node and the sink node dynamically. The scheme used set mobile agents for gathering partial topol- ogy information connecting event and sink node by using loca- tion information. The partial topology information is used in computing the node disjoint paths. For node disjoint path, the sink node computes the path weight factor based on the path efficiency, energy ratio and hop distance factor. For crit- ical information, sink node sends multipath information, whereas single path with highest weight factor information is sent for non-critical information to the event node. As com- pared to ABMR, the proposed LEDMPR performed better in terms of packet delivery ratio, energy consumption, over- head and latency. The work can be extended by considering

