Fe3GeTe2 monolayers have attracted widespread attention.6-12 Numerous 2D materials have been computationally predicted by using the high throughput density functional theory (DFT),13 resulting in a few public and open-source 2D materials databases, e.g., Computational 2D Materials Database (C2DB),14 2D Materials Encyclopedia (2DMP),15 Materials Cloud two-dimensional crystals database (MC2D)16, that consist of hundreds to thousands of samples. Although these databases cover the dynamic and thermodynamic stabilities of 2D materials, as well as electronic structure information, there are two problems in the study of magnetism. First, the materials classification of 2DFM in the database is not accurate enough; all possible antiferromagnetic (AFM) orderings were not considered to accurately determine the actual magnetic ground state, and the calculation magnetic moments is still imprecise. Second, only few 2DFM candidates have been experimentally synthesized thus far, and the magnetizations of these 2DFM materials are fairly weak. This indicates that the information on magnetism in the database does not provide accurate guidance for obtaining excellent 2DFM materials in experiments. Trial-and-error experiments and calculations are time-consuming and expensive.

framework to accelerate the discovery of 2D intrinsic ferromagnetic (FM) materials was developed, in which ML is combined with high-throughput DFT calculations.29 A ML-assisted hierarchical screening strategy for predicting magnets with high stability and large anisotropy energy was proposed by Sen et al.30 Nonetheless, it remains a tremendous challenge for ML approaches to accurately predict the magnetic and electronic properties of 2D materials.

In the present work, we present a data-driven ML strategy to study the magnetism in 2D materials. In contrast to traditional DFT calculations, we focus on exploring the material property relationship to establish the simplest correlation between the magnetic structure and features, such as crystal structure, composition, and elemental properties. We trained three ML models using DFT calculations and a recently updated database of 2D materials to obtain features capable of classifying 2D materials as NM, FM, or AFM and predicting 2DFMs with strong magnetization. Our strategy mainly includes three aspects: (i) we first develop an ML model to distinguish magnetic candidates from nonmagnetic candidates according to the composition and elemental properties, and build a model to classify the FM and AFM materials in a high-throughput DFT-calculated dataset; (ii) on the basis of the unpaired d orbital electrons of the transition metal (TM) and features strongly related to the structure, we establish an ML regression model to predict the net magnetic moment of 2DFMs unit cell; and (iii) using the established ML model, we expedite the discovery of novel 2D magnetic materials with strong magnetization.

did not target the Curie point, because Kabiraj et al. have already calculated this through GPU acceleration.28 Additionally, the C2DB database does not contain the Curie point, and no experimental values have been reported for the magnetic transition critical temperatures of most 2D materials.

Our ultimate-goal was to develop novel 2DFM materials with strong magnetization. Therefore, a two-step ML model was constructed. The first step of ML was to classify 2D materials into magnetic and nonmagnetic groups according to their class labels of magnetic states in the C2DB and 2DMP databases, and data-M-N was adopted for this task. Model-M-N performs binary classification to distinguish magnetic and nonmagnetic 2D materials from the dataset data-M-N. We selected the following four algorithms to train this binary model: Bernoulli Naive Bayes (BNB), K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN), Support Vector Machine Classifier (SVC), Random Forest Classifier (RFC). All the ML algorithms used in the present work were

many MXenes and TM dichalcogenides. We found that most 2DFM materials have not been reported, and their structural prototypes are novel and compelling.47 Moreover, we emphasize that the Hf2Br6 with P-62m space group and Os2Cl6 with P6/mmm space group both have a TM in the sixth period; they have not been reported before and are rare in 2D ferromagnetism.

Most reports on magnetic moment prediction focus on the atomic magnetic moment of each TM,52 or the magnetic moment per atom.53 So it is hard to believe that it fully reflects the total magnetization of the system. According to model-F-A and the high-throughput DFT results, there were 383 candidates, including 357 ferromagnetic and 26 energy-degenerate FM/AFM states, which were used to train the regression model of the net magnetic moments of the unit cell. A material information platform (Matminer) was used to describe elemental features of the materials in the dataset.54 Elemental properties mainly

The high-throughput DFT calculations for the 615 candidates took approximately 57600 core-hours on an HPC cluster running on Intel Xeon Gold 5218 processors. The training and screening of the ML classification and regression models took approximately 560 core-hours on an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Platinum 8259CL. The computational time was reduced by more than one order of magnitude during this process; thus, we used ML to accelerate the discovery of new 2DFM materials.

antiferromagnetic 2D samples. Even, a large database of 15733 2D materials contained only 17 samples marked as AFM. In this context, high-through-put DFT calculations for 615 FM samples were performed using our workflow. The retrieved datasets were used to train the FM and AFM classification models. We labeled this dataset as data-F-A. An accurate FM dataset with 383 samples calculated using DFT+U was used to train the regression model of the magnetic moment, and we defined the FM dataset as data-R. Compared with previous studies, the datasets used contained a more extensive and precise variety of

Acknowledgments (or Funding) This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. U19A2077), and Soft Science Research Project of Guangdong Province (No. 2017B030301013). We thank the High Performances Computing Center of School of Advanced Materials, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School for calculation resource.

