Service Oriented Computing (SOC) is a design paradigm that has evolved from earlier paradigms including object-orientation and component-based software engineering. Important features of services are composi- tionality, context-independence, encapsulation and re-usability. To support the formal design and analysis of SOC applications recently a number of Service Oriented Calculi have been proposed. Most of them are based on process algebras enriched with primitives specific of service orientation such as operators for manipulating semi-structured data, mechanisms for describing safe client-service interactions, constructors for composing possibly unreliable services and techniques for services query and discovery. In this paper we show a versatile technique for the definition of Structural Operational Semantics of MarCaSPiS, a Marko- vian extension of one of such calculi, namely the Calculus of Sessions and Pipelines, CaSPiS. The semantics deals in an elegant way with a stochastic version of two-party synchronisation, typical of a service-oriented approach, and with the problem of transition multiplicity while preserving highly desirable mathematical properties such as associativity and commutativity of parallel composition.

The main contribution of this paper is the introduction of a versatile technique for the definition of structured operational semantics (SOS) of stochastic exten- sions of service oriented calculi that handles the problem of transition multiplicity and considers two-party CCS-like interaction which is typical for service oriented approaches. We illustrate the technique providing a Markovian extension for one of the service oriented calculi namely the Calculus of Sessions and Pipelines [3] (CaSPiS). CaSPiS is a core calculus where sessions and pipelines are viewed as nat- ural constructors for structuring client-service interaction and service orchestration. The stochastic extension of CaSPiS, that we shall call MarCaSPiS, permits an inte- grated analysis of both qualitative and quantitative aspects of formal specifications of services. We define a formal structural operational semantics that is used as the basis for associating a Continuous Time Markov Chain (CTMC) with each MarCaSPiS specification while handling appropriately and naturally the problem of dealing with multiple transitions leading via the same action to the same state. In our approach, the transition relation associates each pair of MarCaSPiS terms and actions to a function from MarCaSPiS terms to transition rates. This function maps each MarCaSPiS term into the rate with which it can be reached from the term at the source of the transition, via the action.

R, that might provide new definitions for s, the synchronisations rates occurring in P|Q have to be updated to take into account the possibility of new synchronisations. This is essential to guarantee standard properties of parallel composition like, for instance, associativity. Indeed, the rules for parallel composition will be defined in such a way that the rates of each action are always updated to consider the role of each partner of the parallel composition.  Finally, the adopted semantics will

In this paper we have presented MarCaSPiS, a stochastic extension of CaSPiS (Cal- culus of Sessions and Pipelines), together with a structured operational semantics that uses a novel technique to deal with the problem of transition multiplicity. The proposed approach is somewhat reminiscent to that of Deng et al. [12] where terms of a CSP-like probabilistic process algebra are associated to a discrete probability distribution over such terms. However, differently from [12], we consider a CCS-like synchronisation in a stochastic context.

The work presented in this paper is a first step towards definition of a set of formal tools for specifying and verifying quantitative properties of service oriented architectures. Indeed, we plan to study stochastic modal logics that permit char- acterising interesting properties of services and that simplifying the formalisation of stochastic properties of MarCaSPiS systems. Moreover, we also plan to develop tools that, in the spirit of [9], permit automatically verifying stochastic behaviours of MarCaSPiS processes by relying on powerful and well studied automatic tools like MRMC and PRISM.

