min-1); b) increase of blood cholesterol levels following uptake of dietary cholesterol (absorption up to 3 h following a meal); solid line: mdiet = 1 mg/min, dashed line: mdiet = 1mg/min and increased mout= 1.6 mg/min; c) effect of the increased cholesterol level due to decreased cholesterol transport to muscles and peripheral tissues and decreased usage as a precursor of vitamin D and steroid hormones (mtis = 0 mg/min, solid line) and counter-acting this increase by decreasing de novo cholesterol synthesis (k = 1000 mg2/min, dashed line) and d) increase of blood cholesterol levels due to lowering the activity of the CETP protein (k12 = 3.3 min-1 and k21=1.3 min-1)

based on the liver biopsy, a more invasive way than the standard blood test, could provide the essential insights into the underlying causes of disturbance of cholesterol homeostasis and direct further diagnosis (e.g. genetic testing of mutations in HDLs and LDLs receptors or the main apolipoproteins components (ApoA1 in HDLs, or ApoB in chylomicrons and LDLs).

Maintaining cholesterol homeostasis is a complex process that takes place at the genetic, cellular and tissue levels. Disturbances in the cholesterol balance, espe- cially high levels of blood cholesterol levels lead to coronary artery diseases and are estimated to cause 2.6 millions of deaths each year. Furthermore, statins, lower- ing de novo cholesterol synthesis, are the most common prescribed medications, all showing that our cholesterol health is of importance. Whereas many mathematical models have been developed to better understand the mechanism of glucose-insulin regulatory system [17] (of similar complexity and significance as cholesterol, leading to another prevalent disease, namely diabetes), the modelling approaches to choles- terol homeostasis are limited. Here, we showed that even modelling the keys aspects behind cholesterol homeostasis in the two-compartment model enables investigation of the elevated blood cholesterol levels in the physiological and diagnostic context. We have showed that the changes in the blood cholesterol levels can be obtained in the predictive fashion, when changing the values of the model parameters. Fur- thermore, we demonstrated the models potential to investigate different treatment strategies to lower high blood cholesterol values (via reduction of de novocholesterol

Presenting a relatively simple two-compartment model of cholesterol transport and de novo synthesis, we would like to highlight the importance of mathematical modelling in improving understanding of the cholesterol homeostasis as well as in aiding the diagnosis and treatment of the life-treating high blood cholesterol levels. Advanced models could not only help to elucidate the relationships between reg- ulation of cholesterol homeostasis at the gene, cellular and tissue level, but could bring us a step closer to a personalized medicine in preventing and treating high cholesterol levels. We have now started developing such advanced model by focusing first on the inclusion of the aforementioned function of the gallbladder.

