Medical imaging help medical doctors provide faster and more efficient diagnoses to their patients. Medical image quality directly influences diagnosis. However, when medical images are acquired, they often present degradations such as poor detail or low contrast. This work presents an algorithm that improves contrast and detail, preserving the natural brightness of medical images. The proposed method is based on multiscale top-hat transform by reconstruction. It extracts multiple features from the image that are then used to enhance the medical image. To quantify the performance of the proposed method, 100 medical images from a public database were used. Experiments show that the proposal improves contrast, introducing less distortion and preserving the average brightness of medical images.

This paper presents a technique for contrast enhancement, detail and brightness preservation in medical imaging. The proposal is inspired by the algorithm of Bai et al. [4] and is based on the multiscale top-hat transform by reconstruction. With the geodesic reconstruction, in the transformed top-hat, we seek to preserve some features that are connected in the image. Thus, by introducing this variation we ob- tain medical images with low distortion, contrast enhancement, detail improvement and preservation of their natural brightness.

Mathematical morphology methods are based on the structural properties of ob- jects. These methods use mathematical principles and relationships between cate- gories to extract the components of an image, which are useful for describing the shape of areas. The morphological operators are non-linear and have as input two sets of data.The first set contains the original image and the second describes the structuring element [27].

The proposed method for medical image contrast enhancement is a variation of the method described by Bai et al. [4] for grayscale images, called Multiscale Mophology for Contrast Enhancement (MMCE). This method extracts multiple bright and dark features from the image using the classic top-hat transform. The proposed variation consists of using the concept of geodesic reconstruction in the top-hat transform. This allows to enhance the visual quality of the image. The proposed method takes into account the operators connected in the images, making the improved images less distorted, preserving the details and the average brightness.

The experiment consists of comparing the proposed algorithm (GR-MMCE) with other techniques in the literature, taking into account SD, PSNR, AMBE and PL as assessment metrics. The aim is to show how good the proposed method is on enhancing contrast and preserving the brightness in medical imaging. Also, the advantages obtained against the other methods will be made known.

For the analysis of results, 100 medical images were selected from a public database [18]. Here we can find images of dental x-rays, hands, legs, backs, thorax, images of retinal vessels, ultrasound, among others. Tests were performed using the HE, CLAHE, MMCE algorithms and the proposed method. The HE and CLAHE algorithms were implemented using the MATLAB program (using the default pa- rameters for CLAHE). The MMCE and the proposed algorithms were implemented in the ImageJ framework [26], the input parameters were the original medical image f , the number of iterations n = 7, and the initial disk structuring element B with radius r = 1.

In this work we presented an algorithm to improve medical images using the mul- tiscale top-hat transform by geodesic reconstruction. Morphological reconstruction allows us to preserve the details of the image. The performance of the proposed method was assessed with metrics measuring contrast enhancement, conservation of average brightness, signal-to-noise ratio of the image and the relationship between image distortion and clarity. The numerical results show that the proposed method performs well in PSNR, PL and AMBE metrics. It also improves the contrast of the original image according to SD. This indicates that the improved images have low distortion, preserve their natural brightness and have enhanced contrast.

