[43] studied the piston flow characteristics by a discrete hydrostatic model. Chen et al. [44] calculated a leakage between the slipper and swashplate in the pump with SVPP but lacked experimental validation. Zhao et al. [45] used CFD software to simulate the submerged cavitation jet in the unloading groove, of which the theoretical analysis is absent.

Fp, Fsp, and FN belong to non-inertial forces. Specifically, Fp acts at the piston bottom, and the direction is along its axis. For the conve- nience of the solution, the force is concentrated at point B. The matrix expression of the force and force arm is as follows:

Under the action of Fp, Fsp, and Fa, the piston-slipper assembly squeezes the swashplate, and the swashplate generates the support re- action force (FN). The Z-component force of FN cancels with the above three forces, according to which the specific expression can be found. The reaction point of FN is A.

are offset by the shaft splines. The CCB in the Z-axis relies on a balance between the oil pressure in the piston chamber, the oil film carrying force and the central spring force, which determines the lubrication state of the oil film. The oil pressure and the oil film carrying force are a pair of mutually canceling hydraulic forces. Normally, the oil film reaction force is slightly greater than the piston chamber pressure, causing the oil film to push the CCB away from the SVP. The central spring force is

The exact model for calculating SVPP leakage is derived from the established oil film lubrication model. For example, the qinner is the leakage of all fluid elements at the inner boundary, which can be gained by calculating the longitude velocity and flow area of a fluid element. It should be noted in the calculation that the oil film thickness is not uniform and causes the fluid element number on the inner boundary to be different for different angles. Therefore, the qinner is calculated as:

14. The increase in speed and spring stiffness makes the CCB tilt azimuth close to ODC, but the variation of the CCB tilt angle is diametrically opposite. Reasons for the above tilt behavior were specifically analyzed in conjunction with CCB dynamics.

For the CCB tilt azimuth: First, the load pressure dominates the moment Mcy_Y of CCB, which is independent of speed and spring stiff- ness. Second, the increase in spring stiffness and speed induces improvement in the swashplate reaction force and radial inertia force. These tilt CCB toward ODC.

the central spring stiffness affects the Z-axis force and X-axis moment of the SVPP. A smaller stiffness deteriorates the tilt behavior of the CCB, with increased leakage and metal contact. A larger stiffness provides a beneficial effect on SVPP, but such enhancement is limited.

This work was supported by the National Key Research and Devel- opment Program of China [Grant No. 2020YFB2007100]; the Major 2021 of science and technology in Hunan province-top 10 key tech- nology projects [Grant No. 2021GK1070]; Changsha Science and Technology Plan Project [Grant No. KH2003025]; the Project of State Key Laboratory of Precision Manufacturing for Extreme Service Perfor- mance [Grant No. ZZYJKT2021-16]; Postgraduate Scientific Research Innovation Project of Hunan Province [Grant No. CX20220262]; and the

R. Ivantysyn, A. Shorbagy, J. Weber, An Approach to Visualize Lifetime Limiting Factors in the Cylinder Block/Valve Plate Gap in Axial Piston Pumps, in: ASME/ BATH 2017 Symposium on Fluid Power and Motion Control, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Sarasota, Forida, USA, 2017: p. V001T01A064. https://doi. org/10.1115/FPMC2017-4327.

