The implicit actions that a system might take will depend on a number of factors, for example whether the individual has a mobile device, what its characteristics are, and who else is in the space. The MATCH system [17], for example, is designed to provide assisted living for people with special needs. When a potentially adverse event is detected a number of actions are taken by the system depending on context. If the carer is in the same room as the individual then the system does nothing. If the carer is in the same house but not in the room, then the carer is alerted either by sound or by a message on a mobile device depending on the ambient conditions in the room where they are located. If the carer is not in the same house then the surveillance centre for the sheltered housing is informed.

A class of ubiquitous systems forms the basis for the proposed quantitative analysis of user related properties. The systems in this class aim to enhance buildings by providing information for the guidance of those within the environment and are ap- plicable to a range of domains. Two examples are used to illustrate commonalities: a guidance system and a system to assist out-patients in a hospital.

Several people may be in a particular space at the same time. For this reason more than one direction is displayed along with its associated destination, so that the visitor can choose the one that is relevant to them. Since collective behaviours are of concern it is assumed that a space has a specific capacity. Having arrived at a space where there is a display there are four possibilities.

The second example is designed to assist out-patients at a hospital. A patient arrives with an appointment. The aim of the ubiquitous system is to provide information and guidance to patients so that they are (1) kept up to date with information about waiting times (2) guided to the next stage of their patient journey when it is necessary for them to move on. Patients may have mobile devices, in which case the information that is relevant to them is sent direct to their device, or do not have appropriate mobile devices in which case they are issued with a sensor/visitor card which can be used by the environment to recognise what they must do next. In the latter case public displays are updated with the number of the patient and information about wait times or guidance about where to go next. A simple system might recognise four types of patient:

that they occupy if they do not have the mobile device. The system will reschedule patients of type (iv) so that the most available of (B) and (X) is scheduled. If there is time then a wellness check is offered (W).

Both examples have common features. They involve individuals reaching destina- tions. In one case the route to the destination is determined by the system once the destination of the visitor is recognised, in the other it depends on patient type, all patients aim to reach the same destination. Hence both fit into a general class of systems which push information depending on context. In each case people respond to the information by taking action that changes their context in some way.

All these factors are likely to affect the level of satisfaction or anxiety amongst users of these environments. Their experience however may also be dependent on external factors and the expectations users bring with them. Other processes that cannot be modelled within the design are implicated. However it is only by recognising and integrating factors that relate the system design to these external factors that progress can be made. While the factors at the top of the list are more familiar in the context of usability, those towards the end of the list are more novel in content from a human-computer interaction perspective. These properties have the following characteristics:

Implicit interaction in the guidance system may be modelled either by bringing into focus an individual or a small group of individuals within the system, or by focussing on collective behaviour while abstracting from individual behaviour. A model is only valuable in design if it has formative value. It should allow the exploration of the impact of design options and enable a comparison between options. If this can be done effectively before the design is deployed then downstream costs are likely to be reduced. This analysis, while technical, should be presented in a form that is meaningful to those who are concerned with human factors aspects and will visualise the design represented by the model.

[12] is that it is possible to combine a functional model that captures key design assumptions with techniques that enable analysis of stochastic behaviour. This eases the constructive use of the results in further design iterations. PEPA will not be described in detail. The proposed PEPA specification is based on a qualitative model described in PROMELA [13] that captured more of the functional details of

for different destinations are still handled by the arbitrator which will start up new slots via the Slot Manager as long as there are empty slots available. Slots become free and the arbitrator is informed via the Slot manager (sfreelae) and returns to its initial state. The activities internal to arbitrators and slots are considered to be relatively fast, which explains the chosen fixed rate 100.

In the example for analysis there are four kinds of visitor. One kind starting in a heading for d, one starting from c heading to e, one starting from a heading to c and the last kind starting from d and heading to a. There are 400 visitors in total, so with the specified rates for v0 to v3 the groups are composed of respectively 25, 75, 100 and 200.

Questions and challenges relate to the sort of analysis that can be done using this model and whether these techniques are relevant to the properties discussed in the earlier section. For this small example the design parameters that are being adjusted include the design of the display, for example how many slots should it contain at the same time. It would be concerned with the size of the display, how many can see it at the same time. It should enable an exploration of the use of different paths and how these paths affect the congestion of the system. This would support the design of

These examples give a very preliminary indication of the role that stochastic model checking can play. However it can be seen that some of the characteristics of the environment relevant to the experience that users could have within it can be explored. This analysis serves a similar role using a more abstract model to that played by the qualitative model checking reported in [10]. However in the present case the same model can be used for verification of collective behaviour.

These preliminary results show some promise. They provide insight into the impact of a ubiquitous system design on the congestion to users in different traffic situations. The design of the system can be assessed in terms of different assump- tions about the size of display (how many can see it), the number of slots on the display and the routes that are defined for reaching the different destinations. These variables can be manipulated. This analysis could be used for example as a basis for changing paths dynamically within the ubiquitous system to create a situation

