Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) are present in many settings addressing a myriad of purposes. Examples are Internet-of-Things (IoT) or sensing software embedded in appliances or even specialised meters that measure and respond to electricity demands in smart grids. Due to their pervasive nature, they are usually chosen as recipients for larger scope cyber-security attacks. Those promote system-wide disruptions and

also referred as GridLock or BlackIoT, against a theoretical power grid, containing various types of power plants. It employs Continuous-Time Markov Chains where elements such as Power Plants and Botnets are modelled under normal or attack situations to evaluate the effect of CLCA in power reliant infrastructures. We showcase our modelling approach in the scenario of a power supplier (e.g. power plant) being targeted by a botnet. We demonstrate how our modelling approach can quantify the impact of a botnet attack and be abstracted for any CPS system involving power load management in a smart grid. Our results show that by prioritising the type of power-plants, the impact of the attack may change: in particular, we find the most impacting attack times and show how different strategies impact their success. We also find the best power generator to use depending on the current demand and strength of attack.

In this application context, it is worth defining a CPS and its roles. It consists of components with two parts, i.e. a computing part integrated with a physical counterpart, both connecting and communicating with other CPS to achieve com- mon objectives. For example, a CPS could be an embedded system attached to a heartbeat sensor component to collect meaningful health data from patients inside a care unit, or could be smart meters exchanging data on power system energy transmission and distribution. These infrastructures usually encompass a sizeable number of entities in hyper-connected environments, deployed to help users improve productivity, bottleneck assessments and much more. The presence of general pur- pose CPS in residential, commercial and industrial settings is ubiquitous as many vendors offer solutions that vary from smart home sensing devices to closed circuit televisions.

The paper is organised as follows: Section 2 will address cyber security concerns and related work. On Section 3 we will discuss our modelling, with our problem formalisation and a simple model. We explain our cyber security model applied to CPS on Section 4. Section 5 will describe our results and findings and in Section 6 we will discuss final considerations, model extensions and future work.

more common for smart infrastructures, such as smart buildings and smart cities. The core idea is to have self regulating power supplies that adjust energy levels due to expected consumption and loads. What this means is that a targeted attack could be aimed at a specific company or location to turn off power and overpower the load management system. What is made evident by these examples [10,31], is that this threat is no longer a far-fetched scenario, but rather, a very real likelihood. As a response to such challenges in power related research we have created a stochastic model that can be used by smart infrastructure managers to evaluate the threat on this system and devise countermeasures to tackle disruptions. Our proposed modelling approach observes the impact on security of different control mechanisms of a CPS grid under a botnet attack. In particular, we show the likelihood of the success under different setups: a detailed analysis is presented in

Another work which studied coordinated attacks by botnets and disruptions to the power grid was done by Soltan et al., 2018 [31]. Their work introduces the concept of Manipulation on Demand via IoT (MADIoT), through simulations they show how external influences of high power devices can cause disruptions and power outages. They have demonstrated the interdependence between supply of power and the demand, and how this can be exploited to cause disruptions. These types of attack are the core focus of our work, however, Soltan and his colleagues focused on simulations of attacks. In contrast, it is our wish to quantify what these attacks mean from the perspective of a potential supplier. Through model checking we could investigate how the attacks affect the power system, and we can adapt it to better adjust, prepare, or respond to these attacks.

We are working on the assumption that our designed adversary has gained illicit access to a large number of IoT devices and formed a botnet. Using this botnet, our envisioned attacker targets a smart grid infrastructure through excess energy usages and causes a spike which damages the load controller. When a power plant experiences very high load, it will employ one out of three mitigation controls, primary, secondary or tertiary [10,31].

The effectiveness of a spike will also depend on the type of supplier providing the energy. Whilst if a nuclear supplier is spiked it might take a very long time to recover, gas power plant have a much higher adjustment rate and are therefore more resilient to these attacks. In our model we mimic the response behaviours of hydro, gas and nuclear power. We model the demand borrowing real values 9 in the UK, which we scale down to limit the number of power suppliers in the model. The attacker is modelled at every hour of the day (with the mean power usage at that time), and we calculate the success and impact rate of the attacks.

Markov Chains (MC) are a powerful modelling formalism to describe behavioural properties of systems with simple primitives [23] proposed in the early 20th century by the mathematician Andrey Markov. However, they do not appear in the context of time shared systems if not by mid 1960 for scalability purposes [29,32]. The idea behind MC is to abstract a system using only states, transitions and rates or probabilities to model behaviour. Solutions of Markovian based systems usually employ direct or iterative solvers, yielding state permanence probabilities. It is possible to model situations where randomness representation is important; this has been successfully applied throughout the years in different domains such as

account the set of prior visited states, e.g, the past up to this point is irrelevant. A CTMC shows similarities with a Labelled Transition System (LTS), but it is different as its transitions are decorated with exponentially distributed (memoryless) delays or rates instead of labels. Another difference is that in LTS (also known as Kripke structure or Finite Automata) the labels on transitions allow the modelling of non- determinism, being a powerful formalism used in formal verification due to its high scalability and applicability [13].

(iii) restart (r), detached from the grid, not generating, nor supplying, and in the need of a restart. The states in SD model the demand D loading the grid at the average expected level m (for medium) plus or minus small deltas, modelled by two additional states l (for low) and h (for high). The attacker B is a botnet controlling a large amount of infected devices. Its states in SB are modelled as simply 0, when the infected controlled devices are all off, or 1 when those devices are switched on. In summary we have the following states

control strategy determines how effectively the load is re-balanced. We define the optimum controller strategy as that one which minimises the time where a system is in a state of over supply or over demand. What dictates the effectiveness of the controller is the responsiveness of the PGs, i.e the controller decides that a PG needs to be turned on to meet the demand, if the PG is a very slow one, this will lead to large amounts of time offline. By modelling different controller strategies, one can easily envision that an optimal controller can be selected against a specific attack and under a specific load. The less trivial research question is whether an optimal strategy can be found to optimise the power supply for a specific grid or CPS. We investigate this problem by modelling the power supply in Sec. 3, and look at the way three different controller strategies impact the effectiveness of a spike Botnet attack. We could potentially have a set of PG to work with (Nuclear, Gas, Electricity, Wind, and so on) where the Spike Botnet engages in an attack-defence game to roughly estimate the state of the controller to direct decisions on when to switch devices on or off.

In Scenario A, we model two systems A-1 and A-2 under a high load. A-1 has very responsive PGs (such as gas plants), and A-2 has less responsive PGs. We showcase that in the system with faster response rate the time in which the system is in over demand is much lower. On the other hand, due to slow startup times, in the second system the time in over demand will be much higher.

In Scenario B, we model two more systems, B-1 and B-2, each of the systems shows the same number of PGs, but while the demand of B-1 is high, the demand of B-2 is low. We show that when the system is in a high demand period, an attacker is much more likely to disrupt the powergrid than if under a low demand period. The scenario matches the values for Scenario A-1, but the demand is altered between B-1 and B-2 from 50 to 100. This case highlights the different situations that can take place if a Spike botnet were to target the power grid, in our in depth experiments mimicking the power usage of real world scenario we take this a step further and examine it on various different types of PG such as gas and solar plants.

Among the several interesting analysis that could potentially be performed using our model, we direct the focus to the probability for the over demand when a spike is successful. In such a case, we consider an attack successful if the spike makes a PG go offline, after having caused an excess in demand. The controller prioritises the order of activation of PGs (we assume all are under its control). If all preferred controllers are on, an alternative type will be activated.

The problem addressed in this work tackled Unit Commitment and presented models to enhance power plant responses to active attacks targeting the energy infrastructure. We have built a CTMC mapping to a power grid mixed with a network of CPS for a set of scenarios. We have considered situations for normal operation (assuming no attacks) in conjunction with scenarios where attackers act- ing in coordination could take advantage of infected CPS to cause electric peaks or surges, which in turn would increase or decrease power consumption in relatively short time periods. We have also presented scenarios where power managers could enact mitigation policies, e.g. choosing other power sources or disconnecting parts of the grid to meet demand. The model described here could also be applied in another mechanism where managers could differentiate localised abnormal usage from directed attacks and take measures to avoid grid disruptions more effectively. Our results show the numerical impact of addressing mitigation strategies to avoid peaks using CTMCs to capture intricate power related behaviours. We show how different power generators produce different results under attack and also that a intelligent controller could be designed to alter the priority of power generation

As next work, we are envisioning to extend the model to address more attackers with different patterns of behaviours as well as adding costs and rewards to states deemed important for later analysis. We could also add extra states to model the activation of other external power sources such as secondary or even tertiary mechanisms and their relation to attacks. The model could also be scaled in terms of different CPS types and wattage needs, where we could evaluate the impact on new security measures to avoid powering up new plants or blacking out major grid portions in response.

It is also our intention to work with simulation models mapping and addressing some of the concerns provided here, where we could enrich it with more fine tuned behaviours to capture other characteristics of power plants as well as other adversary profiles. It is also worth mentioning that in the work concerning GridShock [10], the authors suggest other power plants start up mechanisms in the event of sudden disconnections, e.g. black restart, where portions of the grid are turned on each time. We could analyse these procedures in combination with the notion that cyber attackers may profit from such slow restarts to disrupt the grid and stop energy to

