In other words, the yk distribution asymptotically tends to a multivariate Gaussian distribution N y0 + kSTp, kW (S, p) . Our contribution includes the analytical ex- pressions for the mean and the variance-covariance matrix which depend only on S and p. In the appendix, we also provide the reader with a complete characteriza- tion of the degenerated cases for the limiting distribution depending on the form of the stoichiometry matrix. The rest of the article presents theoretical and practical

Remark that a well-suited V can be calculated using the Choleski decomposi- tion [13] or the spectral decomposition. The idea behind the definition is to deter- mine the appropriate affine map that transforms yk into a centered reduced normal random variable. The soundness of the approach is demonstrated by the following proposition.

In this work, we have studied the asymptotic distribution of the molecular quanti- ties of a reaction network under a strong steady-state hypothesis, using the SSA. We provided analytical expressions for the mean and the variance-covariance matrix which depend on S and p. We presented several theoretical and practical conse- quences of this theorem: the possibility to derive confidence ellipsoids, the model validation problem, the convergence of the ratios of accumulation speeds. Toy ex- amples illustrates our results.

A very interesting aspect of our work is that the constraints-based approach can be considered as a probabilistic counterpart of FBA. In FBA, the fluxes f quantify the occurrence rates of each reaction in steady-state with the main hypothesis that the fluxes are balanced such that the internal metabolites concentrations remain constant. Thus, FBA-based methods are constraints-based approaches where f is assumed to belong to the so-called steady-state cone. In our approach, internal

chemical species are also considered to be balanced. While FBA only concentrates on fluxes at the population level, our original approach at the cell level not only integrates the metabolite balance constraints but can also make use of the second moments (variances and co-variances) of the outputs. Hence, we can integrate the intrinsic variability of productions at the cell level. However, the additional con- straints are no longer linear but quadratic (and not necessarily positive quadratic) and cannot be solved (for instance) by the classical Dantzig simplex algorithm. Thus, the constraints-based approach opens perspectives to apply efficient con- straint resolution or optimization techniques.

