teen rats; the group of 14 rats was fed with a high-fat diet (HFD) and the other group of 7 rats consumed the control diet. Eight weeks after the diet regimen started, half of the rats from the HFD group were shifted to the niacin-supplemented diet (HFND; 1 mg niacin/kg diet) while the remaining rats continued on the HFD for another 6 weeks. Results obtained showed that HFD-fed obese rats exhibited significant increase in body weight gain, reduced glucose tolerance, insulin sensitivity and increased adiposity, as well as altered lipid profile after 8 weeks of feeding compared with the controls. However, niacin-supplemented rats showed reduced weight gain and body weight compared with HFD-induced obese rats even in the absence of a significant difference in the food intake among the groups in the ex- periment. In addition, the rats showed an improved time-course glucose control and insulin sensitivity as demonstrated by a significantly lower area under curve (AUC) values for the glucose curves. The plasma levels of cholesterol, triglycerides and low density lipoprotein (LDL) returned towards control values in rats supplemented with niacin compared with obese rats. The findings suggest that niacin exerts beneficial effect on adiposity, glucose toler- ance and insulin sensitivity, and plasma lipids, and that it specifically modulates the level of serum adiponectin under obese condition.

Obesity is characterized by excessive accumulation or in- crease in adipose tissue mass [1]. The adipose tissue secretes numerous bioactive substances [2] collectively known as adipocytokines. Adiponectin is the most abundant of these adipocytokines and is known to have anti-inflammatory, anti- atherogenic and insulin-sensitizing properties [3,4]. It modulates a number of metabolic processes, including glucose regula- tion and fatty acid oxidation [5], and plays an important role in the suppression of metabolic derangements that cause insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) [6].

The level of plasma CHOL in the obese group was signifi- cantly higher (p < 0.01) than control rats. However, niacin- supplemented rats showed a significant (p < 0.05) decrease in CHOL concentration compared with HFD-obese rats. Simi- larly, obese rats showed a significant (p < 0.05) increase in TRIG concentration, indicating hypertriglyceridemia as compared with normal rats. Supplementation with niacin however failed to attenuate the development of hypertriglyceridemia. HFD- fed obese rats showed a significant (p < 0.001) increase in LDL concentration compared with control rats; however, niacin

[29] have reported that niacin treatment has modest improve- ment on glucose control as it lowers the accumulative AUC during oral glucose tolerance test in a rodent model of obesity and type 2 diabetes. However, Li et al. [32] also found that nicotinamide-treated rats had impaired glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity when compared with the control rats. The inconsistent results observed between studies with obese sub- jects and non-obese suggest that responses to niacin treatment may be dependent on specific pathophysiological conditions.

One of the underlying factors for glucose control is insulin, its level and sensitivity. In this study, niacin supplementa- tion also enhanced insulin sensitivity in obese rats. Increased glucose tolerance and reduction in the concentration of plasma insulin can be related to increased insulin sensitivity and lower degree of disorder of lipid metabolism [33]. Excess blood lipid has serious impact on whole body metabolic function and pro- found negative effect on insulin signalling within the muscle tissue [34]. Dyslipidemia, which is characterized by elevated TG, low HDL and increased LDL, usually precedes glucose in- tolerance and decrease insulin sensitivity through the inhibition of insulin-mediated glucose transporters in skeletal muscle and by contributing to hyperinsulinaemia [35]. Controlling dyslipidemia by niacin in the present study therefore appears to be an attractive target for improving the aspect of meta- bolic deficits that result from deleterious hormonal effects of adipose tissues. An approach to restore insulin sensitivity is a critical focus to achieving glucose homeostasis under obese conditions.

this study, niacin supplementation significantly increased the level of serum adiponectin in HFD-induced obese rats. This sug- gests that the niacin-mediated improvements in glucose control and insulin sensitivity may in part be due to the alteration of adiponectin signalling. There is a consensus in literature that adiponectin generally exerts insulin sensitizing, anti- inflammatory and anti-apoptotic actions on a number of different cell types [36]. Because a negative correlation exists between various hormones (including insulin) associated with insulin resistance and obesity on one hand, and adiponectin secretion on the other hand [37], niacin may indirectly mod- erate insulin secretion via its effect on adiponectin.

