implemented with super coding (SC) and successive interference cancellation (SIC) with filters at the transceiver of NOMA efficiently utilize the spectrum with no loss. It allows several users to multi- plex on the identical channel, to access the spectrum simultane- ously in the power domain. Therefore, SUs can utilize the spectrum bot at the presence and absence of PUs which increase the throughput of the system [5]. In this work, we combine NOMA into matched filter detection technique to acquire a smarter spec- trum allocation. To the best of my knowledge NOMA based CR is not implemented so far. Further, Several parameters like Pd, Pfa, BER Vs SNR and PSD are discussed to analyse the performance of the proposed system.

nominal 5G and IoT communication rates. The results are analyzed to assess the performance of the proposed systems from different perspectives. In this work [17] Matched filter spectrum detectior is designed and evaluated. the PD) and PFA at several SNR values are studeied. It is observed that the proposed technique efficiently detect the unsed spectrum. The simulation results shows a improve detection at 25 dB SNR.

[11] presented a cooperative spectrum modal based on DS func- tion. The sensing performance of the proposed system is enhanced by analyzing the power, waveform and spectrum of the licensed users. In this work [12] joint optimization technique based on lagrange decomposition is presented. The main objective of the work is to improve the spectrum shortage, to provide better.

[15],Cooperative Cr for several users is implemented by utilizing the Cyclostationary technique. The simulation results are analysed with 0.01 Pfa and 0.9 Pd and it is onserved that the proposed tech- nique enhanced the detection for multiple users at the cost of high omputational complexity. In this work [16] joint optimization technique modelled on the Lagrange dual optimization is designed to achieve the resolution to the optimization tribulations in the 5G communication system. An energy efficient system is projected to reduce the average power of the IoT while maintaining the

To the best of my knowledge integration of Matched filter spec- trum sensing technique into NOMA for QAM-64 and QAM-256 has not been studied in the literature. The main objective of the pro- posed work is to design a NOMA based Cr: to use the spectrum in an efficient manner, enhance the spectral performance and qual- ity of service. It is observed that the proposed technique enhances the performance of Pd, BER and reduces the Pfa. PSD of the pro- posed system is also described for different overlapping factor. The simulation results reveal that the sensing time of the proposed technique is less and detection is achieved at minimum SNR for a static threshold value.

