Consider a scenario where multiple supermarket or stores share big warehouses that stockpile supplies for them. Each store is located some distance away from a warehouse and they pay the costs associated with maintaining its products in the warehouse and the transportation costs to its specific location. Such scenario can be seen as a facility location problem, where each store is a terminal and each warehouse location is a possible facility. In the classical optimization version, the view point of the warehouse company is given priority, and each terminal can be seen as being controlled by a central authority in order to minimize opening and connection costs globally. When we consider the fact that each supermarket is competing with each other, this approach of global optimization is not possible to be adopted anymore. In order to analyze such scenarios, we can use game theory.

In the fair cost facility location games we analyze, each player controls multiple terminals, and can move them simultaneously to minimize their own costs. For singleton games, terminals sharing opening costs evenly means the same as players sharing these costs evenly, since players and terminals are effectively the same in these scenarios. However when players control multiple terminals, the same is not true. In our paper we use the term fair cost to mean that in any strategy profile each facility has its opening cost shared evenly among all terminals that connect to it, i.e. if in a certain strategy profile a player a has two terminals connected to a

There have been multiple works examining facility location problems from the out- look of game theory. The class of valid utility games [12, 14, 18] can be viewed as facility games when both facilities and players are controlled by singleton players. There is a whole area in game theory focused in cooperative games, and Goemans and Skutella [8] studied cooperative facility location games.

The capacitated version of the game was considered by Rodrigues and Xavier [16]. They show that for the metric singleton fair cost facility location game, the PoA can be unbounded, while the PoS is Hk, where k is the number of players. Furthermore, they show that it is NP-hard to decide whether there is PNE in singleton capacitated facility location games with arbitrary opening cost sharing.

In this paper we extend the results from Cardinal and Hoefer [2] to fair cost facility location, proving that it is NP-hard to decide whether there is a PNE in this game, even in the metric case, as long as players are allowed to control multiple terminals. For this, we prove that there are fair cost facility location game instances with no PNE. We base this proof in the instances without PNE in weighted network design games used by Chen and Roughgarden in [3]. Finally, we prove that the PoS of this game can be as inefficient as the PoA for both the uncapacitated metric case and the general capacitated case.

In Section 3, we present the formal definitions needed to understand our paper and define our game. In Section 4, we provide instances with no PNE and prove the NP-hardness of PNE existence, as well as link these instances to weighted games. In Section 5, we prove that the price of stability is as poor as the price of anarchy in both the uncapacitated and capacitated versions of fair cost facility location games. Finally, in Section 6 we present our final remarks and discuss future work.

Given a strategy profile S, for Capacitated Facility Location Games with Fair Cost Sharing (CFLG-FC), the definitions of players i payment, pi(S), and social cost, C(S), are the same as before for the uncapacitated game. However, to ensure that capacity restrictions are respected, if a player i in the solution S has one of its terminals connected to f where xf (S) > uf , then a prohibitively large constant cost Uc is added to the payment of player i, i.e., it pays pi(S)+ Uc.

For player Pa, there are only two feasible strategies: either all terminals connect to f3, or t2 connects to f1 and t5 connects to f5. The same happens for player Pc: either all terminals connect to f4, or t4 connects to f2 and t6 connects to f5. For player Pb terminal t1 has to choose between f1 and f2, while terminal t3 will always connect to f5 in any PNE. The proof is based on players Pa and Pc having different facility preferences when presented with mirrored choices from player Pb. To achieve this, we use the fact that player Pa has squared times the weight than Pc does, as well as carefully constructed opening costs.

Now we prove the theorem by contradiction. Suppose that there exists a PNE for this instance. Terminal t1 can be connected to either f1 or f2. First assume t1 is connected to f1. Then, player Pc has no incentive to connect to either f2 or f5, as shown by (7) and (8), and connects all its terminals to f4. Since player Pc does not connect to f5, player Pa also does not have enough incentive to connect to f1 and f5, as shown by (3) and (4), and connects all its terminals to f3. With this, player Pb is paying alone for f1, and since f2 is cheaper to connect, it is not in a PNE, and thus t1 cannot connect to f1 in any PNE.

Proof. First notice that it is NP-hard to verify whether a given solution S to an instance of the FLG-FC is a PNE or not when players control multiple facilities, since for each player we need to solve an optimization facility location problem on the instance restricted to this player alone. To verify that a strategy of a player is a best response, we have to fix all other players strategies, and check if the solution restricted to this player is minimum, which is an NP-hard problem.

Similarly, we can join all players from the decision gadgets into a single player Px in Gj, which controls any terminal ti in any decision gadget xi. Now the total number of players in this instance is reduced to ten. To achieve the number of six players, we remark that player Pa1 has no direct connection to facilities that Pb2 can directly connect, and thus can be safely merged into a single player Pa1b2. Similarly, player Pa2 can be safely merged with Pb3 and Pa3 can be merged with Pb1, resulting in players Pa2b3 and Pa3b1 in Gj. Finally, note that player Pa has no direct connection to fj in any clause gadget Cj, and therefore can safely merge with either Pa1b2, Pa2b3 or Pa3b1. Thus, we have one player controlling all decision gadgets and five players controlling the clause gadgets, resulting in a total of six players in instance Gj while maintaining the same features and possible PNE as instance G.	2

Assume that we are restricted to instances where there is a PNE and players are allowed to control multiple terminals. We combine the instance described in Theorem 4.2 into an instance with unbounded PoA [16] to force that the only possible PNE in the game opens facilities with unbounded opening costs.

