We consider a generic proto-cell model consisting of any conservative chemical reaction network embedded within a membrane. The membrane results from the self-assembly of one of the chemical species (membrane precursor) and is semi-permeable to some other chemical species (nutrients) diffusing from an outside growth medium into the proto-cell. Inside the proto-cell, nutrients are metabolized into all other chemical species including the membrane precursor, and the membrane grows in area and the proto-cell in volume.

embedded CRN, nutrients are metabolized into all other constituents, including the membrane precursor that gets incorporated into the membrane. The membrane thus grows in area and the proto-cell in volume, thereby diluting all constituents. A stationary growth regime was typically reached in previously proposed mod- els [2,3,4], but it is unclear what grants such a property to the proto-cell. The present work addresses this question by proving necessary and sufficient conditions for such stationary proto-cell growth.

We introduce a generic proto-cell model consisting of any conservative chemical reaction network (CRN) embedded within a membrane. The membrane results from the self-assembly of one of the chemical species participating in the CRN (membrane precursor). This membrane is semi-permeable to some other chemical species (nu- trient) diffusing across the membrane between an outside growth medium and the inside of the proto-cell. We prove a simple algebraic necessary condition as well as a topological sufficient condition for stationary proto-cell growth. Both conditions are independent of reaction kinetics, membrane characteristics or nutrient flux.

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the proto-cell model. Section 3 gives the proof of the simple algebraic necessary condition as well as that of the sufficient topological condition. Section 4 is devoted to discussion. And Section 5 gives a conclusion.

Lemma 3.4 For any moiety or positive linear combination of moieties b that is fed with some nutrient flux bT fnu > 0 and such that all concentrations for chemical species in Sme admit strictly positive lower bounds, the corresponding quantity bT A has an upper bound. In particular, D = mT A is bounded.

Lemma 3.7 If every siphon containing any species in Sme contains the support of a moiety, and if this moiety is fed, then the concentrations of all species in Sme have strictly positive lower bounds for all times after a sufficient time (i.e. are persistent).

Proof. It is based upon the previous work of Angeli et al [10] that gives a sufficient condition for persistence (of any species) in a chemical system. This sufficient condition is that any siphon includes the support of a moiety. Their proof relies upon a key result (Proposition 5.4. in [10]) which we restate here in a slightly different wording:

Proof. If every siphon containing any species in Sme also contains the support of a moiety b, and if this moiety is fed with some nutrient flux fnu, bT fnu > 0, Lemma 3.7 ensures that all species in Sme are persistent. Applying Lemma 3.4 to the particular case of the mass ensures that if all species in Sme are persistent, then the cytoplasmic density D is bounded. And Lemma 3.3 ensures that if D is bounded, the proto-cell dynamical system has a stationary point. Persistence of all species in Sme further ensures that this stationary point corresponds to a positive growth rate.

The sufficient condition for stationary growth is verified by a broad range of net- works. Generating numerically large random conservative CRNs with arbitrary stoichiometry, we have found that once the CRN reaches a certain number of reac- tions, the quasi-totality of these networks are such that the only siphon is the full set of species, so that the sufficient condition is verified for any choice of membrane precursor Ame, Sme, or nutrients Snu. It could thus appear that a broad range of chemical reaction networks are compatible with the emergence of life.

However, thermodynamical constraints have not been taken into considera- tion in the present work. Further endowing random conservative CRNs with thermodynamically-consistent kinetics, we have found that the nutrient (resp. mem- brane precursor) should tend to have a high (resp. low) standard free Gibbs energy of formation and a low (resp. high) molecular weight for the proto-cell to exhibit a significant growth rate. [5]

There is another aspect of the model for which assumptions are actually quite stringent. These are assumptions made with respect to the membrane: self-assembly and semi-permeability to some nutrient, not to mention the importance of the self- assembly shape (filament vs. spherical) discussed above. This is in line with previous work that has stressed the importance of membranes in the origins of life. [14]

The proposed model is applicable to proto-cells and not to current evolved uni- cellular organisms because the nutrient transport mechanism is passive diffusion for the proto-cell whereas it is active transport for current evolved cells. It can be verified that the necessary condition still holds in the case of active transport, but that the proposed proof for the sufficient condition does not. This is because the positive lower bound in Lemma 3.6 can no longer be guaranteed in the case of active

