We show that logic C1 cannot be extended to a paraconsistent logic in which the substitution theorem is valid. We show that C1 can be extended to larger paraconsistent logics by adding some desirable properties as axioms. We use three-valued logics to support our claims.

In logic, as in any other area of mathematics, when choosing a family of ax- ioms to define a logic, it is desirable to have independence of the axioms, that is, any formula chosen as an axiom should be independent from the other axioms. Multi-valued logics can be used for this purpose (see an example of this in [14]). This methodology sometimes can have limitations (see [10]), however it is useful to researchers interested in the study of logics, such as in our case.

systems, the presence of inconsistencies is almost unavoidable (see for example [9]). An application that has not been fully recognized is the use of paraconsistent logics in non-monotonic reasoning. In this sense [21,20] illustrate such novel applications. One example where intuition indicates that paraconsistent logics would be use-

According to some authors [1], a paraconsistent logic should retain as much of classical logic, but must allow non-trivial inconsistent theories. Also, it should not validate any inference which is not valid in classical logic. Then, it should be contained in classical logic.

It is well known that Classical logic is very useful in applications related to Artifi- cial Intelligence. In this paper we analyse different paraconsistent logics and their proximity with to Classical Logic. As we know, the substitution theorem is a prop- erty that meets Classical Logic and it is desirable that a logic that approximates Classical Logic satisfies it. In this paper we show that any paraconsistent logic that extends paraconsistent logic C1 does not satisfy the substitution theorem. On the other hand, we also know that the De Morgan laws are relevant properties which are valid in Classical Logic, then we shown different paraconsistent extensions of C1 where some of the De Morgan laws are valid.

We use three valued logics to support our claims. We have also presented a diagram to show different ways of extending C1 to other paraconsistent logics. Be- sides the problem of discovering new paraconsistent logics, there is the problem of deciding which of them is a maximal paraconsistent logic. Exploring different para- consistent logics and solving the problem of maximality for each of them is part of our future work.

