A hybrid cloud infrastructure is a combination of two or more clouds (private, community, or public) that remain unique entities but are bound together by stan- dardized or proprietary technologies that enable data and application portability (e.g., cloud bursting for load-balancing between clouds) [6].

Moreover, Tap-as-a-Service (TaaS) is an extension to the OpenStack networking service (Neutron). It provides remote port mirroring capability for tenant virtual networks. This service has been primarily designed to help tenants (or cloud admin- istrators) to debug complex virtual networks and gain visibility into their VMs, by monitoring the network traffic associated with them. TaaS honors tenant bound- aries and its mirror sessions are capable of spanning across multiple computing and network nodes. It serves as an essential infrastructure component that can be utilized to supply data to a variety of network analytics and security applications [11].

In order to determine the parameters to be used in our simulation model we refer to literature. [4] describes the causes of latency in optical fiber metro networks, and several available latency reduction techniques and solutions are also discussed, con- cerning usage of different chromatic dispersion compensation methods, low-latency amplifiers, optical fibers as well as other network elements, and many experimental values are shown. In [5] performances of the networking environment are evaluated with reference to OpenStack, a widely adopted cloud infrastructure management platform. In particular, the paper provides an insight on how OpenStack deals with multitenant network virtualization and evaluates the performance of its main net- work components by measuring packet throughput in an experimental testbed. [15] presents an analysis of integration of SDN solutions and OpenStack. The architec- ture of OpenStack networking module or Neutron and plug-ins for communication with SDN is considered. Different types of SDN controllers are also considered in the paper. An experimental model of SDN-OpenStack integration was created according to the solution. Such characteristics of SDN-OpenStack solution as de- lay, maximum amount of UDP and TCP flows are obtained experiments. In [10] the impact is measured of virtual network on latency in a public cloud based on OpenStack, by measuring the throughput of VM and simultaneously capturing their packets on hosts.

The chosen modeling approach is based on a modular multiformalism modeling technique [2][8], that relies on Petri Nets (PN) and Queuing Networks (QN). The high level model consists of the composition of functional blocks with an internal behavior and input and output ports, that may be connected respectively with multiple output and input ports from other blocks by means of connectors. The semantics of connectors and ports allows multiple connectors from an out port to a single input port, indicating a confluence of packet traffic. Further details are out of the scope of this paper.

