i.e. integrable only on the zero level of the areas integral. This dynamical condition means that the motion is integrable only when the angular momentum of the body lies permanently in a horizontal plane. The conditional complementary integral for this case is a cubic polynomial in the angular velocities and explicit solution is expressed also in ultra-elliptic functions of time (e.g. [4]).

A direct, simple but very important generalization of the problem described above is that of motion of a rigid body under the action of a combination of two uniform fields. This problem is characterized by two vectors, constant in space which represent gravity and magnetic fields and two vectors, constant in the body, describing the centre of mass and the magnetic moment. The potential of this problem is a linear function in all the direction cosines of the two fields with respect to the body frame.

In spite of its practical importance, the problem of motion of rigid body under the action of more than one uniform fields has escaped attention for a long time. Despite the richness in its structure, integrable cases of this problem are still rare. Till now, none of the above results concerning properties of so- lutions in the complex plane of time or the existence of alge- braic integrals could be generalized to cover this problem. The research in this problem was not carried out on a systematic basis, and only scattered results exist.

angle p. Motion of this type are usual for an axi-symmetric heavy body in a single uniform gravity field (Lagrange's top), with the axis of precession occupying the vertical po- sition. But, as was firstly described by Grioli in 1947 [20], such motion is still possible for an asymmetric (triaxial) body in a single uniform gravity field. The axis of precession is inclined to the vertical in this case at an angle that depends on the moments of inertia [24].

Now we try to clarify the picture of motion of the body with respect to the space axes. The gravity field is in the negative direction of the X-axis. The positive half of the X-axis is ver- tical upwards. The Y-axis is horizontal and aligned in the di- rection of the magnetic field. The Z-axis is orthogonal to it in the horizontal plane.

