In addition to the many interesting questions on the properties of fuzzy CA and their applications, a crucial research question is the nature of the relationship between fuzzy CA and Boolean CA. In fact, the dynamics of fuzzy CA might shed some light on their Boolean counter-parts, and properties of Boolean CA could be interpreted differently in light of those of fuzzy CA. If clear links between the two systems can be established, properties of Boolean CA not previously observed might be revealed by their presence in FCA. Unfortunately, until now, no such light has been shed and no such results exist. In fact, it was not even clear whether such a connection existed. To date, none of the studies on fuzzy asymptotic behavior seem to suggest any similarities between the two models. The only interesting link between them was observed in [13] for the case of elementary Boolean rule 90 (one of the most studied elementary CA rules) where it has been shown that its asymptotic behavior is identical to the dynamics of the oscillations of the corresponding fuzzy

We finish off by examining a class of fuzzy rules whose asymptotic behaviour continues to reflect that of their associated Boolean rule even as they converge to a fixed point. We call this property self-oscillation. We show that a fuzzy CA rule is self-oscillating if and only if the corresponding Boolean CA rule is an additive rule or its negation. This result fully characterizes the class of d-dimensional, infinite CA with this behavior, thus explaining the phenomenon observed in [13] for rule

An interesting property of the DNF fuzzification is how it relates to the probability of a one occuring at a given time in a given cell. Since the fuzzy values are in the range [0, 1], we can interpret them as probabilities, i.e., we can let a fuzzy value xt denote the probability that a cell yi of a Boolean CA assumes value 1 at time

We will first need some notation. Given a random variable Z, let E(Z) denote its expected value. Note that when Z is a binary random variable, then E(Z) is the probability P (Z = 1). Essentially, we show that applying the fuzzification f of g to the expected values of a cell Yi and its 2q neighbouring cells, we obtain the expected value of g[Yi], the cell at the next time step.

In this section, we consider another property of Boolean cellular automata exten- sively studied in the literature: additivity (e.g., see [8,17,26]). We continue the investigation of the link between Boolean and fuzzy CA showing a connection be- tween additivity and a new fuzzy property that we call self-oscillation. In doing so we characterize the class of self-oscillating fuzzy CA. Although for simplicity we are considering one dimensional CAs, note that the results of this section hold for any dimension.

To begin we note that functions converging to either zero or one can never be self-oscillating since values are, respectively, either always greater than or always less than the point of convergence. We will now prove this lemma by induction on n, the the number of variables in f , i.e., on the size of the neighborhood.

