In this paper, we solve two open problems posed by Karen L. Bernstein regarding her promoted tyft format for structured operational semantics. We show that, unlike formats with closed terms as labels, such as the tyft format, the well-foundedness assumption cannot be dropped for the promoted tyft format while preserving the congruence result. We also show that the well-founded promoted tyft format is incomparable to the tyft format with closed terms as labels, i.e., there are transition relations that can be specified by the promoted tyft format but not by the tyft format, and vice versa.

In [3], Bernstein proposed the promoted tyft format which is an elegant framework for specifying the operational semantics of higher-order processes. She proved that the well-founded promoted tyft format guarantees strong bisimilarity to be a con- gruence. The semantics of the lazy lambda-calculus [1] and the Calculus of Higher- Order Communicating Systems (CHOCS) [9] were specified in the promoted tyft format of [3] and using the congruence meta-theorem, it was shown that applicative bisimilarity for the lazy-lambda calculus and strong bisimilarity for CHOCS are both congruences. The conclusions of [3] reads as follows.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we give some basic definitions. Section 3 addresses the well-foundedness concept, shows that it cannot be dropped for the promoted tyft format while preserving the congruence result. Section 4 addresses the expressiveness of the promoted tyft format and proves it incomparable to the tyft format. The paper is concluded in Section 5.

A subset of the tyft format is the one using constants (instead of closed terms) as labels which is also considered in this paper and compared to the promoted tyft format in Section 4. Arguably, this subset can be considered the original definition of the tyft format as defined by [6]. The generalization to closed terms as labels (if at all considered a generalization) is entirely safe and orthogonal to all existing results (e.g., congruence, conservativity and commutativity meta-theorems [2,5]).

is always empty. Arguments of transition labels under a volatile operator should be replaceable by bisimilar terms (i.e., given a transition with a volatile operator as the outermost operator in the label, another transition with the label containing bisimilar arguments under the same volatile operator should be provable to a bisim-

