uploaded by multiple users which may be accidentally disclosed [3]. This situation will open the door of prying eyes to launch var- ious levels of security attacks such as data privacy, integrity and confidentiality in healthcare systems. To provide security, an attri- bute based encryption scheme has been exploited to make access control on electronic healthcare records where the patient can decrypt the data using appropriate access policy [4]. Now-a-days, the edge-based healthcare services were employed for cost effec- tive data processing and network resource provisioning on edge computing framework through data offloading and real-time pro- cessing respectively. Here, computational offloading at edge level can minimize the energy consumption, communication and com- putational delay between edge and cloud server [5]. Existing healthcare system research was focused more on data processing and data sharing security mechanisms at cloud server level [6,7]. Especially, integration of edge and cloud server platforms is very difficult for the real-time healthcare system to provide effective data processing and disease prediction. This is more evident from the edge-cloud integrated smart environment to improve people living quality over the cyber-physical system. Due to openness of the edge-cloud environment and limited access control of users,

Apart from security, proposed research includes the implemen- tation of adaptive classifier models in the edge-cloud-based healthcare system. Existing healthcare system exploited the reasoning-based privacy-aware decision support system for dis- ease prediction and preservation of patient sensitive data [15]. A multistage classifier approach is implemented along with machine learning and particle swarm optimization based feature selection technique to improve the prediction accuracy and diagnosis of dis- ease [16]. These approaches are more complex and increase the response time of the system, and obtain a very smaller fault alarm rate. To overcome these issues, the proposed research incorporates the privacy preserving additive homomorphic encryption and offloading mechanism to enhance the security and optimize the communication capacity and energy at edge level. Along with this encryption, the proposed research incorporates the adaptive weighted probabilistic classifier model at cloud server level for enhancing onboard disease prediction and rehabilitation monitor- ing process. The research paper is organized into five sections. Next section will provide a deep literature review of smart health care systems available in the cloud market according to the context of data security and disease prediction. Section 3, provides a detailed description of proposed edge-cloud-based healthcare system architecture with appropriate security and classifier model. In sec-

In cloud level, searchable public-key encryption scheme was used to balance the security and efficiency of search operations and also provides privacy protection over the encrypted data [22]. This scheme is extended as a fuzzy keywords enabled ranked searchable encryption scheme to guarantee the security features over a real-life speech corpus deployed on public cloud architecture [23]. Further, this searchable encryption cannot be a successful scheme until the search result falls into a precise time period. Therefore, a novel time-aware searchable encryption scheme is designed with designated medical cloud servers to pro- vide more security and efficiency than the existing schemes [24]. A homomorphic encryption scheme was introduced to manage large-scale sensor data with high level privacy preserving anom- aly detection service in cloud-based electronic health records [25]. A systematic review on various homomorphic encryption techniques such as fully, multiplicative, XOR, additive, and critical infrastructure homomorphic schemes were done to extend the healthcare application over big data and cloud environments. These techniques are used to manage and analyze the massive amount of heterogeneous medical data to further improve the quality of healthcare service [26]. According to literature study, some prominent schemes such as key policy attribute-based encryption, trust, multi-tenant, multi-authority, fine-grain, revo- cation mechanism, trace mechanism, proxy re-encryption and hierarchical encryption were analyzed for ensuring security and privacy in cloud [27].

In the context of smart healthcare systems, different types of classifier models are used for real-time disease prediction and rehabilitation monitoring over edge and cloud computing plat- forms. In order to make early diagnosis of Parkinson disease, a comparative analysis was made using Naive Bayes, kernel-based support vector machine, random forest and boosted tree classifier models [34]. As a result, kernel-based support vector machine clas- sifiers were observed as best performers in terms of prediction accuracy, sensitivity and specificity metrics. The modified k-NN classifier model has been applied in cancer disease prediction and diagnosis in the context of smallest and largest modification scenarios [35]. A fuzzy based k-NN classifier model was proposed to design an efficient diagnosis system for improving the perfor- mance of Parkinson disease detection [36]. Sometimes, the sensi- tivity of the k value may degrade the performance of the classifier in case of less sample size with traditional outliers. There- fore, a generalized mean distance-based k-NN classifier model was employed by estimating categorical nested and multi-generalized mean distances [37]. The accuracy of the classifier model will vary with respect to the types of feature extraction and optimization techniques. Since the voice and video data used for classifier train- ing has its own pros and cons, the prediction accuracy of the model does not have much significant difference due to voice or video data exploitation. Therefore, the proposed research work shows the focus on developing adaptive weighted probabilistic classifier models for robust disease prediction and rehabilitation of remote patients with economical cost.

flows with a simple data accessibility scheme. [41]. In order to pro- vide interoperability among the healthcare systems, a semantic based healthcare interoperability framework is explored to provide secure information exchange [42]. While comparing the architec- ture of all the healthcare systems, the proposed secure edge- cloud-based healthcare system provides better security, interoper- ability and performance measurement attributes.

time, prediction time and prediction accuracy. Initially, the classi- fier is trained with two benchmarking voice dataset taken from University of California-Irvine (UCI) repository [43,44]. The train- ing dataset has sound recordings of 195 voice samples, out of which 147 samples affected and 48 samples not affected by Parkin- son disease respectively. Those voice samples were collected from 31 subjects (8 healthy and 23 Parkinson affected patients). After training the classifiers with samples, an effective comparative analysis is made with respect to prediction time and prediction accuracy parameters to test the efficiency of both proposed and existing classifiers. Then, during the patient data prediction, an average performance of 5 experimental trails are tabulated for

The real-time experimental settings of the proposed SECHS model is evaluated by including edge level filtering and offloading mechanism. A remote patient data is lively captured through the healthcare app from 4 camera devices located in different places of home. Each camera device and healthcare app are connected to a nearby edge computing node called Raspberry Pi complete kit device. First, the camera device specification includes ProElite IP01A IP with 4G enabled network and Wi-Fi capability to capture high definition video data. Next, the Raspberry Pi kit specification includes 1 GB RAM capacity, 1.2 GHz processing speed, BCM43143 Wi-Fi and Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) on board capa- bilities. Here, the pi-3 kit will do filtering and offloading on lively captured voice data and then follow the additive homomorphic encryption for maintaining the patient data privacy. After encryp- tion, the edge node will send the encrypted data and key to the cloud computing node. Again, the proposed SECHS will decrypt the patient data and process the data in the proposed adaptive weighted probabilistic classifier which is deployed in the cloud computing node. Finally, the classifier will make effective disease severity prediction and provides the patient with online rehabilita- tion monitoring and assessment capability. In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed SECHS and its adaptive weighted probabilistic classifier model, a comparative analysis is made with existing research in terms of network capacity utilization, response

dramatically improve the response time of predictions made in cloud datacenter. In case of implementing proposed solutions by adding a fog layer may provide better performance on patient dis- ease prediction due to sharing of computational workloads among the real-time fog routers and cloud nodes [47]. As a result, an hier- archical disease prediction mechanism can be enforced through peer-to-peer communication and data offloading among the fog routers and cloud nodes.

