Integrating solar energy into the combined energy supply of surface water source heat pump systems is expected to reduce the electricity consumption and carbon emissions. In this paper, a solar-surface water source heat pump system model is established to maximize system performance and save economic cost. In order to find the optimal operation scheme, an improved arithmetic optimization algorithm (iAOA) is proposed. This algorithm integrates elite opposition-based and nonlinear acceleration functions to solve the model. The effectiveness of the proposed model and algorithm is verified by applying it to a SWSHP district energy system in the central area of Xiangtan city. Experimental results demonstrate that incorporating solar energy into the SWSHP district energy system can improve system performance and reduce operational costs. In comparison with several other optimization algorithms, this algorithm has a faster convergence speed and a higher convergence accuracy. Therefore, it is considered an effective method for solving solar-surface water source heat pump district energy systems.

[13] created a household GSHP system that utilized waste heat from photovoltaic power to improve net power generation and maintain soil heat balance. Scholars have also focused on the performance of solar- GSHP systems. For instance, Mi et al. [14] developed a new hot water

hot water systems. Liu et al. [15] built a mathematical model of a direct- expansion PVT heat pump system, which demonstrated that the coupled system can enhance the operation performance of heat pump systems. Zhang et al. [16] investigated an actual hybrid solar ground source heat pump (HSGSHP) system. It was found to improve performance by nearly 25.8% when the solar space heating was added. Wang et al.

In meta-heuristic algorithms, the quality of the initialized popula- tion plays an importance role in the algorithm performance in finding the best solution. The initial population generated at random by AOA often lacks the population diversity necessary to facilitate the search for optimal solutions. An elite opposition-based strategy [26] is employed in this research to initialize population and enhance population diver- sity. The elite opposition-based learning strategy selects elite solutions from the population, creates an opposite-based population in opposition to the elite solutions, compares the elite opposition-based population to the elite population, and chooses the best solutions as the initial-

In the AOA algorithm, maintaining harmonious relationship be- tween the exploitation and exploration phases is crucial for achieving optimal results. The exploration phase seeks to explore a wide range of the search space, while the exploitation phase focuses on exploiting the most promising areas of the search space. The MOA is an essential com- ponent of the AOA algorithm, which controls the balance between these two phases. However, MOA is a linear control approach that increases linearly with the number of iterations and may not fully capture the

der to validate its effectiveness. Scenario 1 is the current operation scheme, and the units only have two states of full load or half load. In Scenario 2, the system includes only water source heat pump units, providing cool and heat energy while purchasing electricity from the grid to meet cooling or heating demands. In Scenario 3, the system in- corporates heat pump units, photovoltaic solar thermal collectors, and

