Algebraic Reconstruction Techniques (ART ) for the reconstruction of distributions from projections have yielded improvements in diverse fields such as medical imag- ing and electron microscopy. An important property of these methods is that they allow the use of various basis functions. Recently spherically symmetric functions (blobs) have been introduced as efficacious basis functions for reconstruction. How- ever, basis functions whose parameters were found to be appropriate for use in reconstruction are not necessarily good for visualization. We propose a method of selecting blob parameters for both reconstruction and visualization.

It is often desirable to acquire knowledge of the interior of an object or a body. Unfortunately in most cases it is difficult, or impossible, to directly observe the interior of objects. However,it is possible to get information regarding the structure inside an object from measurements resulting from the interaction of the object with some type of energy.

can be further decreased by using a higher value a,but this is at the expense of increased computational cost. Also this study ignores resolution, which is another important criterion. There is no particular reason to believe (and, in fact, one is likely to suspect the contrary) that the parameters which are good for representing very smooth objects will also results in reconstructions of high resolution. We return to this issue below.

For every ray we need to find the point q in S nearest to the plane and compute its distance and the normal to S at q (these are used to assign an intensity value on the computer screen [5,25]). In practice, finding the points q is computationally expensive. In general there is no prior estimate of how far q is from the plane. Based on an approach in [3], we designed the following methodology. We first do a preprocessing of the set {pj at the end of which, for every point on the plane from which we need to cast a ray, we have the list of those grid points (arranged in order of increasing

