Proof assistants aid the user in proving mathematical theorems by taking care of low-level reasoning details. Their user interfaces often present proof information as text, which becomes increasingly difficult to comprehend as it grows in size. Panoptes is a software tool that enables users to explore graphical representations of the formal proofs produced by the imps Interactive Mathematical Proof System. Panoptes automatically displays an imps deduction graph as a visual graph that can be easily manipulated by the user. Its facilities include target zooming, floating information boxes, node relabeling, and proper substructure collapsing.

Panoptes, named after the all-seeing giant of Greek mythology, is a software system for exploring the proof structures produced by the imps Interactive Mathematical Proof System [3,4,5]. The proof structures that imps creates are certain kinds of graphs called deduction graphs. Panoptes automatically displays an imps deduction graph as a visual graph that can be manipulated by the user. Although Panoptes is designed to work with imps, it focuses on facilities that would be useful to many other proof assistants. This paper describes the facilities that Panoptes provides and gives an overview of its implementation.

Target zooming. The user can zoom in and out on parts of the graph by just pointing with the mouse and holding down a button. This is quite different from the standard way of zooming first and then scrolling to reach the point of interest, which can easily lead to confusion and disorientation of the user.

History of operations. A comprehensive history of the operations ap- plied to a deduction graph is kept at all times, so that the user can easily revert back to an earlier arrangement of the graph on the screen. Also, this function is important for preserving the effort invested into rearranging the graph between proof steps, which is possible due to the fact that imps only adds new nodes, but never removes nodes from the deduction graph.

Automatic layout and manual rearranging. Upon startup, Panoptes provides an initial layout of the deduction graph. This allows Panoptes to fit the whole graph in the screen space provided by the system and also to minimize the crossing of edges as much as possible. In addition, the user is able to drag and drop components of the graph to either improve or modify the layout according to his or her preference, while the program automatically protects the connections (the arrows) between the nodes.

Additionally, appropriate automatic labeling and numbering of repetitions (in the case of inference nodes representing applications of the same inference rule) is automatically performed by the system. The power of color is also utilized: grounded nodes are colored in green, repeated nodes (i.e., nodes that complete a cycle or merge proof directions) in brown, collapsed inference nodes in purple, etc.

Developed in Java, the Interactive Symbolic Visualization of Semi- Automatic Theorem Proving system [1] presents formal proofs produced by the acl2 theorem prover [10] in the form of cone-shaped three-dimensional graphs on the screen. The user can rotate the visualization in order to look at all angles, as well as to open detached information windows with informa- tion about the nodes. Rather than labeling, colors are used to differentiate between different nodes.

Another proof assistant, pvs [11], offers graphical display of proof trees for users with Tcl/Tk (http://www.tcl.tk/) installed on their systems. The visualization appears to have limited functionality for the manipulation of the tree display, although it too offers opening of windows with details about the nodes.

