research in biology and biomedicine [43]. However, the vast amounts of exper- imental data and associated analyses now being produced have created an urgent need for new ways of integrating this information into theoretical models of cellular processes for guiding hypothesis creation and testing. Investigation of mammalian signaling processes, the molecular pathways by which cells detect, convert, and in- ternally transmit information from their environment to intracellular targets such as the genome, would greatly benefit from the availability of such predictive models. Although signaling pathways are complex, fundamental concepts have emerged from contemporary research indicating that they are amenable to analysis by com- putational methods. For example, most signaling pathways involve the hierarchical assembly in space and time of multi-protein complexes or modules that regulate the flow of information according to logical rules [22,28]. Moreover, these pathways are embedded in networks having stimulatory, inhibitory, cooperative, and other connections to ensure that a signal will be interpreted appropriately in a particular cell or tissue [18,36].

The HELIX project at INRIA has developed the GNA (Genetic Network Ana- lyzer) tool for modeling and simulation of genetic regulatory networks [10]. Mod- els are specified by giving upper and lower bounds for protein concentrations and reaction rates. The tool computes a qualitative state transition graph from which possible qualitative behaviors can be read.

Simulations using in silico models founded on kinetic measurements of signal- ing pathways or networks are important for achieving a detailed understanding of the biochemistry of signal transduction. However, the development of such models is impeded by the great difficulty in obtaining experimental data. The stochastic nature of cellular scale populations of signaling molecules gives additional compli- cations [31,33]. Moreover, new computational methods will be needed to overcome of complexity of simulating and analyzing such detailed models [17].

The Maude case study presented here together with the EcoCyc work [25] and other initial case studies [30,14] applying formal modeling techniques to cellular path- ways is a first step toward developing a new science of Symbolic Systems Biology. This new science could provide new capabilities for biologists through power tools that enable the generation of novel inferences about relations among biological en- tities. These tools would facilitate our understanding of complex biological systems and accelerate research to test hypotheses concerning their operation in vivo.

In our approach, rewrite rules describe local change that could occur when an instance of the left-hand side of the rule exists in a modeled system. Rewriting logic allows reasoning about possible complex changes given the basic changes specified by the model. These complex changes can be concurrent; that is, different parts of a compartment can change simultaneously and independently. Furthermore, the changes can be multi-step, allowing reasoning about possible future states of the system. Thus, under very reasonable assumptions rewrite theories can be executed in Maude to describe a biological signaling process over time according to a sym- bolic model, and can be formally analyzed to reason about properties of the states reachable from an initial state.

Forward search is a breadth-first search of all paths through the transition graph for a given initial state. It will find ALL possible outcomes from a given initial state. Search can also be constrained to find a possibly limited number of states satisfying a given property.

Meta analysis allows us to reason about the models themselves. Essential fea- tures of models can be abstracted to form families of related models, allowing us to work with uncertainty about reactions. Starting with a base set of known reac- tions, different instantiations of sets of reactions can be explored. For example, we can search for models where a given path property is true in a given initial state. In addition, rules themselves can be abstracted into families of rules, each fam- ily corresponding, for example, to a particular type of reaction, such as activation, inhibition, or transduction.

In this section we describe a Maude model, BP (BioPathways), of a major receptor- mediated pathway in mammalian cells [20], focusing on the part centered around the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). BP formalizes reaction data carefully curated from the literature by expert biologists. Currently BP includes more than 650 proteins and more than 500 rules describing possible reaction steps.

The keywords op and ops are used to declare operators from a list of domain sorts into a range sort. In both of the examples above, the list of domain sorts is empty, indicating that the declared operators are constants. Thus EGFR, EGF, PIP3, Pdk1, and PKCe are declared to be a constants of the sort Protein.

There are constants GDP, GTP, act, and deact of sort Modification which are abstractions of classes of modification with similar effect as regards signal- ing. ModSet is the sort of multisets of modifications, formed from singletons (expressed by the subsort declaration) by multiset union (represented by juxtapo- sition). none is the empty modification set. Sets of modifications are applied to proteins using the operator [_-_]. For example [EGFR - act] represents the activated form of EGFR.

An Enclosure has a membrane part and an interior, each with its own constituent soup. A MemType is used to specify a particular membrane type such as the cell membrane (CM) or the nuclear membrane (NM). Formally, a soup is multiset of things. The multiset union operation models the presumed fluid or dynamic nature of some subcellular compartments where order in which molecules exist in the soups does not matter. The term

represents a cell containing the chemical PIP3 and the activated protein [Pdk1 - act] in the cell membrane and the protein PKCe in the cytoplasm (cell interior). The notation cm:Soup is a variable declared on the fly, with name cm and sort Soup. The variables cm:Soup and cyto:Soup stand for the remaining cell con- tents. Finally, we declare a sort Dish that serves as a top-level soup, and a container for carrying out in silico experiments.

Rule 410 describes the translocation of activated Erk1 from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. Rule 438 describes the activation of Elk1 (a transcription factor) by activated Erk1. Note that rule labels in BP consist of a number followed by an abbreviated description, which allows a meaningful description of reaction paths using just rule labels. We typically refer to the rule using only the number. We also adopt the convention that symbols beginning with ? are variables with sort named by omitting the ? (declared somewhere in the module). Thus ?Erk1/2 is a variable of sort Erk1/2 (a subsort of Protein containing proteins Erk1 and Erk2).

A rule declaration may also contain additional information, including a metadata attribute. The metadata attribute allows rules to be annotated with arbitrary infor- mation that is ignored by the core rewriting engine, but available for use by met- alevel operations. In the above rule, the metadata "cite = 21961415" gives the Unique Identifier for the MedLine database citation as justification for the rule. Other metadata for biological network rules include reaction rate or concentration data, other forms of literature citations, database links, and confidence ratings.

Notice that using the position fair rewrite strategy, Pdk1 is activated and recruited to the cell membrane, while using the top down strategy it remains unactivated in the cytoplasm. These two executions already show that there are multiple possible outcomes starting with q14. We can find all the possible outcomes using the search command.

counter-example to the assertion that such a state is never reachable. The interface to the Maude model checker is embodied in the MODEL-CHECKER module. This module defines syntax for LTL (Linear Temporal Logic) formulas built over a sort Prop. It also introduces a sort State and a satisfaction relation |= on states and LTL formulas.

To use the model checker, the user defines particular states and propositions and axiomatizes satisfaction on these states and propositions. LTL semantics lifts satisfaction from propositions to arbitrary LTL formulas. In our BP experiments states are dishes, thus Dish is declared to be a subsort of State. A proposition prop1 that is satisfied by dishes with cJun and cFos activated is defined as follows.

