Lophira procera is a plant of family ochnaceaes. its vernacular name (Fang) is Akoga and its trade names are Azobe and Bongossi. It is a giant tree of the damp forest, one of the largest in the African virgin forest, easily recognizable by its slender barrel, fairly light brown and its large oblong, erect leaves and tufts at the ends of the branches at the top. This tree is very widespread in Gabon

Protein denaturation methods have been used [21,22] with slight modifications. Briefly, 0.1 mL of albumin from fresh chicken eggs was mixed with 1.9 mL of phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH 6.4) and 1 mL of varying concentrations of the aqueous extract so that the finals concentrations become 31.25, 62.5, 125, 250 and

Since the idea of tumor angiogenesis was suggested by Folkman [8], the blocking of tumor-induced angiogenesis was considered an attractive anticancer strategy because anti-angiogenic agents can be used independently of cancer types. The aqueous extract also showed strong antiangiogenic activity by the inhibition of blood vessel formations on chick embryo chorioallantoic membrane (CAM). Inhibition was dose dependent. In the range of doses tested, no dead embryos were recorded, indicating that the antiangiogenic effect observed was not due to the toxicity of the plant. This extract shows a stronger anti-angiogenic activity than the aqueous extracts of Oncoba welwitschii, Tetrorchidium oppositifolium, which showed a percentage inhibition of 83.334% at 500 lg/mL [14]. The CAM is an extraembryonic membrane whose main function is to ensure the exchange of gases and nutrients. Because of its large vascularity and ease of use, CAM is a popular research tool widely used to study glioma angiogenesis, growth, invasiveness and screening of anti-tumor drugs [28]. Therefore, according to the results, the aqueous extract of Lophira procera may have good inhibitory activity on tumor growth by blocking angiogenesis. Thus the use of Lophira procera in traditional medicine against breast cancer can be justified.

different chemical groups present in this plant. These biological activities are due to the high content of phenolic compounds in this plant. The use of this plant in traditional medicine as anti-ulcers, anti-breast cancer, anti-pain is therefore justified. The isolation of the phenolic compounds responsible for these activities will be the subject of next study.

