Populational Announcement Logic (PPAL), is a variant of the standard Public Announcement Logic (PAL) with a fuzzy-inspired semantics, where instead of specific agents we have populations and groups. The semantics and the announcement logic are defined, and an example is provided. We show validities analogous to PAL axioms and their proofs, and also provide a proof of decidability. We briefly talk about model checking and compare the framework against probabilistic logic. We conclude that the main advantage of PPAL over PAL is the flexibility to work with previously defined agents.

This work aims to specify a variation of PAL where knowledge is represented across populations and groups of populations, instead of discrete agents as it is normally done. The motivation behind this is to provide a framework that is capable of dealing with applications where one intends to reason about evolution of knowledge across populations instead of individual agents. It is specially designed for model checking, because it is not necessary to specify agents (or populations in this case) beforehand, and instead these populations can be defined in the middle of the execution by the announcement operators of the language.

In section 2 we introduce Public Announcement Logic (PAL), which serves as the basis for this work. In section 3, we introduce Populational Announcement Logic (PPAL), explain its purpose and differences with respect to PAL and define its language, semantics and model. We also provide axioms which are analogous to PAL axioms and show proofs of their validities. Still in this section, we prove that PPAL is decidable and demonstrate the complexity of model checking, and briefly talk about the actual model checker implementation. Section 4 provides two basic examples of PPAL, showing how the model evolves after an announcement. Section 5 draws a

As a motivation, consider the following example: A famous politician is under suspicion of money laundering and bribery. Elections are coming up, and this politician expects to be re-elected, but people are less willing to vote for him if they are aware of both charges against him. Not everyone in the population is aware of the charges, however. With PPAL we can model announcements made by a TV program which only a certain amount of the population sees, and then we can assert the overall knowledge of the population in regards to the politician. For instance, the formula

Note that while a population represents many individuals, actual individuals are never directly expressed or referenced, unlike DEL. Individuals are represented solely by the size of the population. The motivation for this comes down to the fact that we are mostly interested in representing and working with the knowledge of populations or fractions of populations, thus there is no purpose in modelling actual individuals. Next we will define the notion of groups.

Since announcements in the logic apply to fractions of a population or group, they work similarly to private announcements. Due to this, the many worlds approach is used. Each population has its own model, representing its current knowledge of the world.

Below, we give some properties about the fuzzy functions that are used in the definitions of satisfaction. At this point we choose not to define a particular fuzzy semantics and instead define classes for each operation. One can choose any semantics which satisfies the following properties, and we provide an example for each of the classes.

A general-purpose Java library implementing the aforementioned language and semantics, and a model checker have been developed. Both programs are covered by unit and integration testing to ensure consistency with the PPAL language and semantics. The source-code of both library and model checker are available on GitHub 4 .

l exist in the first place. The PPAL on the other hand, instantiates a new group which receives the announcement, no matter how small that group might be. The announcements in this probabilistic logic cannot increase the quantity of states in the model, while PPAL announcements create new groups and new models for these groups.

