Abstract This paper presents a new power control routing which is applied to wireless ad hoc net- works, because applying power control into routing protocols has become a hot research issue. This work not only reduces network energy consumption and also improve network throughput, Packet Delivery Ratio and other performance of ad hoc networks. We proposed an on-demand routing algorithm based on power control termed as Power Control Ad hoc On-Demand Distance Vector (PC-AODV). This algorithm builds different routing entries according to the node power levels on demand, and selects the minimum power level routing for data delivery. This PC-AODV uses dif- ferent power control policies to transmit data packets, as well as control packets of network layer and MAC layer. Simulation results show that our algorithm not only reduce the average commu- nication energy consumption, thus prolong the network life time, but also improve average end-to- end delay and packet delivery ratio.

Power control is a very complex issue, Kirousis et al. simplified it into assignment of transmission ranges, short to as RA prob- lem (Range Assignment) [12], and analyzed its computational complexity in details. Let N = {u1,.. . , un} be a set of n points in the d-dimensional Euclidean space (d = 1, 2, 3), denoting the positions of the network nodes and r(ui) be the transmis- sion radius of node ui, the network transmission power f [r(ui)] can be expressed as:

Definition 1 (Power Level). Power levels (termed as PL) are defined as the discrete grades of node transmission power. The power level between node A and node B is expressed as PL(A, B), the minimum power level between node A and node B is expressed as PLmin(A, B), and the power level for a node to send data packets and MAC layer control packets are expressed as PLDATA and PLMAC respectively.

In this paper, we proposed an on-demand routing algorithm based on power control. This algorithm builds different rout- ing entries according to the node power levels on demand, and selects the minimum power level routing for data delivery. In addition, PC-AODV uses different power control policies to transmit data packets, as well as control packets of network layer and MAC layer. Simulation results show that our algo- rithm cannot only reduce the average communication energy consumption, thus prolong the network lifetime, but also im- prove packet delivery ratio and average end-to-end delay. It is a needed approach to incorporate routing protocols with power control in ad hoc networks.

