Several technologies were used in the PF such as Remote Sensing (RS) [1,2], Global Positioning System (GPS) [3], and Geographic Information System (GIS) [4]. The most impor- tant step in PF is the generation of maps of the soil with its characteristics. These included grid soil sampling, yield moni- toring, and crop scouting. RS coupled with GPS coordinates produced accurate maps and models of the agricultural fields. The sampling was typically through electronic sensors such as soil probes and remote optical scanners from satellites. The collection of such data in the form of electronic computer dat- abases gave birth to the GIS. Statistical analyses were then conducted on the data, and the variability of agricultural land with respect to its properties was charted. These technologies apart from being non-real time involved the use of expensive technologies like satellite sensing and were labor intensive where the maps charting the agricultural fields were mostly manually done [5].

The Egyptian economy has relied heavily on the agricul- tural sector for food, feed, fiber, and other products. It pro- vides livelihood for about 55% and employs 30% of the labor force, contributes approximately 17% of the (Gross Domestic Product) GDP and 20% of all foreign exchange earnings. The recorded share from animal protein is about 21 g/day in 1997 and is planned to rise to 24 g per capita by 2017, while the minimum recommended share by Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) is about 30 g/day/person [21]. Egypt has vast areas of poor rangeland due to the lack of sustainable management, estimated at more than 10 million

Egyptian potato exports fluctuate from one season to an- other. In year 2010, Egyptian companies managed to export 289 thousand Tonnes, while in 2011, the exported quantity rose to 461 thousand Tonnes. The main export destinations in 2011 were Russia, EU countries, and countries in the Gulf region [24].

Potatoes are cultivated continuously in Egypt starting from August. Plantings from mid-August to mid-October (main plantation) are harvested from December to mid-February; this represents about 55% of annual production, and it is des- tined mainly for exporting. Plantings from late-October to mid-November account for 10% or less of annual production and are harvested in February, and this crop is grown mainly for export. December till mid-February plantings are har- vested in May/June, and most of this crop (roughly 35% of an- nual production) is sold on the local market or kept as seed for autumn planting.

problems include the fungal pathogens (and their diseases): Alternaria solani (early blight) and Phytophthora infestans (late blight); bacterial pathogens: Ralstonia solanacearum/ Pseudomonas (brown rot or bacterial wilt), Erwinia carotovora subsp. atroseptica (black leg and rot Erwinia), Clavibacter michiganense subsp. sepedonicum (ring rot) and Streptomyces scabies (common scob); nematode diseases especially those caused by Meloidogyne incognita; virus diseases: mottle or latent virus (Marmor dubium var. annulus), mild mosaic (Marmor solani) and insect such as Gryllotalpa gryllotalpa, Agrotis ipselon, Pentodon lispinosus, Bemisia tabaci and Liromyza begoniae [25]. Preventing the conditions under which these pathogens and insect pests appear or the early detection of them can be done efficiently by WSN.

periodically from its environment or responding to a particular query. So, there is a need for networks responding immediately to the changes in the sensed attributes. WSNs should also pro- vide the end user with an ability to dynamically monitor and control the trade-off between energy efficiency, accuracy, and response times. The PF and some other applications need a comprehensive, easy-to-use querying system, so that reliable and accurate answers can be obtained with minimal delays. As all of these features can be provided by the Periodic Thresh- old-sensitive Energy-Efficient sensor Network (APTEEN) [27] routing strategy, it could be concluded that it is the most suit- able routing idea for PF.

It combines both proactive and reactive policies. By send- ing periodic data, it provides a complete picture of the net- work to the user, like a proactive scheme. It also senses data continuously and responds immediately to drastic changes, thereby making it responsive to time critical situations, like a reactive network.

The scalability to large fields is achievable by using a clus- ter-based hierarchical network architecture implemented by the APTEEN strategy. With respect to the performance of AP- TEEN network in terms of lifetime and energy dissipation, it is better than the two popular hierarchical routing protocols Low-Energy Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy (LEACH) [31] and Low-Energy Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy-Centralized (LEACH-C) [32]. The last node dies lifetime of APTEEN is approximately greater than that of LEACH by on average 79% and greater than that of LEACH-C by on average 112%. From the average energy dissipation curve in APTEEN pa- per, by putting time in the vertical axis and energy in the hor- izontal axis and fitting the last behavior taken by the APTEEN

This paper shows the importance of using the wireless sensor network in precision farming field. Also this paper sheds the light on the agriculture in Egypt and how the automation of the agriculture using wireless sensor network will help to solve a lot of Egyptian agricultural problems and improve the crops. An example of the most important crops is selected, which is the potato crop, to study the usage of wireless sensor network for precision farming in Egypt.

