The following section on technicalities introduces some more special cate- gorical notions. In the second subsection it describes the semantics of algebraic specifications. This subsection contains only standard material but introduces the notation and assumptions necessary for the rest of the paper. The assump- tions are summarised at the end of the subsection on page 9. Section 3 contains the definition and Section 4 investigates its properties.

A few notions of fibred category theory are relevant for this paper. I just define them here as operations on sets or predicates, disregarding their fibred nature. See [12,8] for an introduction into fibration. The material used in this paper is also covered in [4, Chapter 3] or [20, Chapter 2].

The following sections rely on several assumptions on the form and especially the semantics of algebraic specifications. This section explains these assump- tions and introduces the needed notions. The assumptions are summarised at the end of this subsection on page 9.

In this paper I only consider single sorted specifications with at most one parameter. The restriction to one sort is somewhat essential because I use morphisms F (X)X as semantics of algebraic specifications. Moreover, the proposed liftings for specifications rely on the liftings of Hensel and Jacobs for data types [5]. The restriction to one sort is also present in their work.

Intuitively both states x and y show the same behaviour (with respect to the coalgebra), so there should be a bisimulation relating them. However, as a morphism of Elem, every coalgebra morphism has to preserve the colour of the state. There is no model of the changed Elem specification with two different colours. Therefore it is impossible to find a pair of morphisms that map x and y to the same element.

Remark 3.3 The set of canonical forms has to be defined during the de- velopment of the specification. The liftings depend in a crucial way on the canonical forms. So they should be chosen with care. If the specification pro- vides normal forms then one can take the singleton sets of normal forms as canonical forms. However, the preceding example shows that normal forms are not necessary.

Let T be a model of the parameter T such that |T | = {t1, t2} is a two element set and kT = t1. Then the function f that maps both t1 and t2 to t1 is a morphism T T . The initial semantics of S are the finite lists containing just t1 or t2 with an additional operation m that conses t1 to its argument list.

This paper presents a definition of predicate and relation lifting for functors obtained as initial semantics of parametric algebraic specifications. This makes it possible to defined the notion of bisimulation and invariant for coalgebras of such functors. The paper contains examples that show that alternative approaches to define bisimulations for such functors are not satisfactory.

There is an obvious approach to obtain liftings for algebraic specifications: One takes the image of the liftings of Hensel and Jacobs [5] for the initial algebra of the signature along the quotient map that factors the carrier of the initial algebra into a model of the specification. However, this approach does not yield satisfactory notions. Therefore I propose a modified definition that employs sets of canonical forms, which must be developed together with the specification.

Future work includes the investigation of more properties and a better understanding of the role of the canonical forms. In particular, I would like to derive conditions on the set of canonical forms that ensure for instance that the liftings commute with intersection. It would also be interesting to implement algebraic specifications and their liftings in the CCSL compiler to permit larger case studies.

