Obesity is a growing health problem that represents a major cause for number of chronic diseases. The most common, includes cardiovascular disease, type-2 diabetes, osteoar- thritis and some types of cancer [1]. Besides, a direct relation between obesity and male infertility has been postulated [2].

In recent years, a dramatic increase has occurred in the use of natural plants for maintaining health and preventing dis- eases. Of these, aromatic plants are characterized by the presence of volatile compounds with pleasant odor known as essential oils (EOs). Aromatic plants are particularly cultivated for the use in food processing, flavoring and other culinary purposes. However, they were identified also for their high curative activities [7]. One of the most familiar aromatic plants is marjoram (Origanum majorana, family Lamiaceae) which is particularly native to the Mediterranean region [8]. In folk medicine, marjoram extracts are used for coughs, cramps, depression, dizziness, gastrointestinal disorders, migraine and nervous headaches [9]. Besides, marjoram has been used as analgesic, antiseptic, antiviral, bactericidal and laxative agent [10]. Marjoram or its EOs seemed also to be effective in enhancing metabolism and maintaining healthy weight [11].

to family Lamiaceae. It is commonly used as a spice and condiment in food preparation, particularly in the Mediter- ranean cuisine [12]. Sage and its isolated oils are largely responsible for various therapeutic effects mainly indicated in the treatment of muscle pain and digestive disorders [13], as well as in promoting energy expenditure and fat oxidation, which may aid in body weight reduction [12]. Sage has shown also to possess antispasmodic, antidepressant and sedative activities [14].

Although much research supporting medicinal activities of both marjoram and sage oil extracts, little is known regarding their effects on obesity and related diseases, particularly male infertility. Therefore, the present study was carried out to investigate the therapeutic effectiveness of administrating marjoram and sage oil extracts in reducing negative impact of obesity on male fertility. This was achieved in terms of eval- uating number of reproductive indices, including lipid profile, reproductive hormones, testicular enzymes and histopatho- logical changes in testicular tissue.

After the acclimation period, rats were randomly divided into seven groups (6 animals/each): group 1, rats were fed standard diet all over the period of the experiment; group 2, rats were fed standard diet and received sunflower oil as vehicle orally at a dose 1 ml/kg b.wt; group 3, rats were fed standard diet and received marjoram oil orally (0.16 ml/kg b.wt) diluted in sun- flower oil (1:2) [9]; group 4, rats were fed standard diet and received sage oil (0.05 ml/kg b.wt) diluted in sunflower oil (1:2)

Serum testosterone (T) and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) levels were evaluated, according to the methods of Tietz [20] and Longcope [21] using kits provided by Rock Diagnostics GmbH-D-68298. Estrogen (E2) and prolactin (PRL) were esti- mated by Enzyme linked Flurorescent Assay (ELFA) technique using kits of Biomerieux, as described by Dupont et al. [22] and Sapin and Simon [23]. Leptin was estimated by ELISA tech- nique using commercially available kit (DRG instruments, Gmbh, Germany), according to the method of Considine and Siha [24]. Serum T/E2 ratio was calculated as T in ng/ml divided by E2 in ng/ml [25].

3b-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3b-HSD) activity Testicular supernatant (1 ml) was mixed with 1 ml of sodium pyrophosphate buffer (pH 8.9), 40 mL of ethanol, containing 30 mg of dehydroepiendostero and 960 mL of 25% bovine serum albumin making a final incubation mixture of 3 ml. Next, 100 mL of 0.5 mM NAD was added for evaluating 3b-HSD activity at 340 nm against a blank (without NAD) [19].

The quantitative measurement of aromatase activity was performed by a solid phase enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), based on the sandwich principle, as described by Roselli [26]. Samples were incubated in microtiter plate wells pre-coated with biotin-conjugated antibody specific to aromatase. After incubation, a sandwich complex was formed and the unbound material was washed off. Next, Avidin peroxidase enzyme complex was added for detection of the bounded aromatase at 450 nm.

genetic, cultural, environmental, and behavioral factors [35]. Although the complex etiology of obesity, dietary factors particularly, increased consumption of high fat diet (HFD) constitutes a major risk for its development [36]. Feeding HFD can promote body weight gain through development of posi- tive energy balance, leading to an increase in adipose tissue mass. Earlier studies have taken place in using various ani- mals to demonstrate an obesity model-like condition in human. Among which, rodent models of diet-induced obesity provide the best parallels in relation to human obesity [37]. Similar pattern was noted in the present study, where rats fed on HFD experienced marked obesity characterized by signifi- cantly increased adiposity index, with elevation in the body weight gain compared with the normal rats.

relation between obesity and the growing incidence of male infertility. Data from different population studies suggested a potential link between male obesity and the prevalence of hypogonadism [2]. In particular, men with increased BMI are significantly more likely to be infertile than normal weight men [38]. In human and animals, determination of sperm numbers, morphology and motility remains the primary clinical tool for the assessment of male infertility. Studies designed to measure sperm parameters for obese men tended to show a negative association between semen quality and BMI [39]. As support, the present study demonstrated marked reduction in the sperm count of HFD-fed rats and further extended to show no difference in the weight of testis, epididymis, seminal vesicle and vas deferens, indicating that obesity has no effect on weight of sex organs. The latter has

corroborated other data showing no changes in the average weight of testis and other sex organs in different animal models of diet-induced obesity [40]. In this context, other studies indicated that obesity tends to affect male reproduc- tive potential by disrupting histological structure of the testis [41]. Results from the present study confirmed this, as evi- denced by degenerative changes in seminiferous tubules, sloughing, vaculation and reduction of spermatogenic cells, supporting the relation between obesity and impaired spermatogenesis.

(ER-a and eb) on to the hypothalamic e pituitary unit [46], thereby suppresses the hypothalamic pituitary testicular (HPT) axis and leads to reduction in serum DHEA which is important for producing male androgens [47]. Current decline of DHEA could be therefore relevant to the observed reduction of T levels in the present obesity model. Reduction of T may corroborate also to higher PRL levels with obesity [39]. PRL is a hormone produced by the pituitary gland in mammals. It is a key hormone in controlling milk production, however apart from lactation, PRL is closely involved in several physiological actions, such as reproduction [48]. Synthesis and release of PRL is controlled by dopaminergic inhibition mechanism, however an altered dopaminergic system may present in obese men with rise of PRL secretion [49]. Normal serum concentrations of PRL have been shown to exert permissive roles on the male reproductive tract, however excessive PRL concentration is correlated with hypogonadism, impotence and infertility [50] probably through interfering with produc- tion of FSH and LH which in turn will affect the testicular function with decrease in T release [50]. In consistence, the present study showed increased PRL levels following induction of obesity which in turn may indicate hyper- prolactinemia as part of endocrine alterations responsible for obesity-linked male infertility.

leptin production under obese conditions. Leptin is a protein hormone that is synthesized and secreted by adipocytes. Its physiological role is to regulate appetite and body weight, but due to excess adipose tissue in the obese subjects levels of leptin are often elevated leading to adverse effects, particu- larly on the male fertility [51]. The most important of these effects is that increased levels of leptin may act as inhibitory signal for T synthesis through membrane receptors on testicular Leydig cells [52]. Leptin receptors are also present on the plasma membrane of sperms, suggesting that leptin may directly affect sperm production independent of changes in testosterone production [53].

a relation between leptin and the increased body fat accu- mulation which in turn may affect T production. This may be related to the fact that excessive leptin levels may cause impaired leptin signaling in adipose tissue for regulating lipid metabolism. Thus, promoting lipid deposition in the body tissues, leading to increased BMI and obesity [39]. Elevated BMI and fat accumulation may lead to lowered T production [4], indicating a negative relation between leptin and serum T [54]. Accordingly, the present findings of increased serum leptin and lipid profile (TL, TC, TGs, PLs) in both serum and testis may be relevant to the observed decline of T levels in the obese rats.

genic cascades could be implicated in promoting male infer- tility with obesity. This may occur via defects of critical steroidogenic enzymes, including 3b-HSD, ALP and ACP. 3b- HSD controls T biosynthesis reactions through catalyzing conversion of DHEA to androstenedione in mitochondria, thereafter the process of biosynthesis of T is continued while moving into the endoplasmic reticulum in Leydig cells [55]. ALP helps in ionic movement across the cell membrane and is also associated with secretory and absorption process of the

cell [56]. Decline in ALP activity may indicate a state of decreased steroidogenesis where the inter and interacellular transport were reduced as the metabolic reactions for ste- roidogenesis slowed down [57]. ACP is an enzyme capable of hydrolyzing orthophosphoric acid esters in an acid medium. The testicular ACP gene is up-regulated by androgens and is down-regulated by estrogens [58]. Activities of ACP have been shown to rise when testicular steroidogenesis is increased. A decrease in ACP activity would thus reflect decreased testic- ular steroidogenesis and this may be correlated with the reduced secretion of gonadotrophins [57]. Accordingly, the present findings of decreased testicular activities of ACP, ALP, and 3b-HSD may be closely related to impaired testosterone production observed in the HFD-fed rats.

drugs are often tried. Apart from these compounds, traditional medicinal plants or their extracts are increasingly used, nowadays, to prevent or treat obesity and its related repro- ductive disorders [59]. In this context, much attention has been given to aromatic plants, such as marjoram and sage for the presence of essential oils (EOs) in their extracts [60]. In the present study, administration of marjoram or sage oil extracts to HFD-fed rats was effective in preventing the increase in body weight gain and adiposity index compared to the obese rats. An improved lipid profile in both serum and testis was also observed, in parallel with increased serum androgens (T and DHEA) and decline in E2, leptin and PRL levels thus indi- cating enhanced fertility, as clearly evidenced by normalized epididymal sperm count and testicular structure.

remains unclear, however it can be related to the active con- stituents of the EOs used in the current study. EOs are a mixture of volatile and natural substances, characterized by a strong odor and produced by aromatic plants as secondary metabolites. The variety of pharmacological activities of EOs attracted the interest of many researchers to investigate its potential as drugs for treatment of various diseases [7]. Different pharmacological activities of these oils are related to their active constituents, mainly terpenoids [61]. Terpenoids are natural products belonging to the chemical group of ter- penes that are the main constituents of EOs. Several bioactive terpenoids contained in herbal or dietary plants can modulate the activity of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) [62] which are ligand-dependent transcription factors, belonging to the nuclear receptors. In mammals, three sub- types of PPARs, a, d, and g, have been identified which are known to play a multitude of essential roles in energy ho- meostasis and reproductive functions [63]. PPAR a is highly expressed in liver, cardiac muscle, and digestive tract, and regulate the expression of target genes involved in lipid metabolism. Activators of PPAR a have the potential to decrease circulating lipid levels and are commonly used to treat hyper-triglyceridemia and other dyslipidemic states [64]. PPARd is expressed in many tissues including adipose tissue and it has been demonstrated that PPAR d activation attenu- ates obesity and type-2 diabetes [65].

be related to the observation that carvacrol supplementation to HFD-fed mice tended to reduce body weight gain, visceral fats and plasma lipids compared with mice fed HFD, probably through regulating adipose tissue genes expression and pro- teins associated with the signaling cascades that lead to adi- pogenesis [68]. Similarly, the oil extract of sage was found to contain different terpenoids, such as 12-O-methyl carnosic, 20-hydroxyferruginol, viridiflorol, oleanolic acid and a-lino- lenic acid. In particular, methyl carnosic acid and a-linolenic acid were able to significantly activate PPARg, which seems effective in regulating genes involved in energy expenditure, as well as lipid and glucose metabolism [69]. As such, it can suggest that improved obesity status and associated hyper- lipidemia by marjoram and sage oils presented here is mainly dependent on the dual activation of PPARa and PPARg by terpenoid constituents abundantly present in such oils.

relation between HFD e induced obesity and development of disrupted testicular function and structure. Altered hormonal profile, including androgens, E2, leptin and PRL could explain such relation. Administration of marjoram and sage oil ex- tracts conferred marked preventive activity against altered hormones, in parallel with improved testicular status. Thus, indicating the highest capacity of each oil extract to prevent cases of male infertility, especially associated with obesity.

See comment in PubMed Commons below Expression and neuropeptidergic characterization of estrogen receptors (ERalpha and ERbeta) throughout the rat brain: anatomical evidence of distinct roles of each subtype. J Neurobiol 1998;36:357e78., Laflamme N., Nappi RE., Drolet G., Labrie C., Rivest S.

