This paper aims to address the deficit. We summarize the known results about primitive recursiveness of reals which we can find in literatures. We will give some new properties of the p.r. reals and analyze systematically the dependence of primitive recursiveness of reals on the representations.

In this section, we recall the representations of real numbers which will be discussed in this paper. First we explain the classical form of the representa- tions. Since we are interested in the effectivizations of the representations to different levels, all representations will be defined again in a uniform way such that they depend on some given class F of functions. According to the choice of the class , various computability of different levels about real numbers can be defined. These notions depend also on the selected representations.

representation of real numbers mentioned above uses functions, either from natural numbers to natural numbers or from natural numbers to rational numbers. Thus, any effectivity notion about these functions can be trans- fered naturally to the real numbers represented by these functions. To this end, we have to extend the computability (or subcomputability) of the func- tions on natural numbers to the functions from natural numbers to rational numbers. This extension looks like the following:

Thus, we have b x = fx(b, 0), if x is not a rational number and hence is not of the form x = m/bk. That is, the Beatty function of x is p.r. By Theorem 6.1, x is a Dedekind p.r. real number. If x is rational, then x is obviously a Dedekind p.r. real number too.

Roughly speaking, an irrational number x is called primitive-recursively ir- rational (p.r. irrational for short) if it is possible to find a primitive-recursively lower bound of the distance between x and any given rational number. More precisely, there is a p.r. function f such that for all positive integers m and n

In this paper we summarize several known results about primitive recursive- ness of real numbers under different representations which are scattered in literatures and show some new relations among them as well. We have seen that, the p.r. reals under different representations form a comprehensive hi- erarchy:

