We introduce Process Algebra with Hooks (PAH). In PAH processes represent different layers of abstraction, from biochemistry to tissue, and special synchronisations via hook actions ensure consistency between these abstractions. There is an explicit representation of geometrical space and the algebra has a stochastic semantics based on functional rates of reactions.

Following this flow of research, we consider models that include a geometrical notion of space [9]. Here we present process algebra with hooks (PAH), a process algebra designed to capture essential features of models of pattern formation. Our approach is inspired by mathematical models of pattern formation that have their roots in the early work on morphogenesis of Turing [18]. Turing supported the

hypothesis that, given an area with identical and uniformly distributed cells, pat- terns of different phenotypes arise due only to the diffusion and the local reactive activity of the molecules present in the cells. These ideas inspired new models that today are validated by increasing experimental evidence [12]. Additionally, Turing introduced the term morphogen, a special molecule whose concentration determines the phenotype of a region in space. Today, we know that this phenotype depends usually on the absolute concentration [11] of morphogens and in some cases on the relative concentration [13].

Following these concepts, in PAH we use processes to represent different layers of abstraction, e.g. from biochemistry to tissue. A bottom-up synchronisation of these layers via actions called hooks ensures the consistency of the abstractions. Moreover, an explicit notion of geometrical space is embedded in the algebra. Other features are borrowed from Bio-PEPA, such as multi-way synchronisation, functional rates and parsimony of the syntax. In this paper we focus mainly on the multi-layer aspect of PAH, rather than the spatial aspect.

The paper is organised as follows. In Section 2 we introduce PAH by examples, before presenting the formal syntax and semantics in Section 3. In Section 4 we show how to model the biochemical layer in PAH, while an example of the use of PAH is in Section 5. We conclude with discussion related work in Section 6 and conclusions and future work in Section 7. The interested reader will find the stochastic semantics is in Appendix A, additional formal definitions in Appendix B and the details of our formalisation of functional rates in Appendix C.

Example 2.1 Using the process as level of concentration abstraction, let Mv (i = 0,..., 3) be the process representing the morphogen M at a position v in space, with concentration level i. Moreover, let Tv and Tv be processes at a higher layer,

layer actions a:v and b:v. These instances represent a concentration threshold and are represented by the different notation a:v[x:v] and b:v[y:v]. x:v and y:v are called hooks, because they link actions on different layers of abstraction bottom- up. a:v and x:v are indeed the same action, interpreted from two different layers of abstraction. They carry different but complementary pieces of information: a:v means the biochemical reaction Ra:v has happened, while x:v means a change at the tissue layer has been triggered. Note, we do not represent the execution of a:v[x:v] as an interleaving of the action names a:v and x:v. Instead, a:v[x:v] generates a single

Example 2.2 More complex relations between biochemistry and tissue can be de- scribed. In this example, the state change of T is triggered when the concentration of morphogen A surpasses the concentration of morphogen B. We define additional utility process Pi to represent the difference between the concentration levels of A and B.

As an aid to the reader, we conclude this introduction with an explanation of the terminology of actions and their composition. So far, we have been using actions of the kind a:v[x:v] or b:v. a, b and x are action names, v is a location and the compositions of action names and locations, e.g. b:v, are called actions. A set of actions {a:v, b:s, . . . } is called an activity. In fact, processes can perform only what

we call an extensible activity, written A[H], where A and H are activities. If H is empty, a short hand notation for A[H] is A. To simplify the notation, we omit the curly brackets { and } when this does not generate ambiguity. Finally, when we write a:v[x:v] we mean the extensible activity composed of two activities, both singletons, while when we write b:v we mean the extensible activity composed of two activities, where the first is a singleton and the second is empty and so omitted.

In this paper we present a new process algebra, PAH. Due to space limitations we concentrate here on the syntax, semantics and examples of use. While we do not define relations here, the reader should bear in mind our overarching motivation for this algebra is comparing systems with different underlying biochemistries.

removing the hooks and filtering the set of regular actions A. In particular, A con- tains several actions, but they might be just the same action, seen from different layers of abstraction. In the filtered system, depending on which layer of abstrac- tion is to be considered, only those actions belonging to that layer will be kept on the label.

Stochastic semantics. We aim to formalise models of pattern formation where patterns arise due to biochemical reactions and diffusion. In order to provide accu- rate quantitative predictions, we developed a stochastic semantics for PAH, based on functional rates. This means that we can derive rates for the transitions of the LTS from arbitrary kinetics laws. The interested reader can find the stochastic semantics of PAH in Appendix A.

A novel process algebra, PAH, that aims to formalise models of pattern formation has been presented. Its main feature is the ability to model different layers of abstractions, by an action synchronisation that works bottom-up. It also includes an explicit representation of geometrical space and transport between locations.

In PAH, the lowest layer of abstraction is the biochemistry, where processes denote levels of concentration of species. Processes at higher layers denote tissue or any other layer of abstraction. At all levels there is an explicit notion of location in geometrical space. The semantics is given by a labelled transition system, which is then filtered to provide a more concise form, without hooks, tailored to a given layer of abstraction.

To define a stochastic version of PAH, we need to associate a rate with each transi- tion of the temporary LTS. The rate is a positive real number that is the parameter of the exponential distribution of the time necessary for a transition, i.e. an action, to happen.

