The term quantum communication refers to the process of transferring a quantum state between distinct physical locations. There are two ways of accomplishing this task. The first one is analogous to classical communication and involves sending a quantum bit over a quantum communication channel (just as classical communica- tion is associated with sending classical bits over a classical communication chan- nel). The second one has no classical analogue. In a quantum world it is possible to transfer a quantum bit without utilising a quantum channel, by using a classi- cal communication channel and a pair of entangled states and applying quantum operations locally.

program development, or programming methodology. This is the field of computer science concerned with applications of mathematics and logic to software engineering tasks. In particular, the formal methods provide tools to formally express specifica- tions, prove correctness of implementations, and reason about various properties of specifications (e.g. implementability) and of implementations (e.g. time and space complexity).

In this work the analysis of quantum communication protocols is based on quantum predicative programming ([23,24,22]), a recent generalisation of the well- established predicative programming ([14,15]). It supports the style of program development in which each programming step is proved correct as it is made. We inherit the advantages of the theory, such as its generality, simple treatment of recursive programs, and of time and space complexity. The theory of quantum pro- gramming provides tools to write both classical and quantum specifications, develop quantum programs that implement these specifications, and reason about their com- parative time, space, and communication complexity, all in the same framework.

The rest of this work is organised as follows. Section 2 is a brief introduction to quantum predicative programming. The contribution of this work is Section 3 which introduces a formal framework for specifying, implementing, and analysing quantum communication protocols and presents the analysis of two such protocols: quantum teleportation and quantum dense coding. Section 4 states conclusions and outlines directions for future research. A short introduction to quantum computing

A probability is a real number between 0 and 1, inclusive. A distribution is an expression whose value is a probability and whose sum over all values of variables is 1. Given a distribution of several variables, we can sum out some of the variables to obtain a distribution of the rest of the variables.

When defining a quantum communication channel one must be careful not to introduce any unwanted behaviour, such as violation of the no-cloning principle (i.e. creation of identical copies of an unknown arbitrary quantum state). For this purpose we make the change of ownership of the transported qubit explicit in the definition:

state of the qubit) that she wishes to transfer to Bob. Alice starts by interacting the qubit she wishes to teleport with her half of the entangled pair (she applies a controlled-not followed by a Hadamard transform) and measuring her two qubits. She then sends the results of her measurements to Bob (two classical bits). Bob receives the two classical bits and, depending of their values, applies one of the three Pauli operators or the identity to his qubit. Surprisingly, he has recovered the state Alice wished to teleport.

The quantum dense coding (sometimes called super-dense coding) protocol is less famous than the quantum teleportation protocol, but it is no less important. It achieves the transfer of 2 bits of classical information by sending 1 bit of quantum information and utilising 1 entangled pair of qubits. That is, its goal is the opposite of that of the quantum teleportation protocol.

That is, Alice applies one of the three Pauli operators or an identity to her half of the entangled pair, depending on the values of her classical bits, and sends her qubit to Bob. Bob receives the qubit, applies a controlled-not followed by a Hadamard, and measures the two qubits in his possession. We now show that the program P implements the specification S. First, we simplify the processes Alice and Bob:

We have presented a formal framework for specifying, implementing, and analysing quantum communication protocols. The analysis is not limited to reasoning about the data sent or received during the execution of the protocol. We provide tools to formally prove complexity of the communication protocols, such as the number of classical and quantum bits sent during the execution. We have applied our approach

In this section we introduce the basic concepts of quantum mechanics, as they pertain to the quantum systems that we consider for quantum computation. The discussion of the underlying physical processes, spin- 1 -particles, etc. is not our interest. We are concerned with the model for quantum computation only. A reader not familiar with quantum computing can consult [19] for a comprehensive introduction to the field.

