This research report details the results of a longitudinal design-based study that aimed to design, develop, and evaluate a virtual reality (VR) learning intervention called Virtuoso for autistic adults. The VR training was designed to help autistic adults learn how to use public trans- portation services in a safe, effective, and controllable manner (Glaser and Schmidt, 2018). The study highlights the challenges associated with designing VR for autistic users, specifically the programming for gener- alization of skills learned in the VR environment to real-world public transportation. The report discusses the potential benefits of VR tech- nology for autism interventions, including the potential for skills learned in VR to generalize to real-world situations. The report provides a comprehensive overview of the research and its findings, offering valu- able insights into the potential of VR technology to support the learning needs of autistic individuals (Glaser & Schmidt, 2021; Schmidt et al., 2019; Schmidt & Glaser, 2021a, 2021b).

condition affecting 2% of people worldwide, and associated challenges that can impact education, employment, and quality of life. We then describe the potential of public transportation training to increase in- dependence, employment opportunities, and social engagement for autistic people, as well as the barriers to accessing such training, including safety risks and a lack of available training options. We present the use of virtual reality technology for autism as particularly promising given its potential for generalization of skills to the real-world. Our intervention, entitled Virtuoso, aims to address the challenges of public transportation training by offering a safe and controlled training envi- ronment for autistic adults. The Virtuoso public transportation training intervention is detailed, with a discussion of the various design elements that were incorporated to enhance the learning experience and promote generalization.

Virtuoso is a suite of VR technologies that was developed in collab- oration with autistic adults enrolled in a day program and their service providers at a large Midwestern university. Virtuoso was developed to provide the day program with a formalized immersive learning inter- vention to teach skills associated with using a publicly-available uni- versity shuttle in and around the university campus (Glaser et al., 2022; Schmidt et al., 2019; Schmidt & Glaser, 2021). The ability to access and use public transportation is a critical aspect of independent living (Felce, 1997), as it provides much-needed access to medical, vocational, and community opportunities (Shier et al., 2009).

Prior to the development of Virtuoso, the day program lacked a formal and systematized public transportation routine. Given that asso- ciates of the day program needed to use public transportation on a reg- ular basis to travel to vocational training sites and engage in day-to-day programming around campus, a number of issues arose, the most poignant of which had to do with the inherent risks associated with transportation training. Therefore, the use of immersive technologies was seen as a promising solution to this real-world problem. However, we were unable to locate any off-the-shelf public transportation VR tools. Therefore, we opted to develop Virtuoso. This decision was predicated on the following justifications.

prompts. These were removed in VRL2, allowing participants to inde- pendently practice navigating important routes and encounter necessary information with reduced environmental prompts. Further additional environmental details such as bushes, trees, fire hydrants, and more notably non-playable characters were added to make the campus more realistic. The fourth and final stage took place in the real-world, providing participants an opportunity to perform the skills they had previously learned and practiced virtually. Ultimately, this pedagogical model sought to promote synthesis of important subordinate skills (e.g., interpreting a map, interpreting a schedule) using a range of evidence- based practices, such as system of least prompts (Doyle et al., 1988), prompt fading (Cengher et al., 2018), video modeling (McCoy & Her- mansen, 2007), and incorporation of established generalization heuris- tics (Stokes & Osnes, 2016a).

Field Notes. A trained research assistant took notes of observed ac- tivities that were scanned and digitized, stored in a secure cloud sharing platform, transcribed, and then organized in a text document for further analysis. Notes were broad in nature with a focus on documenting details pertinent to our research questions. In particular, notes were taken when the research assistant observed behaviors and communication that conveyed details about the realism of digital assets.

Video analysis using V-Note Pro. Precise measures of total time on task and percentage of task completion were also established using V- Note Pro. To determine the total time on task, researchers applied duration-based codes using V-Note. Two independent coders coded tasks from start to end. Results between coders were nearly identical (off by milliseconds). Values were input into a spreadsheet and later used to calculate descriptive statistics.

One way within subjects ANOVA. Within-subjects 1-way ANOVA was used. Participants were measured multiple times on the dependent variable (total time to complete each task and each session) under different levels of the independent variable (different stages of the shuttle training program). The goal of the ANOVA was to determine if there was

a significant difference in the mean total time to complete each task and each session across the different stages of the shuttle training program. The Shapiro-Wilk test was used to check the normality of the data for each task. If the data was normally distributed, the 1-way within-subjects ANOVA was performed. If the data was not normally distributed, the Friedman rank sum test was used instead.

Semi-structured Interviews. Upon completion of each VR training session, participants took part in a semi-structured interview, each of which was annotated using thematic analysis. To thematically analyze our data, we started by familiarizing ourselves with the data by reading through the interview notes several times. Next, we began to identify and highlight segments of our data that seemed relevant. This process was completed by two members of the research team to generate preliminary codes. We then met and formalized the themes into a codebook and began the process of charting them to seek the relationships between

them. From there, we selected the most important and relevant themes and interpreted and elaborated on them, considering their relevance to our research questions. Themes were organized by comparing and con- trasting participant perceptions of VR environment attributes with the real-world.

Analysis of percentage of task completion revealed that in both the VR sessions and the real-world session, all four tasks were completed by all participants (i.e., check daily schedule, check map, walk to shuttle, and wait for shuttle). A single exception to this was for participant Keith in VRL1, when a technology error precluded his ability to complete the wait for shuttle task. Percentage of task completion for all participants in VRL1 was 95.83%, in VRL2 was 100.00%, and in the real-world was 100%.

evident for the check map task, also with a 33 s difference between VRL1 and real-world sessions. For the walk to shuttle task, VRL1 and VRL2 were identical, although the average to completion was 43 s longer for performing the task in the real-world. For the wait for shuttle task, average times differed from 1 s to 32 s between sessions. On average, total time to completion was fairly similar between sessions, ranging from 7:01 to 7:32.

To compare behaviors between the following sessions, analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed on: (1) VRL1 and VRL2, (2) VRL1 and real-world, and (3) VRL2 and real-world. Homogeneity of variance was calculated for OG and Virtuoso participants (VP) across conditions, with findings suggesting normal distribution of the data. Generally speaking, behavior across sessions and tasks was similar. However, some differ- ences were observed. For VRL1 and VRL2, significant differences were found in OG behavior for the wait for shuttle task and for VP behavior in the walk to shuttle task. For VRL1 and real-world, significant differences were found in OG and VP behavior for the walk to shuttle task. For VRL2 and real-world, significant differences were found in OG behavior for the walk to shuttle task and for VP behavior in the wait for shuttle task.

Humanoid avatars were the asset with the most discrepancy in par- ticipants' perceptions. The avatars used were perceived as being realistic and contributing to the 3D environment's realism by some participants, although they also were perceived as having some non-realistic charac- teristics. For example, Kevin told us that he thought the OG's avatar was realistic looking. In fact, all participants were able to tell the research team accurately who the real-world counterpart of the OG's avatar was. However, the avatar's mannerisms and movements were sometimes perceived as being unrealistic. Travis told us that he was confused as to why her mouth was not moving when the OG was talking, but also stated,

As discussed previously, generalization is unlikely to occur as a matter of course. Researchers must actively design and program for general- ization (Stokes & Osnes, 2016). Virtuoso was designed intentionally to embody generalization heuristics while promoting useful skills for public transportation utilization for autistic adults (Schmidt et al., 2020). The primary aim was to create an intervention that was grounded in well-established, evidence-based practices and to improve the interven- tion based on iterative design, enactment, evaluation, reflection, and revision. As such, the findings related to Research Question 1 are congruent with others who have applied these heuristics for VR in- terventions (e.g., Dixon et al., 2019).

RQ2 investigated the extent to which participants perceived them- selves to be present within the Virtuoso-VR learning environment. The psychology of telepresence has long been recognized as a fundamental factor in influencing behavior in VR. For example, seminal work by re- searchers at the Stanford Virtual Human Interaction lab suggests that telepresence and realism are vital for exerting social influence in VR environments (Blascovich, 2002). It is broadly understood that if users are able to feel psychologically present then the actions that they participate in within the virtual environment can take on a deeper meaning and users can then form a better mental model of their behav- iors to that of the real world.

Because of the heterogeneity of the participants and established challenges using standardized measures with autistic populations, the extent to which telepresence would actually manifest in the study was uncertain. Indeed, autism research suggests that individual differences such as IQ, anxiety, and resilience can influence participants' perceptions of telepresence in VR environments (Malihi et al., 2020). That partici- pants' perceptions of telepresence were uniformly high is reassuring and

Generalization from digital environments to the real-world has been widely cited as justification for the use of VR among autistic people. However, the research evidence supporting generalization is remarkably limited (Glaser & Schmidt, 2021; Mesa-Gresa et al., 2018), as is guidance on how to design VR environments to promote generalization (Schmidt & Glaser, 2021). Few studies explicitly investigate generalization effects. Those that do suffer from a range of methodological limitations, such as using self-report data (cf., Parsons et al., 2006) or reporting highly var- iable and inconclusive outcomes (cf., Self et al., 2007). In a field that has a paucity of empirical support for generalization, such studies are helpful in that they provide evidence of promise; however, research with more rigorous experimental control is needed to validly and reliably establish an empirical basis of support for generalization.

Few studies have attempted to approach the problem of generaliza- tion with such rigor. Notably, those that have tend to focus on relatively simple, discrete skills related to safety. For example, Strickland, McAllister, Coles, & Osborne (2007) developed a VR environment to promote fire safety skills, after which a proportion of study participants completed a generalization task without error. Josman et al. (2008) developed a VR training intervention to teach street-crossing skills to autistic children. Their findings indicated that about half of the partici- pants were able to improve their pedestrian behavior following the VR intervention. Lastly, perhaps the most compelling and methodologically sound example of generalization can be found in Dixon et al. (2019), who used single-subject design research methods to evaluate a street-crossing intervention with three autistic children. Participants in this study were

able to reach mastery in both the VR environment and in the real-world. Similar to the Virtuoso study reported here, Dixon and colleagues spe- cifically programmed for generalization using heuristics proposed by Stokes and Osnes (2016). However, a key difference in this study was that, although the researchers used fully immersive head-mounted dis- play-based VR, their VR intervention was based on 360-degree spherical videos, which provide only three degrees of freedom and different interaction possibilities (Glaser et al., 2022). Affordances of fully inter- active, digitally-rendered VR systems that provide six degrees of freedom were absent, such as avatars, avatar control, a fully interactive environ- ment, etc.

The work presented here contributes to the limited evidence base on generalization in VR for autistic users. Researchers have long maintained that designing VR interventions for autistic populations is a wicked problem (Schmidt, 2014) with no established or ideal solution, and solving one aspect of the problem might exacerbate other problems. Yet few researchers approach the problem of designing VR for autistic users from this perspective. Instead, the majority of research in this area is remarkably technocentric, attributing all questions and solutions to the technology itself. However, the technology underlying VR interventions remains remarkably immature, difficult to support in real-world inter- vention contexts, and particularly prohibitive for those who lack strong software development skills. As such, the technocentric stance could be problematically flawed when viewed in light of issues such as (1) chal- lenges associated with realizing real-world tasks within VR technology systems (Glaser et al., 2021), (2) human-computer interaction issues related to cybersickness (Glaser et al., 2022), (3) technologies becoming quickly obsolete (sometimes in the midst of a study), and (4) the diffi- culty of sustaining and supporting VR interventions longitudinally. These issues highlight the importance of considering the complex range of factors beyond technology itself when designing VR interventions for autistic users.

suggest that computing power will double every 1.5 years and that this advancement will lead to even more rapid technology acceleration. Extrapolating from this, it may be the case that VR is simply too immature in its current state for widespread implementation and use, but that this will inevitably change with time. Regarding intervention designers partnering with software development studios, precedent exists in the area of digital games based learning, where researchers have noted similar challenges (Hirumi et al., 2010). Given the similarities between video game development and VR development, designers of VR for autistic users should explore collaborating with more sophisticated development studios, as was the case with the Floreo VR system, which is perhaps the most successful commercial venture in this space (Ravindran et al., 2019).

Despite over two decades of research in the field of VR for autistic users, the surprising lack of support for generalization - one of the most fundamental justifications for the use of VR - is a major concern. To address this gap, we have taken action by explicitly programming for generalization and reconceptualizing notions of realism. Our hope is to inspire and encourage future research in this critical area.

