Abstract Researchers in different fields of study are always in dire need of spline interpolating function that conserve intrinsic trend of the data. In this paper, a rational trigonometric cubic spline with four free parameters has been used to retain convexity of 2D data. For this purpose, con- straints on two of free parameters bi and ci in the description of the rational trigonometric function are derived while the remaining two ai and di are set free. Numerical examples demonstrate that resulting curves using the technique of the underlying paper are C1.

Properties that quantify shape of data are positivity, mono- tonocity, and convexity. Plenty of spline functions exist which can produce a smooth curve but inept to preserve the inherent shape of the given data. The motivation of this paper is to pre- serve the intrinsic attribute of data that is convexity.

Convexity pervades everyday life. Whether it is manufac- turing of lenses, modeling of cars, analysis of indifference curves, nonlinear programming and approximation of func- tions, convexity stays the part and parcel of all. Loss of con- vexity is irreconcilable in all such practical problems.

Over the years, many milestones have been achieved in the field of shape preservation when data under consideration ex- hibit convex trend. Various schemes have been developed to reach the epitome of abstraction. Brodlie and Butt [1] pre- served the convex shape of data by establishing a piecewise cu- bic function. Their scheme suffered the detriment of insertion of the additional knots in an interval where convexity is lost.

Convexity preserving properties of rational Bezier and non-uni- form rational B-spline were studied geometrically by Carnicer [2]. Explicit representation of rational cubic function with one free parameter was developed by Delbourgo and Gregory [3] to retain convexity. Passcow and Roulier [4] formed a spline interpolant by constructing an auxiliary set of points and using convexity preserving properties of Bernstein polynomials. Schumaker [5] preserved the convexity by piecewise quadratic polynomial which was economical but again an extra knot had to be inserted. A rational cubic function with two shape parameters was introduced by Sarfraz and Hussain [6] to retain convexity. Sarfraz et al. [7] developed rational cubic functions with four parameters. In [7], the authors derived the shape pre-

In this section, problem of preserving convexity of 2D is ad- dresses. For this purpose, constraints on free parameters in the description of rational trigonometric cubic function (1) are developed. Let the convex data set defined over the interval [a, b] be {(xi, fi), i = 0,1, 2,..., n}. The necessary condition for the convexity of data is

Now, S2(x) > 0 if Ai, i = 0, 1, 2, ..., 63 are all positive as the denominator in (2) is strictly a positive quantity. Ai, i = 0, 1, 2, ..., 63 are all positive if the free parameters satisfy the following conditions

