Abstract In this paper, a novel version of Differential Evolution (DE) algorithm based on a couple of local search mutation and a restart mechanism for solving global numerical optimization prob- lems over continuous space is presented. The proposed algorithm is named as Restart Differential Evolution algorithm with Local Search Mutation (RDEL). In RDEL, inspired by Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), a novel local mutation rule based on the position of the best and the worst individuals among the entire population of a particular generation is introduced. The novel local mutation scheme is joined with the basic mutation rule through a linear decreasing function. The proposed local mutation scheme is proven to enhance local search tendency of the basic DE and speed up the convergence. Furthermore, a restart mechanism based on random mutation scheme and a modified Breeder Genetic Algorithm (BGA) mutation scheme is combined to avoid stagnation and/or premature convergence. Additionally, an exponent increased crossover probability rule and a uniform scaling factors of DE are introduced to promote the diversity of the population and to improve the search process, respectively. The performance of RDEL is investigated and compared with basic differential evolution, and state-of-the-art parameter adaptive differential evolution variants. It is discovered that the proposed modifications significantly improve the performance of DE in terms of quality of solution, efficiency and robustness.

particular generation. Additionally, an exponent increased crossover probability rule and a uniform scaling factors of DE are introduced to promote the diversity of the population and to improve the search process, respectively. Furthermore, a restart mechanism based on random mutation scheme and a modified Breeder Genetic Algorithm (BGA) mutation scheme is combined to avoid stagnation and/or premature conver- gence. Extensive numerical experiments and comparisons have been conducted in this paper on a set of 14 well-known high dimensional benchmark functions indicate that the proposed (RDEL) algorithm is superior and competitive with conven-

on a set of well known benchmark functions showed that the FADE Algorithm outperformed basic DE algorithm. Like- wise, Brest et al. [9] proposed an efficient technique, named jDE, for self-adapting control parameter settings by encoding the parameters into each individual and adapting them by means of evolution. The results showed that jDE is better than, or at least comparable to, the standard DE algorithm, (FADE) algorithm and other state-of-the-art algorithms when consider- ing the quality of the solutions obtained. Along the same line, Omran et al. [13] proposed a Self-adaptive Differential Evolu- tion (SDE) algorithm. In it, F was self-adapted using a muta- tion rule similar to the mutation operator in the basic DE. The experiments conducted showed that SDE generally outper- formed DE algorithms and other evolutionary algorithms.

Recently, inspired by SaDE algorithm and motivated by the recent success of diverse self-adaptive DE approaches, Mallipeddi et al. [17] developed a self-adaptive DE, called EPSDE, based on ensemble approach. In EPSDE, a pool of distinct mutation strategies along with a pool of values for each control parameter coexists throughout the evolution pro- cess and competes to produce offspring. The performance of EPSDE was evaluated on a set of bound constrained problems and compared with conventional DE and other state-of-the-art parameter adaptive DE variants. The comparative results showed that EPSDE algorithm outperformed conventional DE and other state-of-the-art parameter adaptive DE variants in terms of solution quality and robustness.

In order to enhance the local search tendency, and to acceler- ate the convergence of DE technique, a new local mutation rule is proposed based on the position of the best and the worst individuals the entire population, respectively. It is worth men- tioning that the proposed mutation is inspired by the structure of PSO algorithm that mimics social-psychological principles such as flocks of birds, schools of fish and ant colonies. Briefly, in the global PSO version, each particle learns from the personal best position and the best position achieved so far by the whole population. Similarly, the main idea of the pro- posed novel mutation is based on that each vector learns from the position of the best and the worst individuals among the entire population of a particular generation. Simply, the new position of each mutant vector depends on the position of the best and worst vectors achieved so far by the whole population of a particular generation by following the same direction of the best and similarly by avoiding the direction of the worst. The modified mutation scheme is as follows:

strategy is greater than the probability of using new local muta- tion. However, at latter period, it biases to exploitation ten- dency because the probability of using the local mutation scheme is greater than the probability of using the basic muta- tion rule. As a result, through generations, both global explora- tion and local exploitation capabilities are executed. On the contrary, enhancing local search ability of DE may lead to pre- mature convergence or stagnation situations. Hence, a restart mechanism based on random mutation scheme and a modified Breeder Genetic Algorithm (BGA) mutation scheme [33] is combined to avoid both situations. In this mechanism, one of two mutation operators is performed based on a predefined probability.

Generally, in the random mutation, for a chosen vector xi at a particular generation, a uniform random integer number jrand between [1, D] is firstly generated and then a real number between (bj aj) is calculated. Then, the jrand value from the chosen vector is replaced by the new real number to form a new vector x'. The random mutation can be described as follows.

Practically, no vector is subject to both mutations in the same generation, and only one of the above two mutations can be applied with the probability of 0.5. However, both mutations can be performed in the same generation with two different vectors. Therefore, at any particular generation, the

Therefore, Cr should take a small value in order to avoid the exceeding level of diversity that may result in premature convergence and slow convergence rate. Then, through generations, the variance of the population will decrease as the vectors in the population become similar. Thus, in order to advance diversity and increase the convergence speed, Cr should be a large value. Based on the above analysis and dis- cussion, and in order to balance between the diversity and the convergence rate or between global exploration ability and local exploitation tendency, a dynamic non-linear increased crossover probability scheme is proposed as follows:

EPSDE [17]. The above benchmark functions f1 to f14 are tested in 10-dimensions (10-D), 30-dimensions (30-D) and 50-dimen- sions (50-D).The maximum number of function evaluations is set to 100,00 for 10D problems, 300,000 for 30D problems and 500,000 for 50D problems. The population size is set to 50 for all dimensions with all functions. For each problem, 30 independent runs are performed and statistical results are pro- vided including the mean and the standard deviation values. The performance of different algorithms is statistically com- pared with RDEL by statistical t-test with significance level of

