The use of online services and applications (e. g., online shops, social networks and peer-to-peer applications) has become widespread in recent years. An important security problem related to online services is that users have to interact with a number of different services and other users they do not know very well and with whom they have little or no past experience. However, the users need to know whether services and other users are trustworthy, i. e., whether they will behave as expected (e. g., whether information sources are competent and reliable and whether services will handle disclosed personal information responsibly).

systems systematically collect available user recommendations about the trustwor- thiness of services and of other users, combine these statements and compute the resulting reputation value of all services according to a trust model. The trust model of a reputation system defines how to represent, reason and calculate with trust values. Designing a sound trust model is difficult because trust statements are uncertain. Thus, it is necessary to reason with uncertain indications and degrees of support, and it can happen that opinions conflict with each other.

The belief value b of a conjunction can be interpreted as the probability that both input values are belief, d as the probability that at least one input value is disbelief. The remaining probability mass is assigned to ignorance. The disjunction operator is constructed accordingly. The negation operator swaps the belief and

We have shown that neither the handling of conflicting opinions nor the evaluation of trust graphs has been solved satisfactorily in current trust models. Therefore, we propose new representations for trust relations and trust values that reflect the degrees of belief, ignorance, disbelief and conflict (Sect. 3.1 and Sect. 3.2), and we present an approach for reasoning and computing with these trust values. This extends the trust representation in our previous approach [6], which is contained as a special case in the new approach.

We start with a deterministic calculus for discrete trust values (Sect. 3.3) and extend it for calculating with continuous values (Sect. 3.4). Our evaluation approach handles conflicting opinions reasonably, it is free from counterintuitive effects caused by re-normalizations and it can be applied to trust graphs with arbitrary topology.

jective estimation of the probability that there are both supporting and refuting indications for H at the same time, and i represents the subjective estimation of the probability that there are neither supporting nor refuting indications for H. These four cases are complementary, therefore b + i + d + c = 1. In first-hand trust relations c is usually 0. The correspondence between discrete and continuous trust values is shown in Tab. 2.

Inference rules define the logic of reputation systems, i. e., whether opinions can be combined and how the resulting reputation value depends on the trust values of the first-hand trust relations. In the following, we propose deterministic operators for conjunction, disjunction, negation, recommendation and consensus for the formula- tion of inference rules. As we favor a computation approach with probabilistic initial view it is sufficient to define these operators for discrete trust values. In Sect. 3.4, we show how these deterministic operators can be used with continuous trust values. Some examples for typical trust inference rules are shown in Sect. 4, more inference rules for reputation systems, especially also for validating the authenticity of public keys, can be found in [6].

no indications supporting Hx (i. e., in the cases of ignorance or disbelief ) then we cannot derive any indications about H, else (i. e., in the cases of belief and conflict ) we can conclude that there are indications supporting H (or refuting H) exactly if there are indications supporting Hy (or refuting Hy respectively). Therefore, the

We first describe the reputation computation with discrete trust values, and propose then two approaches to compute with continuous trust values. Due to the discussed drawbacks of the computation approach with probabilistic operators, we choose an approach with a probabilistic initial view. We also define corresponding probabilistic operators and show that both approaches can be mixed.

We propose the following approach to compute with continuous trust values. It is based on the following random experiment: For each of the n first-hand trust statement Hj (j = 1,..., n) with trust value tj = (bj, ij, dj, cj) we choose a discrete trust value t' : With probability bj we choose belief, with probability ij ignorance, with probability dj disbelief and with probability cj conflict. Next, we compute the resulting discrete reputation value t' from the chosen discrete trust values with the deterministic approach described in Sect. 3.4.1. The resulting reputation value t = (b, i, d, c) is defined as follows: b is the probability that t' is belief, i the probability that t' is ignorance, d that t' is disbelief and c that t' is conflict.

