visual attributes to learn/detect a novel class which has not been seen during the training stage but we still know its attribute values, called zero-shot learning [10,11]. Besides, we can even infer an unfamiliar class which we have not known its attribute ground- truths [12,13] at all. We may also produce more semantic queries by using the visual attributes to perceive scenes/objects in the image search engines [14].

In this work, we propose a new approach which tries to recover from aforementioned insufficiencies of the supervision caused by the human factor, and the lack of connections in the attribute-based class modeling. It is based on the relative attributes for incremental visual recognition. We generate the relative attributes in an unsu- pervised manner by randomly ordering the target classes. On the other hand, we model the visual classes in a weakly supervised environment where a very limited number of training data is used. Meanwhile, we update both the attribute space and class models concurrently in an iterative algorithm. To do so, we establish a machine-machine interaction protocol that projects a Student (S)- Teacher (T) relationship that is available in the real world.

We present three contributions in this paper. First, the attribute space and the class models are learned simultaneously in an iter- ative manner. This is very intuitive since the class models are constructed on the attribute space, and there must be a connection in a combined learning procedure. The second contribution is the bilateral learning paradigm where S updates the attribute space which, in fact, influences T's future attribute-based explanations. We can say that T is also learning or it should generate its responses with respect to S' inferences on the attributes. Also note that at- tributes are initialized randomly and T's attribute-based explana- tions are prepared online in an unsupervised manner. The last contribution is about the virtual growth of the training set. Unlike semi-supervised methods where each sample is used only once for the learning procedure, T does not reveal the true label of the selected image if the belief is false. So the number of training data is increased by dropping the falsely predicted sample back into the unlabeled pool. In the experiments, we see that the number of it- erations is almost doubled, and this leads to a better performance in visual recognition.

The general structure of the rest of the paper is as follows: Section 2 summarizes the related work about attribute-based ap- plications with their important aspects. Then, we explain the pro- posed work in details in section 3, and the experimental evaluations are presented with comparative results on two popular datasets in section 4. We conclude the paper with our clear in- ferences in section 5.

The importance of an attribute for each class varies for recog- nition purposes. Thus, we may produce an image/category- attribute co-occurrence matrix such that attribute membership for each class/image and the corresponding correlations with respect to the attributes may be captured. These relations can be produced in a supervised manner beforehand; or in a semi- supervised/unsupervised fashion. Some researchers suggest that binary correlations would be sufficient while others claim real valued ranking scores are essential to measure the attribute strength among categories/samples.

Relative attributes are first introduced by Parikh and Grauman in Ref. [6] with the assumption that semantically more enriched data descriptions and discrimination will be achieved if we use relative class memberships on attributes, instead of binary re- lations. Biswas and Parikh propose an interactive learning scheme for both object and face recognition with relative attributes in Ref. [15]. They improve this semi-supervised work in Ref. [10] by weighting negative candidate samples, selecting the query images and updating the attributes.

In supervised settings, the attribute labeling can be constructed on whether the instances individually or the visual categories generally. Akata et al. [8] try to solve the attribute-based classifi- cation problem by constructing a composite framework which embeds mapping images from both sides of low-level features and class labels into a common attribute space at once. Jing et al. [20] generate a deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architec- ture to learn appearance and motion based binary attributes. Kia- pour et al. [21] experiment a challenging task to extract deep learning features that are based on retrieval and similarity learning methods for this task. Xinlei and Abhinav [22] propose an approach to utilize web data for learning visual attributes through CNN.

Unlike supervised learning where the attributes are named specifically, one may not name the attributes but only use them to discriminate the data classes. Farhadi et al. [5] embed the object recognition problem into describing objects and mainly focus on attribute learning. Ma et al. [11] implement an algorithm to learn class-level relative attributes in an unsupervised manner where they produce relative attributes as many as the number of pairwise class combinations in a greedy fashion. Karayel and Arica [23] follow the similar way of [11,24] but they produce the attributes completely randomly and attribute selection is implemented af- terwards. Yu et al. [25] formalize a category-attribute co-occur- rence matrix for cross-category generalization.

visual data, they are learned from global low-level features (i.e. GIST). The classes are then modeled by S with a limited number of category labeled data in the mid-level attribute space. Although it is T's initiative to generate random class orderings for the attribute learning, S then takes the responsibility to update both the attribute

explanations for the S' beliefs. Because S uses these explanations for the updates of attribute space, overfitting may occur respectively. To avoid overfitting at this point, we propose three enhancements for S. First, S machine also propagates its best prediction once in a while (i.e. one in ten iterations) on the contrary to the selection method which is based on the maximum entropy. Secondly, S re- stricts one sample image to be selected often by deploying a

are then decreased by one through iterations, and the previously selected images are not allowed to be chosen again until their counters reach zero, i.e. not for the three next runs in this case. Finally, S keeps track of the selection history of samples in the current Uset. Hence, the image is not propagated again with a class label which has been predicted falsely in the previous iterations.

[29]. In detail, the samples in the Sset are known with their labels by S, so their weights are naturally 1 like in Ref. [15]. Hence, the candidate weights are first normalized to [0,1] such that they are summed to 1 for true predictions while the maximum value is set to 1 for false predictions because absolutely negative samples exist in the candidate list.

Our main concerns in multi-class classification are whether: a. Attributes constitute a fruitful intermediate space for data repre- sentation, b. Unsupervised attributes are more discriminative than the crowd sourced attribute labeling in supervision, c. Learning attributes and category models incrementally in a machine- machine interaction increases the recognition accuracy when compared with DAP and SSAC frameworks.

simply to the number of samples in the Uset, i.e. 200 for 25 images per category. On the contrary, the bound varies in the proposed method since the query image is dropped back into the Uset when it is predicted falsely.

successful when its plot rises up earlier and sharper than the others. We compare the performances of the DAP, SSAC and pro- posed   work   with   supervised   and   combined   (i.e.

In this study, we use attributes as the mid-level representation, instead of low-level features, in an incremental learning procedure for visual recognition. Attributes constitute a communication channel through S-T machine interactions. The conversation mainly indicates a question-answer protocol where S selects an informa- tive sample from the unlabeled pool of data, Uset, each time and T gives attribute-based explanations for mentoring. Also note that the training set is expanded virtually since the query image is dropped back into the Uset without exposing its ground-truth category label when S predicts it falsely. So we introduce a stu- dent centered learning method where S is actually responsible for updating the attribute space and class models simultaneously in an iterative manner. Although T initiates the relative attributes by sorting the image categories randomly in an unsupervised fashion, S updates the attributes with the selected query images from then on. This means that T also learns in time how the student interprets the representative space on which the class discriminants are built. Additionally, S does not use only its labeled dataset, Sset, for updating the class models, but it also implements a candidate se- lection method to append some samples from Uset to Sset in a weighting scheme.

classification is the focal point, the mean accuracy vs. iteration step/ number of attributes and the ROC curves are the main themes for analysis during multiple experiments. To summarize, the proposed method outperforms other works significantly, and it is concluded that the unsupervised attributes exploit the recognition perfor- mance when learned incrementally and simultaneously with the class models even though they are achieved by random class or- derings without human laboring.

Technological Research Council of Turkey. He received the Ph.D. degree in Electronics and Communication Engineering from Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey in 2016. He has been working for Navy Inventory Control Center, Kocaeli, Turkey since 2009 for stock estimation and process control. His research interest includes computer vision for image retrieval and classification, logistics decision support systems and data ex- change standards for inventory planning, pattern recognition analysis, data mining and machine learning applications for the recommender systems.

