To improve the data communication processing capability of smart city informatization construction and defend against malicious joint attacks of internal communication participants, we studied the use of function encryption, blockchain, differential privacy and other technologies to defend against weight dis- closure, participation in collusion attacks, single point failures and other issues in the federal learning process, and introduced edge computing and asynchronous communication in the classic federal learning framework, Improve the communication efficiency of the model while ensuring the accuracy. The research results show that the accuracy of FE-BDP algorithm can maintain above 95% for a long time, and the change is not significant with the increase of the number of users, indicating that the algorithm has strong stability. The loss value of FE-LDP model is significantly smaller than that of other models and can be stabilized below 0.05. The data aggregation time of blockchain encryption technology is less than 1.0s. The edge-asynchronous communication framework can be applied to multiple urban scenarios and achieve effective data communication, with the highest accuracy rate of 93.87%and the lowest commu- nication cost of 1315.29s. The research results show that the security encryption fusion technology can effectively protect user data privacy, and the edge-asynchronous communication framework has obvious effect on improving communication efficiency, which has important application value for promoting the construction of smart city informatization.

sonal and enterprise data have been stored in Internet big data, and their data security has begun to attract the attention of the public. However, the traditional data encryption and communica- tion techniques are laborious to achieve the security management of large-dimension urban data, and the probability of data leak will still occur [3]. For this reason, research has advanced a Federated Learning (FL) framework, which solves the privacy preservation trouble by building a FL pattern, and can avoid customer informa- tion disclosure while making full use of multi-party data [4,5]. However, with the ceaseless expansion of the dimension of urban data, the encryption difficulty of urban data is also increasing, and the traditional FL has been laborious to achieve effective preserva- tion of customer data [6]. For this reason, the research has intro- duced a differential privacy preservation technology under the FL to further realize the encryption of smart city data. It has intro- duced the Block chain (BC) to address the trouble of urban privacy data leak caused by failures. Then, it uses the edge asynchronous framework to achieve effective data transmittal and ameliorate the productivity of data communication, so as to tender a theoret- ical cornerstone for the development of smart cities.

rithm in traditional FL to a sparse differential gradient. After the first upload of gradient parameters, only the increment of param- eters is transmitted to the server, and the threshold value of parameter increment is set. Parameters whose increment is lower than the threshold value will not be uploaded, so as to reduce the communication and encryption costs of parameter transmittal.

When the loss of privacy exceeds the threshold, it means that the risk of privacy leak is high and the training needs to be stopped immediately. LDP allows subscribers to decide PB independently, but subscribers usually choose a high PB, which reduces the exac- titude of the pattern [21]. Therefore, the study introduces an exci- tation mechanism. If the lower limit of subscriber privacy preservation acceptance is pri, then the subscriber privacy preser- vation meets conditionpri(eps; sigma) P pri, where eps is the PB and sigma is the noise parameter. The server sends the public test data set and initial pattern to the subscriber in the iteration pro- cess. The subscriber upload the local pattern rate as a competitive tender to the server. The server will incorporate the subscribers with high exactitude into the federal learning and reward them. Under the excitation mechanism, subscribers and servers will try their best to pursue the balance between exactitude and privacy preservation, so as to find appropriate preservation strategies.

The border server will set a threshold value for the quantity of cus- tomers that upload parameters. If the quantity of customers par- takeing in training and parameter upload exceeds the threshold value, the border server will not receive parameter transmittal from other customers and directly conduct aggregation operations to avoid gaining gradient parameters with gradient delay transmit- ted by other customers, It affects the outcomes of aggregation operations. After the aggregation operation is completed, the bor- der server will broadcast the polymerized parameters to all cus- tomers, informing them that the iterative training has ended.

Cloud centrum servers and border servers often have large com- munication overhead and delay in the communication process, and different border servers have large differences in the quantity of customers and computing resources, which makes the iteration time of different border servers in the training process different [25]. If the cloud centrum server and the border server use syn- chronous communication, although the trouble of gradient param- eter delay is solved, the communication and computing productivity of the cloud centrum server will be limited by the bor- der server with the longest drill time. Before the border server with the longest drill time finishes uploading the parameters, the cloud centrum server will always be in a state of waiting for the param- eters, resulting in a large amount of waste of computing resources. When the cloud centrum server gains all the parameters uploaded

and send the updated global pattern to the border server. However, when synchronous communication is used, there is a delay gradi- ent between the cloud centrum server and the border server, and the update of the global pattern parameters of the cloud centrum server may be affected by the upload parameters with a degree of delay [26]. Therefore, the asynchronous communication mode is further introduced into the communication framework with the border server, and the communication mode between the cloud centrum server and the border server is changed to the asyn- chronous communication mode to ameliorate the convergence and communication productivity of the pattern. In addition, gradient delay compensation is introduced to ensure that the gradient delay is controlled within a small range by means of delay compensation, and set a limit for gradient delay to address the trouble of delay degree that may be caused by asynchronous communication. In the  asynchronous  communication  mode,  after  receiving  the

environment of the hospital. Analyzing the communication over- head of the edge asynchronous efficient communication frame- work, we can find that in different scenarios, the time overhead is less than 1350s, and we can know that the communication over- head of the communication framework in different scenarios is not significantly different. The above outcomes display that the edge asynchronous efficient communication framework advanced in the study has a high exactitude and low loss rate, and can deal with different urban scenarios, while displaying consistent communica- tion overhead, which further displays that the edge asynchronous efficient communication framework has a high stability.

data, a data encryption technique under the FL is advanced. This technique uses formulaal encryption and differential privacy preservation technology to avoid customer data leak. At the same time, to ameliorate the development rate of smart city, an edge asynchronous framework is advanced to ameliorate communica- tion productivity. The pattern verification displays that the advanced FE-BDP encryption pattern has significantly ameliorated its exactitude after the introduction of differential privacy technol- ogy, and can maintain the exactitude of more than 90% for a long time. Compared with other encryption patterns, FE-BDP has a higher exactitude, which is more than 95%. In addition, the loss value of the FE-LDP pattern advanced in the study is significantly smaller than that of other patterns, and can be stabilized to below

0.05. At the same time, the aggregation time of the BC based data aggregation technique is less than 1.0s. Finally, evaluate the com- munication productivity improvement effect of the edge asyn- chronous framework. The outcomes display that the edge asynchronous framework has significantly better convergence,

and its communication overhead can be reduced to 1315.29s at the lowest. The above outcomes display that under the FL, the intro- duction of formulaal encryption and differential privacy preserva- tion technology can effectively achieve data privacy preservation, and can ameliorate communication productivity with the edge asynchronous framework. However, the study did not consider the city data that is growing with time. Therefore, in the subse- quent study, we will advance a constantly updated data encryption and communication productivity improvement technique based on the change of city data dimension.

