Edge computing is a paradigm that can improve the quality of the service and the rate of resource utilization of the network system. Edge computing is developed from distributed computing that can integrate the hardware resources of the devices nearby the terminals to provide high quality services to users with low latency [1,2]. Similar to cloud computing, edge computing provides services to users via the network. Compared with the high centralization of cloud computing, edge com- puting is decentralized. The services provided by devices in edge com- puting do not need to be managed and provided through a centralized server. That is to say, the services provision of edge computing is directly client oriented that results in the service quality is more high, reliable and secure compared to that in cloud computing [3]. The obvious ad- vantages of edge computing determines that it can be well used in many network-based scenarios, such as internet of things [4], wireless sensor networks [5], smart cities [6], etc.

The reminder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 de- scribes the preliminaries that are used in the design of the proposed scheme. Section 3 introduces the system model and the design goals. Section 4 presents the details of the proposed scheme in this paper. Section 5 provides the evaluation that includes security analysis and performance analysis. The conclusion is given in Section 6.

Layer 2. Services Provider: The service provider in this layer are the edge devices in edge computing. The edge devices are the idle devices nearby the IoT in the network. Here, the communication network is the 5 G that can improve the service response speed and

information transmission quality. That is to say, the devices in edge computing are the connected devices in the cellular network pro- vided by the same base station and adjacent base stations in 5 G. Compared to cloud computing, the resource center in edge comput- ing is closer to terminals. The distributed devices can provide high quality services to terminals with low latency. To fully schedule the resources of edge devices, the concept of software-definition is used to manage the storage resources, the computing capability and the edge services. Hence, the services and resources provision in the pro- posed 5G-enabled SDEC are more flexible compared to traditional edge computing. This layer is responsible for storing the gathered data and executing the computational tasks outsourced by the IoT devices. The edge devices are honest but curious to the stored data. Moreover, it is possible that the edge devices will delete the less often used data and try to forge the computational result when the corre- sponding data has been destroyed. Hence, it is necessary to check the trustworthiness of edge devices and audit the storage integrity of the data periodically in edge computing.

Layer 3. Server/Controller: The server is the ESC that can be used to manage the resource and services of edge computing. Moreover, the ESC plays the role of the controller in SDEC. That is to say, the ESC is the management and control center that schedules the re- sources of edge computing and achieves the collaboration among devices, storage, computing capability and services in edge comput- ing. Moreover, the ESC is the KGC of the system and can be seen as the auditor of the distributed data integrity auditing in edge com- puting. Different from the entities in layer 1 and layer2, the ESC is a fully-trusted entity that can successfully generate and compute the parameters and keys according to the algorithms in the proposed scheme.

The details of the proposed scheme are introduced in this section. First, a high description is resented, which describes the main process of the proposed auditing scheme. Then, the detailed description of the proposed scheme is provided, including the phases of Key Generation, Data Tag Generation, Data Auditing Challenge, Storage Proof Genera- tion and Data Integrity Auditing.

Data Auditing Challenge. In the proposed scheme, the ECS is re- sponsible for auditing the stored data blocks of terminals. The pe- riodically sampling auditing to the data blocks stored in the edge devices can improve the security of the data storage. Moreover, the auditing result of the stored data is an important factor for evaluat- ing the reputation of the edge devices in the data storage. Suppose

This work is supported by the National Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 62102169, No. 62072249, No. 12105120, the Natu- ral Science Foundation of the Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions of China under Grant 21KJB520033, the Key Research and Development Program (Social Development) of Lianyungang under Grant SF2102, the Research Start-up Fund of JOU under Grant KQ20039.

Dengzhi Liu received the M.E. degree and Ph.D. degree from the School of Computer and Software, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, in 2017 and 2020, re- spectively. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the School of Computer Engineering, Jiangsu Ocean University, China. He mainly focuses on the security and privacy issues in data storage and transmission. He has authored more than 50 research papers and published in international conferences and journals. His-current research interests include cloud com- puting security, cyber security, and data security.

Zhimin Li received the Ph.D. degree from the School of Infor- mation Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecom- munications in 2009. She is currently a Lecture with the School of Computer Engineering, Jiangsu Ocean University, China. Her current research interests include applied cryptog- raphy, electronic forensics, blockchain and so on.

Dongbao Jia is an associate professor at School of Computer Engineering, Jiangsu Ocean University, Lianyungang, China. And he is also currently a special researcher at the Univer- sity of Toyama, Toyama, Japan. He received his M.E. and Ph.D. degrees from the Department of Intellectual Informa- tion Engineering, Graduate School of Science and Engineering for Education, University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan, in 2015 and 2018, respectively. His-main research interests are intel- ligence algorithm, neural engineering and system security.

