Hence, in 1996, Zhou and Hansen have introduced extra atomic formulas to propose a first-order interval logic, called Neighbourhood Logic (NL) [27,28], for specifying liveness and fairness of computing systems and also defining notions of real analysis in terms of expanding modalities. These atomic formulas relate time intervals to their (left and right) interval neighbours. In 1997, Roy and Zhou presented a sound and relatively complete Duration Calculus as an extension of NL [23]. They had already shown that the basic unary interval modalities of [12] and the three binary interval modalities (C, T and D) of [24] could be defined using the modalities of NL. Hence they presented an embedding of the logics of [12] and

functions on real numbers, which is independent of time and time intervals. A temporal propositional letter is a truth-valued interval function, i.e., it depends on time intervals. More details as well as examples can be found e.g. in [26]. The use of intervals instead of time points has the advantage that time points can be modelled as intervals [b, e] with b = e and therefore intervals are more general.

As already mentioned we will use sets of intervals as elements of our algebra. This shift to sets extends NL in the manner that we can now formulate expressions and properties for sets of time intervals and not only for single intervals. To formulate properties concerning single intervals one can use the singleton set that only consists of one interval. Additionally, as we will see later, it turns out that this shift yields the well-known algebraic structure of a semiring (see e.g. [13]). Let us have a look at the structure

The domain operator need not exist on every test semiring [19], but in the case of quantales, and therefore in INT, domain is guaranteed to exist. Most publica- tions concerning semirings with domain (e.g. [6]) claim another additional axiom. Therefore our form of domain is sometimes also called predomain.

After this short excursus about relationships between detachment and (co)domain, we continue to embed NL. As a first result we note that at least one of the eight axioms, which are claimed in [27] can be dropped, since it is a theorem in domain semirings. Further simplifications on calculations are given in Section 4.1 after introducing a more general framework of neighbourhoods.

We call a semiring with a complement semiring. Note that complement semirings form a larger class than Boolean algebras even if we define meet by x H y =df x + y. The reason is that we do not postulate the distributivity laws for join and meet. In the remainder we assume S to be a complement bidomain semiring. Therefore, we can freely use (co)domain as well as the complement operation.

Since Galois connections are useful as theorem generators and dualities as theo- rem transformers (see e.g. [3]) we get many properties of (perfect) neighbours and (perfect) boundaries for free. For example we have, with x H y = x + y,

Since domain and codomain only characterise the starting and end points in INT, these operations are not able to characterise the remaining relations. In Section 3 we used detachments to derive algebraic versions of the neighbourhood modalities. As shown there, in INT, detachments cut off parts of intervals. Therefore detachments are very useful for characterising the remaining relations of Allen. We assume S to be a quantale, since there detachments and meet are guaranteed to exist. By straightforward calculations we get

In this section we have a look at the interpretations of (perfect) neighbours and (perfect) boundaries in other semirings. We will show that the interpretations vary from interval properties already shown by Zhou, Hansen and Roy over reachability in graphs to an application to hybrid systems. These interpretations are possible only, since we have abstracted NL from intervals to semirings. All semirings, which we will present are well known. Further details about them can e.g. found in [7,16].

S. Therefore n r describes a kind of non-reachability from S and guaranteed reach- ability from S. All other (perfect) neighbours and boundaries characterise other kinds of reachability. The characterisations of reachability in graphs do not lead to better reachability algorithms. By the above calculations we only want to show that neighbours also occur in graphs and therefore we can shift knowledge from NL to graphs and vice versa.

[16] we presented an algebra for hybrid systems using lazy semirings. This model handles finite as well as infinite trajectories. Thus we started to adapt neighbours and boundaries to the framework of lazy semirings [15]. Doing this we have a further application for NL in a theory where we can express unlimited processes and, in general, infinite elements. As one of our first results we get that neighbours and boundaries occur in an algebraic version of the branching time logic CTL as the existential and universal temporal operator [15,22]. The first aim of further work in this area is on the one hand to get more applications for neighbours and boundaries in both settings (full and lazy semirings) and, on the other hand, using a concrete example of a hybrid system and investigate wether neighbours can be used for properties of safety and liveness. Finally it has to be checked, if our algebraic setting helps to find the answer wether NL is decidable (which is still an open question).

