Signal transduction pathways describe how signals received by receptors at the cell membrane are processed inside the cell via biochemical reactions. Usually, the signal is transferred into the nucleus, where it causes a change in the currently active genetic program of the cell. Understanding this flow of information inside a cell is fundamental for an in-depth understanding of the functioning of a cell as a whole. Modeling and simulating this information flow is beneficial, because it helps to understand the flow of signals in a complex network, to test hypotheses in silico before validating them with experiments and to validate the data collected about a certain pathway.

There exist a number of pathway databases compiling the current knowledge about biological pathways. Thus, we developed an extendable system to generate different models, expressed with different modeling languages, out of the data stored in pathway databases in order to simulate these models with the corresponding simulation tools. What most of the approaches discussed above have in common is, that the models are constructed manually and not generated out of a database, and in those approaches, where the models are derived out of one or more databases (e.g. [27]), only one kind of models is generated. This is in contrast to our approach, where we offer the possibility to generate different representations for a certain pathway.  At the moment we operate on one of the major pathway databases,

and are explained in more detail in [4]. We will discuss what distinguishes LSCs and the Play-Engine tool from other languages and tools and why we chose them for our pathway modeling approach. Furthermore, we will explain how we connected the Play-Engine tool to a pathway database and what kind of tools we developed for this purpose. Furthermore, we present some first simulation results.

The paper is organized as follows: In section 2 we present some basic informa- tion on signal transduction pathways and discuss a pathway exemplar. Than we introduce our modeling and simulation approach for signal transduction pathways, thereby concentrating on LSCs and the Play-Engine. In the fourth section we give technical details of our approach and discuss the tools we developed in this context. In section five we present first simulation results. Finally, we draw some conclusions and an give outlook on our future work.

biochemical reactions into the nucleus, where it changes the currently active pro- gram. Signal transduction pathways comprise different kinds of molecules: proteins and enzymes with different kinds of functions interact with the help of cofactors, second messengers, phosphatases and small effectors to transmit the signal. The mechanism of transmitting the signal is mediated through state changes of molecules like conformity changes and the building of molecule complexes on the basis of bio- chemical reactions. This molecule interactions cause the signalflow through the cell and the amplification of the signal in order to reach the nucleus.

Sepsis is the systemic immune response to a severe bacterial infection [26]. We are born with a functioning innate immunity system which recognizes bacterial and viral products. In sepsis, when a bacterium attacks an endothelial cell, different kinds of mechanisms are activated. Receptors of the innate immune system are ac- tivated by microbial components such as LPS (endotoxin, lipopolysaccaride), which is a signaling molecule involved in the initiation of the sepsis syndrom. Receptors, which recognize such LPS molecules, are a family of transmembran receptors known as Toll-like receptors (TLRs). To date, there are 12 TLRs identified in mice and 10 TLRs identified in humans. TLR4 is one of them and is identified as a signifcant

The TLR4 signal transduction pathway is subdivided into the MyD88-dependent and MyD88-independent pathway and consist of four chains. The whole pathway is specified in [3]. In order to give an overview over the general flow of information, it is sufficient to explain one part in detail.

In LSCs a distinction is made between universal and existential charts, whereas the former describes behavior that may happen, the latter describe behavior that must happen. Universal charts contain precharts, which describe the condition under which the behavior described in the main chart has to occur. Furthermore, forbidden behavior can also be expressed.

In this section we give a brief overview over our representation of signal transduc- tion pathways with Colored Petri Nets (CPNs). More details can be found in[4]. In contrast to regular Petri Nets [9] in Colored Petri Nets the tokens are distinguish- able [16]. Each token has a certain value belonging to a certain data type. The values of the tokens are called colors and the data types color sets. Each place must

files it contains pathway maps in GIF format (cf. Sec. 2). On the right hand side there is the Play-Engine tool, which needs a GUI for the system being described, capturing the systems behavior in LSCs and storing these LSCs in XML files. The database and the simulation tool are connected via two tools or modules: the LSC Transformation module and the Pathway-Editor.

The Pathway-Editor [36] assists the user in a number of ways to build GUIs for the Play-Engine. Export in other file formats is also supported. There are three main tasks the Pathway-Editor has to fulfill: (1) Construction of pathway maps as GUIs for the Play-Engine. (2) Export of these maps in GIF format for use in the

data about molecules and their biochemical reactions but no information about compartments of the cell like nucleus, cell membrane and mitochondria. Hence, our algorithm can not draw them automatically, but we provide the according graphical elements in order to enable the user to complete the maps. Afterwards, the posi- tioning can of course be further enhanced manually. According to points (1) and

In the future we plan to support other modeling languages and simulation tools, as e.g. Statecharts and the Rhapsody tool, for which first preparations already have begun. Furthermore, we are going to adapt our system to accept CSML (Cell System Markup Language, [28]) as an input format for signal transduction pathways. CSML is an XML based exchange format for biological pathways. The developers of CSML provide tools to translate pathways described with other XML-based languages, as

