Little is known about the skin structure of juvenile chameleon especially its sensory function of their integumentary structure. Fifteen juvenile Chameleo chameleon are collected from Abu Rawash, Northern area of Giza, Egypt during Summer of 2015. It is belong to the order Squamata, family, Chamaeleonidae. Three ages are used in the present study and categorized according to the morpholog- ical criteria of head, abdomen and limb lengths. Dorsal abdominal surfaces are covered with abdominal scales of varying sizes either conical or elliptical-structures, regularly arranged in rows and imbricated with each other. Each scale possessed one cylindrical lenticular epidermal sense organ containing heavy sensillia. Histologically, the scales are characterized by wider conical surfaces and intermingled with another one by hinge region. The epidermal layer of outer scale surface is composed of five-layered strat- ified squamous epithelium including the stratum germinativum, intermediate zone of stratum spinosum

abundant in the intermediate zone as well as in the peripheral dermal layer underneath stratum germi- nativum layer. The melanosomes possessed long cellular processes with their content of melanin gran- ules underneath the epidermis. The dermis is composed of upper collagenous and inner compact layer. Semithin sections revealed the presence of fibroblast cells, collagenous fibrils, nerve axons, melanosomes and mast cells in the connective tissue core. Increased immunoreaction of cytokeratin is observed in the epidermal layers of G3; meanwhile, an increased proliferation of epidermal and dermal cells was detected in G1. Transmission electron microscopy exhibited striking formation of dermal sense organs containing neuronal cells of both oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells with myelinated and unmyelinated nerve axons ensheathed externally by thin collagenous fibers. Finally, the author concluded that the juve- nile chameleon skin is keratinized with obvious external and internal sensation and abundant mast cells within dermis giving characteristic immunity. The melanosomes are dispersed within epidermis and der- mis allowing the animal to maintain its color alterations according to the surrounding environment.

Integumentary sense organs represent the mechanosensory receptors in reptilian species such as Amphibolurus barbatus [12] and Iguanian lizards [13]. These sense organs serve as mechano and thermoreceptors and possibly sensitivity to humidity [12,13]. It is also served as complex touch corpuscles on the skin surface of the head of snakes [14,15]. Small tactile mechanosensory epi- dermal sense organs are also reported in 13 fully aquatic and two semi-aquatic species of elapids [16].

At light microscopic level, the epidermal scales are of varying shapes taking conical, polygonal, and tubercular shaped- structure. The scales are overlapped and conjugated with each other in hinge region. The scale is characterized by its wider coni- cal surfaces and intermingled with the successive one by the hinge region. The epidermal layer of outer scale surface is composed of five-layered stratified squamous epithelium comprising the stra- tum  germinativum,  intermediate  zone  with  different  ker-

At ultrastructural level, the epidermis is composed of five lay- ers. Basally, germinativum cells having centrally located nuclei with dispersed euchromatin and characteristic nucleoli. Fine kera- tohyalin granules are dispersed in between stratum germinativum cells. The intermediate contains abundant keratinocytes with cyto- plasm rich in keratinohyalin granules. Electron-dense smooth granules of melanosomes are detected in between the ker- atinocytes in the stratum granulosum layer. The epidermal surface

A stricking finding is the presence of a single epidermal sense organ per each dorsal body scale. The sense organs takes the lenticular-shape possess dense sensory hairlet-structures bearing bristles. Several studies reported similar sense organs although the emerging sensory hairlet structures are very few such as, Oplu- rus fierinensis [26], Amphibolurus barbatus [12], Ceratophora, Draco, Phrynocephalus, Stellio, and Trapelus (agamids) and in Anolis, Chal- arodon and Oplurus iguanids [13] and Stenodactylus Petrii and Ptyo- dactylus Guttatus [27].

Furthermore, for the first to remarks, the epidermal sense organs have deep connections with integumentary sense organs embedded in the dermal layer. Ultrastructurally, it is appeared in the form oval-shaped bundles covered by a thin coat of collagenous fibrils. It is composed of two types of neurons including Schwann and oligodendrocyte cells. Myelinated and unmyelinated nerve axons are detected.

