Abstract Distance learning has gone through four generations over more than a century. Those four generations, though have elevated the level of interaction between the student and his distant instructor and classmates, are still lacking an essential component for effective teaching, namely customizing the delivery of a course in terms of the material and the style of teaching according to the student profile. In traditional classrooms, the human teacher utilizes his experience and intel- ligence to adapt the teaching method and style to meet the average student in the classroom.

This research has focused on improving the effectiveness and quality of web-based e-learning through adapting the course authoring and delivery to match each individual student skills and preferences. In this article, we shed lights on the vision and status of the eight-year Smart e-Learn- ing environment project: The main objective of this project is to employ AI techniques to advance e- learning forward towards the fifth generation e-learning as we envision it. The idea is to embed instructional design theories as well as learning and cognition theories into e-learning environments to provide a more intelligent and, hence, more effective one-to-one e-learning environments. This article only gives a high level overview; however, the more interested reader will be referred to arti- cles describing the work in more technical details.

Educated and skilled human resources and workers are real as- sets and keys of success and power for both nations and organi- zations. However, several challenges exist. Using the internet and WWW to support teaching and to deliver education and training is one way to overcome some of these challenge. This multimedia rich environment added new dimensions in design- ing course contents. It also created several models of education,

such as self-paced, interactive, collaborative, and virtual classes. Web-based content delivery made course materials, announce- ments, electronic libraries, and other information accessible through carefully designed web pages. Interactive learning envi- ronments both asynchronously and synchronously are now available. However, the question of effective quality education still remains. Having such fascinating capabilities, however a question still remains; how can learning systems properly utilize such capabilities for a more effective learning process? In other words, what is the best teaching method to use for a specific stu- dent or group of students knowing that every one has his/her own learning objectives, motivations, knowledge, and skills, which are essential in tailoring a course material? On the Inter- net, now a day, most learning concepts could be found available in a multi-different ways of representation; the question is how to pick the most appropriate one for a specific course experience, especially that they are mostly heterogeneous and expressed in a non-unified format.

Fortunately, in the era of the Internet, open sources of information intensively exist; and hence, material and learning material became available; also sharing and reusing them is gracefully allowed. Accordingly, instructors can use such learning material in preparing their courses. Sharing and reus- ing of teaching materials reduces the cost of designing new courses, saves the time of rewriting, and avoids duplicating efforts.

However, one of the most formidable tasks for educators is shaping their presentations of core knowledge to meet the indi- vidual needs of learners with varied and diverse cognitive and psychological traits [2]. In order to achieve such a goal, two is- sues must be considered. First, a detailed model of the individ- ual student which is called Student Model (SM) must be maintained and, second, learning materials must be composed of small granular multimedia objects referred to as Learning Objects (LOs).

An Overview on the Smart e-Learning Environment research project is presented in Section 2, while more details on the several research subprojects implementing the ideas and philosophy behind the model supported by Smart e-Learning are presented in Section 3. Section 4 outlines the experimental strategy and approach followed so far for verify- ing and assessing this work. Finally, a conclusion on the results uncovered by this research is presented in Section 5 with a highlight on some future research directions as seen by now.

Several components have been worked out under different research projects to support the global vision of the Smart e-Learning paradigm. Components are viewed as supportive to the relationships among the different elements of the educa- tional triad. Those components are briefly described below.

The Smart Tutor (ST) [2]: It is a web-based intelligent tutoring system. It is a prototype design for experimenting with the hypothesis that there are some important characteris- tics that are essential in designing an effective ITS, such as: adaptive teaching strategies, student models that are based on background knowledge and skills, and teaching approaches suiting specific skill sets. Another hypothesis is that the cogni- tive model of instructors, like all other experts in their fields, leads them to retrieve their previous teaching experiences, select one or more that are more close to the current situation, and adapt them for reuse. These adapted course plans are added to their repository of experience. These are cases in the goldmine of experience repository of the instructor.

Smart e-NoteBook [8]: It is an adaptive multimedia hyperlinked learning material management environment that supports students (or any users, such as researchers, teachers, writers, etc) during their different modes of use (study, review, or research to answer a question). Smart e-Notebook takes the instructor provided multimedia material that is not necessarily prepared for a specific person (let us call it e-Notebook), and generates many personalized editions of MySmart e-Note- Books one for each individual student that better suits his per- sonal student model. The student model attributes that the Smart e-Notebook considers are the learning style (according to Felder-Silverman model) and the domain knowledge. To fulfill its task, Smart e-NoteBook assumes that the input e-Notebook multimedia course material submitted by the instructor to be presented in the form of Learning Objects (LOs).

Smart Office-hours Assistant [15]: It is an Intelligent Question Answering System (IQA) tool which simulates the same role of the instructor in answering as much questions as possible. Answers are adapted to suit each individual student according to his/her specific student model: learning style, background domain knowledge, IQ, thinking style, and motivation. To fulfill its task, Smart Office-hours Assistant assumes that the answers are already available in the form of Learning Objects (LOs).

Our model is composed of three components: knowledge, personal (soft) and technical (hard) skills, and emotional state. Knowledge and skills are arranged in multi-layered networks to represent their interdependencies; and together with spe- cially designed inference rules the proactive effect is achieved. Fuzzy probability density functions are associated with each modeled variable in order to manage uncertainty. New tempo- ral operators and inference rules are specially designed to mod- el emotions.

A selected group of students from various disciplines have been chosen as subjects for the experiment. The question- naire was then distributed and applied to them. Analysis of the results revealed the validity of the tool to evaluate the learning styles of students.

To assess the first hypothesis, two volunteered instructors were chosen; one specialized in computer science and the other in educational psychology. Each one was asked to select one of his favourite topics that he already teaches in order to prepare a lecture on; he was also asked to choose his favourite book on the topic. The first instructor has chosen a topic in binary number systems (Chapter 3 from Forouzan [16]), while the second has chosen a lecture on the left and right parts of the brain and their effect on the learning styles (the material was of his own).

To assess the efficiency of the learning process, the first experiment put no time limit on the students to finish studying the material; once the student finishes studying he/she was pre- sented with an assessment quiz. While the second experiment was designed to assess the effectiveness of the learning process by limiting the study time to a maximum of 1:15 hr for the stu- dent to finish studying the material after which they were pre- sented with the evaluation quiz to assess their depth of understanding. In both experiments the system measured the elapsed time per each student.

In the second experiment, a lecture was prepared for a course on data structures, in particular, the Linear List, the Stack and the Queue. The experiment took place within female students section of the Information Technology department at King AbdulAziz University. Twenty-three volunteered students par- ticipated in the experiment. Students were asked to study the material within the lecture time (1:15 h) after which each one of them went through an exam of the form of both multiple choice questions and open-ended questions in order to evalu- ate their level of understanding, and hence assessing the effec- tiveness of the study process according to the said model.

