We present a sound and complete axiomatization of finite complete trace semantics for generative proba- bilistic transition systems. Our approach is coalgebraic, which opens the door to axiomatize other types of systems. In order to prove soundness and completeness, we employ determinization and show that coalgebraic traces can be recovered via determinization, a result interesting in itself. The approach is also applicable to labelled transition systems, for which we can recover the known axiomatization of trace semantics (work of Rabinovich).

Organization of the paper Section 2 and Section 3 are the introductory part of the paper introducing basics of coalgebras and coalgebraic trace semantics, and probabilistic transition systems and their trace semantics in concrete terms, respec- tively. In Section 4 we present the syntax of expressions for quantitative transition systems, followed by the axiomatization in Section 5 where the main results (sound- ness and completeness) are presented and proven. We wrap-up with concluding remarks in Section 6. The proofs are available in [18].

In the next sections, we will show that the axiomatization, obtained from the sound and complete axiomatization for bisimilarity by adding one new axiom, is sound and complete with respect to trace semantics. This is the main technical result of the paper and, despite the simplicity of the axioms, proving that they are enough to achieve completeness is not a trivial task. Before we provide the technical details of the proof, let us present the intuitive idea behind it.

Inspired by the work of Rabinovich, who axiomatized trace semantics for LTS, we took as basis a calculus sound and complete w.r.t. bisimilarity and we extended it with an extra axiom. Our approach is coalgebraic. This means that constructions and results are phrased in quite general terms which might be helpful to pinpoint which conditions on the functor type of the system are crucial and which general- izations are possible.

