Cellular processes are governed by complex molecular regulatory networks. To understand the dynamics emerging from these networks, a popular approach relies on a Boolean abstraction. These Boolean regulatory networks define qualitative models with discrete dynamics in which properties of interest relate to the so- called attractors and their reachability. When considering multi-cellular systems, cell-cell communication must be accounted by properly inter-connecting cellular network models. This is done through logical composition rules that define cell-cell communication, leading to a (composed) model of the regulatory control of the whole.

As formalised in Definition 2.1, an LRG is a graph in which the nodes embody genes or, more generally, regulatory components and the directed, signed edges represent regulatory interactions between these components. Moreover, variables are associated with components to denote their states (ON/OFF or yet true/false), and logical functions specify the evolution of these variables.

to multi-valued LRGs whose variables can take a broader range of discrete values). This is not a limitation because any multi-valued LRG can be formally mapped to a Boolean LRG [13]. Indeed, this mapping was been used in our first case study in Section 4.

In practice, to compose LRGs, one needs to specify how they influence each other. This is done through the composition rule M, where the definition of the sets Zk depends on the topology of the system. Here, as previously mentioned, we consider that all the cells encompass the same LRG, are hexagonal and arranged over a 2D grid.  This leads to the definition of a simple neighbouring relation,

depending on a distance: cells have up to 6 direct neighbours (contacting cells on the grid, i.e. at distance 1) and possibly more neighbours at greater distances. If the neighbouring relation specifies a distance 2, a cell has up to 6 + 12 = 18 neighbours. The number of neighbours thus depends on the distance, but also on the position of the cell in the grid (less neighbours for cells at the grid borders than at its center).

As future work, we aim to exploit the grid topology as well as intrinsic model characteristics, to use symmetry breaking and thus cut down the number of solu- tions [6,20]. This will allow the consideration of ever larger grids. Furthermore, there is room for generalisation of the framework presented here, as integration functions (and hence the compatibility rules) may depend on distinct internal com- ponents. Finally, we intend to integrate the SAT Compatibility condition encoding in EpiLog (http://epilog-tool.org), a software tool dedicated to the definition, simulation and visualisation of qualitative models of pattern formation on epithe- lia [28].

