In earlier work, a fast stochastic method for reconstructing a certain class of two- dimensional binary images from projections using Gibbs priors was presented. In the present study, we introduce a stochastic segmentation of magnetic resonance gray-scale images of trabecular bone using Gibbs priors. We show some results as well as some post-processing that can be used to clean up segmentations of noisy gray-scale images.

Segmentation deals with the problem of creating a binary image from a gray- scale image (where, in the binary image, 1 represents the presence and 0 represents the absence of the object which we wish to segment from the gray- scale image). A stochastic algorithm for the reconstruction of binary images from projections using Gibbs priors presented in [1], [5] gave good results. The main goal of the work reported here is to develop a segmentation algorithm using a similar approach.

1 The first author was supported by a U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) training grant T32 CA 74781. The second author was supported by the NIH grant HL28438, as well as by the U.S. National Science Foundation grant DMS9612077. We thank the Laboratory of Retinal Microcircuitry at the University of Pennsylvania for generously providing space and computer facilities to the first author.

In this paper, an image is a rectangular two-dimensional array of pixels. A gray-scale image is one where each pixel has a value inclusively between 0 and 255 (where 0 corresponds to black and 255 corresponds to white). A binary image is one where the value of each pixel is either 0 or 1. In the discussion of binary images that follows, we use black and 0, as well as white and 1, interchangeably.

components that are not part of the trabecular bone (trabecular bone is mostly a connected structure). These components seem to arise from the noisy gray- scale image which we tried to segment. Some post-processing is necessary in order to remove these components.

The images that are output from our segmentation algorithm contain both small white and black connected-components that need to be removed (the color needs to be switched). Let threshold-white be the number of pixels in the largest 8-connected-component of white pixels that will be removed (color will be turned to black). Let threshold-black be the number of pixels in the largest 4-connected-component of black pixels that will be removed (color will be turned to white). Let the size of a connected-component be the number of pixels in the component.

Having come to this conclusion, we had the task of finding good values for threshold-white and threshold-black. We found that in this particular application, using threshold-white=60 and threshold-black=30 gave good re- sults. Using larger threshold values resulted in losing parts of the bone, while using smaller threshold values resulted in some unwanted small connected- components in the binary image. For these threshold values, the percent of different pixels between the post-processed segmented image and the gold- standard segmentation is 4.6, compared to 8.6 percent different pixels be- tween the not post-processed segmented image and the gold-standard image,

