In this paper a complete quantum chemical study of [1,2,4]-triazolo [3,4-b][1,3,4] thiadiazole has been done with the combination of DFT/B3LYP method and 6-311G(d, p) basis set. The vibrational assignments are calculated with the help of PED. By using quantum theory of atoms in the molecule (QTAIM) we have calculated topological parameters at BCP point by which the nature of several intermolecular hydrogen bondings are studied. Electronic properties are calculated with the help of HOMO-LUMO plot. Chemical active sites of title molecule are described by FF, chemical hardness, chemical softness etc. UV spectra are calculated with the help of TDDFT using optimized parameters. NBO analysis gives idea about transfer of charge between bonding and antibonding electrons. Biological activity analysis suggests that the mole- cule can be used in anti- inflammatory drugs to explore new drugs. The molecule is docked with

The HOMO represents the ability to donate an electron by an atom while LUMO represents the ability to accept. The HOMO and LUMO energies are calculated by DFT/B3LYP method. The elec- tronic parameters, such as highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy (E-HOMO), lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy (E-LUMO) and band gap energy (DE = FLUMO- FHOMO) are described theoretically [39]. The energy (Egap) between HOMO and LUMO in the present study is found to be

The Fukui function (FF) [46,47] of a molecule provides informa- tion about reactive sites and the method of understanding as well as categorizing chemical reactions. The atom with the highest FF value is highly reactive site as compared to the other atoms in the molecule. The use of the Fukui functions for the site selectivity in title molecule for nucleophilic and electrophilic attacks has been made with special emphasis on the dependence of the Fukui values with the basis of B3LYP/6-311G(d, p) level of theory. Using the Mullikan atomic charges of neutral, cation, and anion, state of

nearly same as, 2-{[5-(adamantan-1-yl)-4-methyl-4H-1,2,4-tria zol-3-yl]sulfanyl}-N,N-dimethylethanamine [53], and nearly one fifth of Thiazole Azo Dyes.[54] Urea is benchmark compound for NLO properties, therefore we compare our results with urea. The calculated value of hyperpolarizibily of the compound is nearly nine times greater than hyperpolarizibily of urea so it is a good claimant as a NLO material.

