Trust-based service management in IoT systems, a promising research direction provides an intelligent solution for the identification of appropriate and trustworthy service providers from a huge of number smart nodes providing similar services. An efficient trust-based service ranking scheme (TBSRS) is pro- posed. The novelty of our design lies in providing accurate trust evaluation and service ranking in the absence of assessment data or presence of untrustworthiness recommendations. TBSRS also addresses the issue about the trustworthiness evaluation of a new service. Service providers are ranking based on the binary fruit fly optimization algorithm in TBSRS. The experimental results demonstrate desirable convergence, accuracy, and resiliency properties of TBSRS, and also demonstrate that TBSRS outperforms Adaptive IoT Trust and IoT-HiTrust in terms of the precision of service selection and other a few perfor- mance metrics.

How to evaluate the trustworthiness of a new services in Service-Oriented E-Commerce Systems. For a new service, it is dif- ficult to evaluate the trustworthiness due to data sparsity. To the best of our knowledge, one possible solution used by most of trust models is to assign an initial trust value to the new service. How- ever, this leads to another problem how to determine the initial trust value. In this paper, we propose an efficient trust-based ser- vice ranking scheme given as TBSRS which can provide accurate trust evaluation and service ranking in the absence of assessment data or presence of untrustworthiness recommendations. The key contributions of this paper are as follows:

The remainder of the paper is arranged as follows: Section II discusses the previous work. The proposed scheme TBSRS is pre- sented in Section III. In Section IV, we conduct extensive experi- ments to evaluate the proposed scheme. Conclusions and our future work are discussed in Section V.

The random position in the current iteration is generated in the initialization step. Then, the fitness value of each fruit fly is evalu- ated based on current position. smellbest and posbest are updated with the fitness value and position of the fruit fly with high fitness value respectively. The new smellbest is compared with the last

curve expresses Adaptive IoT Trust. The green curve expresses IoT- HiTrust. The blue curve expresses our TBSRS. The trustworthiness of all SPs is initially set to 0.5, so malicious SRs initially could have the chances selected as SPs to provide the service. Under our TBSRS, the percentage of malicious nodes selected is the lowest in comparison with Adaptive IoT Trust and IoT-HiTrust.

One can observe that TBSRS outperforms both Adaptive IoT Trust and IoT-HiTrust in terms of the percentage of good nodes providing new service selected as SPs. The experiments results show that more new services are selected by SRs due the accurate trustworthiness of new service in TBSRS as time processes. The fourth experiment shows the impact of different value of Percent- age of malicious nodes Pm on the precision of service selection. Top-13% SPs are selected in the experiment.

In the paper, an efficient trust-based service ranking scheme (TBSRS) is proposed for providing accurate trust evaluation and service ranking in the absence of assessment data or presence of untrustworthiness recommendations. The entire framework of TBSRS comprises of three components, namely (i) Filtering compo- nent (ii) Trustworthiness assessment component (iii) Ranking component. The convergence, accuracy and resiliency properties of TBSRS is analyzed and validated via simulation. A comparative analysis of TBSRS is also performed against Adaptive IoT Trust and IoT-HiTrust. The experimental results validate by simulation demonstrate that TBSRS outperforms these existing approaches in terms of the precision of service selection and other a few per- formance metrics. TBSRS will be applied to mobile social IoT appli-

