Currently, researches on mechanical joints are mostly focused on the performance of metal mechanical joints for conventional machine tools. For example, Shoukry [12] studied the contact stiff- ness of mechanical joints and developed a corresponding mathe- matical model. He also found that mechanical joints have a constant tangential-normal contact stiffness ratio. Archenti [13] studied the proportion of the mechanical joints errors to the total

error of the machine. He found that the accuracy of the machine tools is largely affected by the mechanical joints. Zhao [14] deduced the elastic modulus and shear modulus of the mechanical joints based on the fractal contact theory. Chen [10] investigated the effect of friction on the contact stiffness of mechanical joints and developed a model for the contact stiffness considering the effect of friction. It can be seen that very little research has been carried out on the performance of oil medium steel-BMC mechan- ical joints.

This paper investigates the thermal characteristics of oil med- ium steel-BMC mechanical joints. A new discrete analytical method for the actual contact proportion of oil medium steel- BMC mechanical joints considering contact weight was developed. The variation pattern of the actual contact proportion with preload and roughness is analysed. A model of the thermal parameters of the oil medium steel-BMC mechanical joints was developed. The virtual material-simulation analysis method of oil medium steel- BMC mechanical joints was established theoretically, and the accu- racy of the theoretical model and simulation analysis method was verified through experiments and simulations. Taking certain type of BMC bed foundation as an example, the influence of oil medium steel-BMC mechanical joints on thermal performance and thermal mechanical coupling characteristics of BMC bed foundation was studied. The important influence of thermal properties and ther- mal mechanical coupling characteristics of oil medium steel-BMC mechanical joints is proved.

Analyze the cause of thermal performance changes of oil med- ium steel-BMC mechanical joints. The actual solid contact propor- tion of the mechanical joints grows as the roughness falls or as the preload grows. The thermal properties of mechanical joints tend to be the properties of solid material (BMC and steel) with the increase of the actual solid contact proportion. The thermal con- ductivity and density of solid materials (steel and BMC) is much greater than that of lubricants oil, so the relevant performance

where, Eo is the elastic modulus of lubricating oil, 1.5GPa. Vo is the volume of lubricating oil in the mechanical joints. Dpo is the change pressure on the lubricating oil. DVo is the change volume of lubri- cating oil after pressure. DF is the normal support force provided by the lubricating oil. Dd is the change of oil film thickness after the mechanical joints is compressed.

Creo software was used to draw the 3D model of virtual mate- rial specimen. In the software, a 1.5 mm thin layer was cut on the mechanical joints as a virtual material layer which uses boolean operations. The 3D model was imported into Workbench software

When considering the influence of oil-mediated steel-BMC mechanical joints, a 1.5 mm thick virtual material layer was cut at the contact position of the mechanical joints. The material parameters for each part of the BMC bed foundation and the virtual material layer were defined during simulation analysis. The mesh size is 10 mm, and automatic division is used for mesh division. The model contains 103,149 nodes and 20,825 elements. A thermal

The thermal performance and thermal mechanical coupling performance of BMC bed foundation were studied with and with- out considering the influence of oil medium steel-BMC mechanical joints. The results showed that the highest temperature relative error is +3.9%, the maximum thermal deformation relative error is +15.9%, and the maximum thermal stress relative error is 64.6% with the same load and boundary conditions. It is proved that the oil medium steel-BMC mechanical joints have a key influ- ence on the thermal performance and thermal mechanical cou-

