This study adopted the quasi-experimental research methodol- ogy. After a successful consultation with the 72 service firms listed in the Nigeria Stock Exchange (NSE) to seek for permis- sion to use their firms as a research case study, a total of 28 ser- vice firms gave consent but only 23 of them actually participated (returned at least a validly completed question- naire) in the data gathering process which took place from the period of April 14th to May 15th, 2015. The 23 firms were as follows: Expert Edge Software, Main Street Bank, Bank of Industry, Skye Bank PLC, Zenith Bank PLC, Keystone Bank Limited, Access Bank PLC, Guaranteed Trust Bank PLC, First Bank Nigeria PLC, Union Bank PLC, Fast Credit Lim- ited, Information Technology Transfer, Petrodata Manage- ment Services, Digital Communication Company, CHAMS PLC, Computer Warehouse Limited, ETISALAT Nigeria, Visaphone Communications Limited, Airtel Nigeria, MTN Nigeria, SMILE Communications, STACO Insurance PLC and Zenith Insurance. The research took two independent paths which later coalesced into the third and final part of the research.

per firm type that took part in the survey. Most of the firms and respondents were from the Banking sector (45.51%) and the respondents had a good spread across the three managerial levels with the operational level accounting for 43.59% of the respondents.

It is safe to conclude therefore that there is a negative-weak correlation between ICT maturity and ICT Value in the Nige- ria service industry i.e. one should neither expect a higher value from ICT in a service firm as the ICT maturity of the firm improves nor expect lower value with lower ICT maturity. It is evident therefore that the benefit from ICT adoption and dif- fusion is not traceable to the degree of ICT adoption and dif- fusion in the service industry.

The major contribution of this research to knowledge is that the uncertainty surrounding how ICT value relates to ICT maturity has been unraveled i.e. the contributing value of ICT in a service firm is not traceable to the maturity of ICT in the service firm. Policy makers, managers and Information Technology (IT) experts now have a clear understanding of how the benefits from ICT adoption and diffusion (ICT value) relate to the actual level of ICT adoption and diffusion (ICT maturity).

