The class of circular-arc graphs, as well as its Helly, normal, and proper subclasses, has been extensively studied in the literature. Circular-arc bigraphs, a bipartite variation on circular-arc graphs, remains a relatively new field, with only a few studies on the class and its proper and unit subclasses existing. In this paper, we introduce a Helly subclass for circular-arc bigraphs, based on the concept of bipartite-Helly families, and provide a polynomial-time recognition algorithm for it. We also introduce an alternative proper circular-arc bigraph subclass to the one in the literature, as well as two different normal circular-arc bigraph subclasses based on the definition of normal circular-arc graphs. We present containment relations between the different proper and normal classes.

Circular-arc bigraphs arise as a bipartite variation of circular-arc graphs. A bipartite graph is said to be a circular-arc bigraph if there exists a one-to-one corre- spondence between its vertices and a family of arcs on a circle such that, for every pair of vertices in different parts, they are neighbors precisely if their corrsesponding arcs intersect. The class is not very widely studied, although matrix-based char- acterizations of the class and its unit and proper subclasses exist [1], as well as a polynomial-time recognition algorithm for the proper subclass [2]. Currently no mention of a Helly or normal subclass of circular-arc bigraphs exists in the literature.

In this paper, we consider all arcs to be open unless otherwise stated. If A is an arc ona circle, we use s(A) and t(A) to denote its counter-clockwise and clockwise endpoints, respectively. To simplify notation, we call counter-clockwise endpoints s-endpoints, and clockwise endpoints t-endpoints. For any arc A in circle C, we

We then define Helly interval bigraphs as graphs that admit a bi-interval model (E, F) that verifies the bipartite-Helly property. It is easy to verify that a bipartite graph is a Helly interval bigraph if and only if its square is an interval graph. We introduce a similar result for Helly circular-arc bigraphs in Lemma 3.2.

Proof Let (C, A) be a Helly circular-arc model of G2. Let I, E c A be such that I contains the arcs corresponding to V in G, and E contains the arcs corresponding to W . The bi-circular-arc model (C, I, E) is a Helly model of G.	2

Theorem 3.13 demonstrates that Algorithm 3.1 is a correct recognition algorithm for Helly circular-arc bigraphs without isolated vertices. Note that every step in the algorithm can be computed in polynomial time. Let G = (V, E) be a bipartite graph such that |V | = n, |E| = m:

