In periodic timetabling, we are given a line-plan for a railway network. This includes the running times of the lines, the passenger demand for every possible connection, infras- tructure information, and the period time F of the lines, e.g. sixty minutes. For possible extensions, we refer to Nachtigall[7].

in mind by customers 2 . And when planning the German ICE/IC network, the interfaces to both international and regional networks, become better controllable when assuring symmetry by the definition of zero hubs. However, such an approach has the bizarre effect that planning the German ICE/IC network is started in Zurich[10], being a zero hub in the Swiss railway network.

If we are lucky, infrastructure permits trains always to meet within important stations. In our example, only one pair of black trains and one pair of dark gray trains misses to meet at minute 00 within one of our four major stations. But since we assume the lines to be operated hourly, these two lines will meet at minute 30 within the remaining station. Hence, when choosing stopping times of 10 minutes, every possible connection in our

In the first phase of Rail 2000, the stations of Basel, Bern, Olten, Zurich and Chur serve as hubs each hour or half-hour. In the stations of Lausanne, Biel, Lucerne and St.Gallen, the trains will meet each time at a quarter to and a quarter past the hour. (http://www.sbb.ch/bahn2000/e/fahrplan.htm)

The new line construction Mattstetten - Rothrist is the core part of Rail 2000. As from 12 December 2004, the Inter-City trains connect Bern with Zurich at a speed of 200 km/h. On this line, no station and no turnout will hinder their swift run. The journey from Bern to Zurich will take 56 minutes only (currently 72 minutes). (http://www.sbb.ch/bahn2000/e/projekte.htm)

Of course, such systems risk to become very inflexible. For example, there will be no substantial incentive to reduce the current running time of 54 minutes between the two zero hubs Basel and Zurich by, say, only five minutes. Improvements that would fit into such a system must be of much bigger dimension. Hence, in some way, gradual improvements are obstructed. Moreover, it would cause major disruptions to the complete system if maintenance of some central track causes an increase of running time by ten minutes for some weeks.

To recapitulate, the PESP gives rise to an immediate graph-theoretic interpretation. And some of the solution methods, that have been proposed for the PESP, benefit enor- mously from this interpretation, in particular from finding short cycles which are defined in the digraph associated with a PESP instance. Hence, a graph-theoretic interpretation seems to be very important for periodic timetabling.

Now, assume that the two gray lines meet between time 9 and 1, and that the black lines to meet between time 1 and time 3. The gray stations, again, show zero waiting time. At the central station, we have an effective waiting time of five time units when changing from the dark gray line to the black line but only one time unit in the opposite direction. At the lower right station, we have an effective waiting time of 6 time units for passengers changing from the black line to the light gray line, but zero time units for the opposite connections.

The following computations have been executed on a railway network with eleven pairs of directed lines. For 44 stopping activities there is the possibility to introduce additional stopping time. The 55 most important connections have been taken into account, and of course, vehicle waiting time is penalized, as well. Moreover, there are three single tracks in the network. After elimination of redundancies, the resulting digraph contains 56 nodes and 231 arcs. Since the passenger demand is not always symmetric, some connections do only appear for one direction. For example, for one pair of connections, the weights differ by a factor of more than eight. Hence, only one direction remains visible when focusing on the TOP 55 connections. This is a further reason for introducing symmetry only by additional arcs linking the endpoints of the lines to the artificial event modeling time zero.

On the other hand, it is good news that symmetry speeds up the optimization process. However, the bad news for practitioners is that, in our examples, at almost any time, the current feasible solution for the symmetric instance is worse than the feasible solution for the more general problem. Hence, the speed-up of the complete optimization process might not serve as a heuristic for quick generation of good (symmetric) solutions for the general problem.

