In order to cope with the heterogeneity, autonomy and diversity of interests among the different members, governance (or law enforcement) systems have been defined. The governance systems define a set of norms (or laws) that must be followed by the system entities [15]. In this context, norms are used to regulate the behavior of the agents in MAS by describing the actions that can be performed or states that can be achieved (permissions), actions that must be performed or states that must be achieved (obligations), and actions that cannot be performed or states that cannot be achieved (prohibitions). In addition, norms are used to cope with the autonomy, different interests and desires of the agents that cohabit the system [12]. The relation between norms and architectures are covered in recent works [2,13].

Simple Reflex Agents [14]: condition-action rules are used to select actions based on the current perception. This architecture assumes that at any time the agent receives information from the environment through sensors. These perceptions consist of representations of the state through the aspects that are used by the agent to make the decision. A sub-system is responsible for processing the se- quence of perceptions and selects the appropriate action from a set of possible actions for the agent. The agent performs the selected action through actuators.

Model-based reflex agents: similar to simple reflex agents, model-based agents use condition-action rules to select their actions. Additionally, to deal with partially observable environments and to achieve a highest rational performance, this agent is able to store the current state of the environment in their internal state or model. A function called next function is introduced to map the perceptions and the current internal state to a new internal state, which is used to select the next action.

Utility-based agents: considering the existence of multiple goal states, it is pos- sible to set a measure of how a particular state is desired, in order to optimize the performance of the agent. Thus, the utility function is introduced in this ar- chitecture to measure the related utility according to the current goals [14]. The utility-based agents include the same elements of goal-based agents.

The extension of TAO is focused on the representation of the internal architectures along with the static elements that compose a norm. The representation is done through templates used to define each abstraction in a schematic way. They list the set of properties and relationships of each element in the metamodel layer.

The template for a norm presents a Norm class which defines its state as the resource to be restricted, the behavior of its instances as a set of its properties and relationships that are common to all norm instances. According to Section 2.2, the behavior of a norm is defined based on its characteristics related to the deontic concepts and activation constraints.

Adaptations on the already existent abstractions in TAO are necessary in order to incorporate the norm concept. The concepts of right and duty in the agent role used to define the actions that can and must be executed by agents are substituted by the deontic concepts of permission and obligation defined by norms. Thus, the concepts of right and duty have been replaced by norm concepts in the Agent Role template for Goal-based Agent and Utility-based Agent.

Differently, according to [14], a simple reflex agent has not beliefs and goals. In the case of model-based reflex agent, beliefs exist only as a structural feature (Section 2.3). Thus, the following template represents the architecture for the corresponding agent role.

The complete modelling of the TAC-SCM is available on https://sites.google.com/site/uecegessi/case-study-tac-scm-tao. The templates used to define each abstraction that correspond to the metamodel layer are instantiated in order to exemplify the use of the templates to model the domain model layer in the context of TAC-SCM.

The organization model Moise+ [11] is based in model Moise [10] that presents an organization-centred view considering three forms to represent the organizational restricts (roles, plans and norms). Moise+ allows the description of permission and prohibition norms for roles in context of an organization. This model presents the following weak points: (i) it does not define the agent properties; (ii) it does not allow the norm specification for agents and environments, (iii) it does not support the definition of sanctions and (iv) even allowing the modeling of the heterogeneous agents, it does not support the definition of all internal agent architectures defined in [14].

The organization model OperA [5] is a framework that allows the specification of MAS through of the distinction between the characteristics of the organization model and the behaviour of the agents. OperA allows the description of norms related to obligation, permission and prohibition for agents, agent roles and agent groups in context of organization. Additionally, it allows the definitions of restric- tions for norm activation. However, this organizational model: (i) it does allow the modeling the structural aspects of agent organizations, (ii) it does not support the definition of reward, only punishment and (iii) it does not allow to restrict the agent behaviour in context of an environment.

TAO+ allows the representation of the structural and dynamic properties of the entities of MAS in association with the static elements of the norm (deontic concepts, entities involved, actions, activation constraints, sanction and context) that governs the behavior of these entities. In addition, TAO+ represents of the all internal agent architectures defined in [14]. Thus, the normative multi-agent systems with different agent architectures can be modelled in TAO+.

