Image thresholding is one of the most important approaches for image segmentation. Among multilevel thresholding techniques, cross entropy has been widely used by researchers to find multilevel threshold values. In multilevel cross entropy thresholding techniques, main target is to find an optimal combination of threshold values at different levels for minimizing the cross entropy. In this paper, Teaching-Learning- based Optimization (TLBO) algorithm is used to find an optimal combination of threshold values at dif- ferent levels for minimizing the cross entropy. TLBO algorithm is inspired by passing on knowledge within a classroom environment where students first gain knowledge from a teacher and then through mutual interaction. This new proposed approach is called the TLBO-based minimum cross entropy thresholding (TLBO-based MCET) algorithm. The performance of the proposed algorithm is tested on a number of standard test images. For comparative analysis, the results of TLBO-based MCET algorithm are compared with the results of Firefly-based minimum cross entropy thresholding (FF-based MCET), Honey Bee Mating Optimization-based minimum cross entropy thresholding (HBMO-based MCET) and Quantum Particle Swarm Optimization-based minimum cross entropy thresholding (Quantam PSO- based MCET). Comparative analysis is done based on two most popular objective performance measures, Peak Signal to Noise Ratio (PSNR) and Uniformity. From experimental results, it is observed that the pro- posed method is an efficient and feasible method to search an optimal combination of threshold values at 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th levels.

The objective of this paper is to search an optimal combination of thresholds for minimizing the cross entropy. The selected opti- mal combination of thresholds is used to segment the input image. The proposed thresholding approach is called the TLBO-based min- imum cross entropy thresholding (TLBO-based MCET) algorithm. Here, the fitness function for TLBO algorithm is cross entropy of the input image and segmented image.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 intro- duces the TLBO algorithm. In Section 3, the proposed TLBO-based minimum cross entropy thresholding (TLBO-based MCET) algo- rithm is described in details. Performance evaluation is discussed in detail in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper and suggests future research directions.

another student (v) of the class if student (v) has more knowledge than student (u). Thus, if student (v) is better than student (u), then student (u) is moved towards student (v). Otherwise, student (u) is moved away from student (v). The learning philosophy of this phase is simulated as below:

In this case, the proposed approach is superior to the other meth- ods in terms of uniformity and fitness value. Form experimental results, it is possible to appear the fact that the selected thresholds of the TLBO-based MCET algorithm can effectively find the ade- quate solutions based on the minimum cross entropy criterion. Thus, we can say that the proposed method is an efficient and fea- sible method to search an optimal combination of threshold values at 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th levels.

