Abstract Text segmentation from degraded Historical Indus script images helps Optical Character Recognizer (OCR) to achieve good recognition rates for Hindus scripts; however, it is challenging due to complex background in such images. In this paper, we present a new method for segmenting text and non-text in Indus documents based on the fact that text components are less cursive com- pared to non-text ones. To achieve this, we propose a new combination of Sobel and Laplacian for enhancing degraded low contrast pixels. Then the proposed method generates skeletons for text components in enhanced images to reduce computational burdens, which in turn helps in studying component structures efficiently. We propose to study the cursiveness of components based on branch information to remove false text components. The proposed method introduces the nearest neighbor criterion for grouping components in the same line, which results in clusters. Furthermore, the proposed method classifies these clusters into text and non-text cluster based on characteristics of text components. We evaluate the proposed method on a large dataset containing varieties of images. The results are compared with the existing methods to show that the proposed method is effective in terms of recall and precision.

India is a multilingual country, where all the states have provi- sion to specify their own official language, which results in many official languages and various documents in different languages. Though work on segmentation of text is improved significantly, the recognition of old scripts like Indus is still dif- ficult because of its complexity. Indus documents consist of symbols that look like ornamental in images [1]. Generally, these symbols are carved by hand on irregular surfaces such

The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we give a brief survey of related work. Section 3 discusses the proposed work in detail. Finally, Section 4 discusses experimental results for the proposed method and the comparisons with the exist- ing methods.

The survey on the contributions toward inscription can be found in Soumya and Kumar [11]. The authors proposed pre- processing techniques and segmentation methods of Kannada present handwritten texts based on connected component anal- ysis. However, none of the methods is tested on unstructured layout documents. Omar and Lu [4] proposed an algorithm to extract text lines from historical document images using Steerable Directional filters. An adaptive local connectivity map is generated based on paragraph map to extract para- graphs. The objective of this paper is to find the orientation for each paragraph. Patterns are validated using projection profiles. Text lines in each paragraph are extracted by finding

work for the characters on plain surfaces but not for ornamen- tal characters on irregular surfaces. Garz et al. [7] proposed binarization-free clustering to segment curved text lines in His- torical documents. Text lines are detected by representing word segments using graphs, in which an edge is a link between two segments. The method works well for the texts written in ink; however, it cannot work on unconnected characters. Rabaev et al. [8] detected characters in damaged documents and then grouped them to text lines by analyzing the evolution maps of connected components. A sweep line moved from left

The method in [12] segments text lines based on the dis- tances among the bounding boxes of components in an image, while the method in [13] segments a document that has text lines by drawing snakes (curves) over ridges (the central point of each line). The latter assumes a uniform height for text lines. However, it is not true for Indus documents. The advantage of the two methods is that they segment text lines irrespective of scripts and are said to be robust to non-structured layouts in Indus documents. Since these two existing methods are devel- oped for segmenting text lines from plain background images, they may give lower accuracies for Indus documents.

For the enhanced image, we further apply skeleton to reduce pixel widths of edge components. This operation pre- serves the structures of edge components in the enhanced image, and at the same time it saves the number of computa- tions. We observe that generally most Indus documents con- tain texts along with pictures like animals. Since a picture looks like animals with different shapes, when the branches of the picture look more cursive, the picture contains a larger number of branches. With this notion, we propose a method to eliminate the components which has more cursive branches in the skeleton image. This results in pruned text image components.

(d). Let P1(i, j) and P2(i, j) be the pixel values at position (i, j) in A and B, respectively. The intersection of these gradient images is computed as true if P1(i, j) and P2(i, j) both have pos- itive gradient. The algorithmic steps of enhancement are repre- sented as follows.

(d). It is also true that a skeleton algorithm sometimes creates disconnections between the components. To avoid disconnec- tions, we perform smoothing using morphological operation. This results in a smoothed image, where we can see connected components without disconnections. Then the proposed method fixes the bounding box for each component in the smoothed image. If the bounding box of components overlaps with the bounding boxes of other components, it will be

candidate components considered for merging. The distance between a candidate component and another component is cal- culated by finding the boundary values of the components. Cj is the set of all the other components excluding Ci. The dis- tance between the two components is considered for merging. Let (X1, Y1) and (X2, Y2) be the extreme coordinates of two components facing each other, and the distance between the two components is obtained by

show the step by merging the nearest neighbor components and the final results. Since the grouping process involves unsu- pervised nearest neighbor clustering criterion, it results in clus- ters without identifying them. Therefore, we propose to extract features which represent text components, namely, the number of branches in text components in the cluster for classifying the cluster as a text one. The cluster that gives a less number of branches is considered as a text cluster because text compo- nents usually have fewer branches compared to non-texts like an animal picture.

We have proposed a new method for segmenting text lines from degraded historical document images like Indus. The proposed method introduces a new combination of Laplacian and Sobel operations for enhancing low contrast pixels in the images. The characteristics of the components in the image are studied to eliminate unwanted components, which results in text components pruning in the image. We have proposed a grouping process, which involves the nearest neighbor crite- rion for merging text components. The iterative clustering pro- cess is then proposed to separate text and non-text regions. Our future plan would be extending the same method for other Indian scripts to show its ability and generic properties. We also focus on character segmentation from segmented text lines and character recognition.

