A simple model of cooperative information exchange between multiple participants is de ned, using propositional update semantics. The model is presented in the form of a reduction system. Several properties of the system are proven, concerning con uence, normalisation, properties of normal forms and reduction strategies. We end by discussing possible applications and extensions.

Dynamic semantics (in its broad sense) is characterized by the fact that (1) the update e ects of utterances plays a central role, and (2) there is a shift of attention from individual sentences to discourse. For this reason, it lends itself well as a basis for the formal analysis of the pragmatics of information exchange dialogues. In this paper, we discuss a simple model of the \game of cooperative information exchange", based on propositional update semantics. As was suggested in [10], the model is formulated as an abstract reduction system.

Our starting point is Stalnaker's theory of assertions. In making assertions, people take some of their private information and make it common ground. In terms of possible world semantics, they eliminate possibilities from the common ground, which they know not to be the case [9].

At any point in a dialogue, people make choices concerning which informa- tion to exchange (which possibilities to eliminate). Typically, there are many alternatives to choose from. Notwithstanding this apparant divergence, there is a clear direction in which the conversation proceeds. During the conver- sation, the information states of the participants grow more and more alike.

This process converges to a (hypothetical) situation in which there is no infor- mation left to communicate, i.e., all available information is common ground (i.e., the information that used to be distributed between them). Of course, this situation is never reached in practice. 2

The top three ovals together make up one state. In this state, the two agents each have certain information, and certain information is common ground between them. 3  At the \end state" (at the bottom of the picture) all three circles coincide. This corresponds to the hypothetical state that we discussed, in which each agent has the same information, and this information is common ground. 4

In information exchange dialogues, the participants typically have a spe- ci c goal, e.g. to resolve a decision problem [15]. We can think of such a goal as a set of states. Then, the outlined area in the bottom half of the picture represents a possible goal (the goal being to reach one of these states).

Various pragmatic notions t in this picture. For instance, relevance can be analysed as a strategy for achieving a goal. Intuitively, irrelevant utterances are utterances that will not help you to achieve your goal. This idea is further pursued in [11].

theoretical computer science that is concerned with the reduction of terms or more abstract objects to a normal form. Combinatory logic and the lambda- calculus are the prime examples, but many other reduction systems have been devised, e.g. for braids and knots. For a general introduction, the reader is referred to [8] or [1].

The structure of the paper is as follows. First, we will formulate a model of cooperative information exchange, in the form of an ARS. Next, we will discuss some of its properties, concerning con uence, normalisation and normal forms. We will end with a discussion on possible applications and extensions.

De ning an ARS involves two steps. First, one de nes a set of objects and second, one de nes a number of reduction relations over these objects. In our case, the objects will correspond to Stalnakerian \Contexts" or, as we will call them here, states. A state speci es the information that each agent has, as well as the information that is common ground between the agents.

We will keep things as simple as possible, and use ordinary propositional logic as our language. Let P be a propositional alphabet and A a nite set of agents. Let V be the set of all valuations over P . Then we de ne states as follows.

In a sense, these reduction relations specify the rules of the game. They specify when an agent can make an utterance and thereby reduce a state to another state: an agent can only make an utterance if he knows the content to be true, and it is not already common ground. The e ect of the utterance is a public update with this information. 6

\has the Church-Rosser property"). This implies that any state has at most one normal form. We will now investigate which states have such a normal form, and what it looks like. If the propositional alphabet P is nite, then the answer is as follows.

However, this is all under the assumption that the propositional alphabet is nite. In the general case, things are a bit more complicated. In general, we do not have Strong Normalisation (in fact, some states might not even have a normal form). This means that if the agents keep on exchanging information, this process might go on forever. And even if the process ends in a normal form, it is not guaranteed that in this nal situation, all the agents have the same information. It might happen that one agent has more information then another, but he cannot communicate this information, because the language is not expressive enough (only nite sentences might be uttered). The following example illustrates this.

  be such that  (a) =  (c) = V (i.e., all valuations) and  (b) = fv 2 V j v(p) = 1 for some p 2 P g. Then  is in normal form, even though agent b has more information then agent a.

i. Suppose v 2  (a). Let v be the principal ultra lter of v, i.e., fX  V j v 2 Xg. Then  (a) 2 v and 8p 2 P : fw j w(p) = v(p)g 2 v . Therefore, v 2 ^(a).

ii. Suppose  is nitely satis able in ^(a). Then ffw j w j=  g j  2  g [ f (a)g has the nite intersection property and can therefore be extended to an ultra lter u. Now let v be such that v(p) = 1 i fw j w(p) = 1g 2 u.

iii. Suppose   and  is saturated. Suppose v 2 ^(a). Then by de nition, there is an ultra lter u 2 Uf (V ) such that  (a) 2 u and 8p 2 P : fw j w(p) = v(p)g 2 u. Let be the theory of v. Then is satis able in ^(a). Because we know that u has the nite intersection property, it follows by induction on the formulae in  that  is nitely satis able in  (a). But we know that  , so then is also nitely satis able in (a). And by saturatedness of  ,  must be satis able in  . This can only be if v 2 .

v 2 (c). Let  be the theory of v. Then  is satis able, and therefore also nitely satis able, in (c). Take any agent b 2 A. Because is in normal form, we know that 8  :   b  =)   c	From this it follows

A model of cooperative information exchange was introduced, based on update semantics, as well as the theory of abstract reduction systems. The main focus was on the formal properties of the model. We took a very simple update semantics, namely one for propositional logic, where the worlds are propositional valuations. Also, the update mechanism is very simple: even when an assertion is made that contradicts the private information of some agents, the agents will still update with the information, ending up in an absurd information state. The reason for choosing such a naive model, was to have a \technically clean" basic framework that has clear formal properties and which is relatively easy to grasp. The model will serve as a basis for future extensions that will turn it into a more realistic model of information exchange.

Various extensions present themselves. In [10] a start was already made with a similar system on the basis of [5]'s QL, which is a predicate logical lan- guage extended with questions. Also, attention has been directed to the theory of dynamic epistemic semantics and public announcements [4,2]. At rst sight, it seems quite straightforward to take the notion of public announcement and turn it into an ARS similar to the one presented here. However, many com- plications arise. One of the problems is that the resulting ARS is in general not con uent. 9 This topic is presently being investigated further.

In [11], some preliminary results are reported on the application of the present framework to the analysis of relevance. To this extent, a notion of communicative goal is introduced, and a notion of success relating strategies (or rather strategy pro les) to goals. In principle, such an approach can also be generalised to apply not only to assertions but also to questions, cf. [10].

Finally, it is interesting to observe that the link between information ex- change and rewriting becomes even more apparent when we shift from the compositional/set-theoretic perspective of dynamic semantics to a more rep- resentational (DRT-style) one. In the latter case, information state are no longer sets of possible worlds, but rather formulas or DRT's. If we would proceed in this way, then our ARS starts to look much more like an actual term-rewriting system.

