In the last few years, evolutions have been trying an increasing interest in using the internet and communication technologies tool (ICT). Wide groups of applications and technologies were generated to support communication to others anytime and everywhere. Pre- sently, the internet has become be a necessity for the world commu- nity. All people can reach all the information without any limitation, on time and place. Also, in the learning procedure, communication can be one of the determinant factors to gain success in the learning process. The use of ICT also can be given good impacts for learning process as well as to provide learning efficiency in order to help

sound substance that they have created a relationship with others to an arrangement of accessible substance, begin or join subgroups of successive concern gatherings. Concede [17]. Social networks are an approach to impart online that can be utilized to connecting, share data and group up to other. Internet-based life can be like sites and applications [18].

The quantitative research design was selected as a major method of study. In a quantitative method, the researcher collects, analyzes and interprets Quantitative search is used to analyze data. The survey technique was developed through a structured questionnaire to collected data. In the viewpoint of Kumekpor

We also review the results. Here, in the answer to the first ques- tion, we find that a clear majority believes that there are positive impacts on the utilize of social media. In the second question, many see themselves as vulnerable to privacy violations and black- mail while using social media. In the third question, we see a high percentage of those who sometimes see the possibility of social media negatively affecting their health and, to a lesser extent, In the fourth question, the answer was clear to a majority of those

We conclude by reviewing aspects of Business impacts using social media. Therefore, we note in the first question here that the use of social media for this purpose varies between use some- times and non-use. In the second question, there is no interest and follow-up to the Business groups. In the third question, we find that there is not much time spent on Business use through social media. In the fourth question, the majority see their use being for sale and purchase together. In the fifth question, About normal shopping methods and compensation through e-shopping on social media. In the sixth question, we find that there is also great dissatisfaction with the clear majority of commercial Ad. In the seventh question, it is sometimes thought that the promotion of products through these means is effective, or in the eighth question, we also have confidence in the process of shopping and

In our study, we found that there is a generally positive impres- sion among students about social media. There is also a great inter- est and increasing use of these social media for academic use. Many of them do not want to use it for business purposes and do not see the possibility of adopting e-shopping as an alternative to regular shopping. In the political aspects, with their conviction of the extent of the influence of social media in the possibility of changing political events and maybe a dangerous factor in this area, but they also have no desire to participate and follow up the use of social media, For this reason, we should focus on the aca- demic aspect and the range to which students respond to the uti- lization of social media in their scope and academic studies. This is very encouraging by focusing on making these platforms a reliable educational platform, for example, Academic and activate this aspect and focus on it through the recommendations of stakehold- ers in the academic field we must not overlook negative aspects such as impact it is necessary to note the negative effects on health, especially addiction and the use of social media. It is noteworthy that Facebook is the most common and the most popular and most common among all these means social communication, which was presented in the questionnaire with a clear and noticeable advancement of YouTube in the academic field only, which enhances the possibility of using it for academic purposes reliably by academic institutions. In future, we can expand this study through by taking other societies and countries and achieve a com- parative study among them. We also can do a survey for other stakeholders sides like faculty staff members and employers to improve the performance of our future studies.

