The station location problem consists of placing some new stations along the tracks of an existing railway network in order to increase the number of users. The motivation for studying this problem is mainly to increase the attrac- tiveness of train travel for local traffic in an existing railway network. But new stations are costly for the company and new stops will result in a longer travelling time for those people that are already using the network. Therefore our goal is to minimize the number of new stations. Actually, this research was motivated by a collaboration with with the Deutsche Bahn about exactly this

While the station location problem for one line segment is solvable in polynomial time, in general the problem becomes NP-hard for two or more line segments [1]. However, a heuristic approach to solve the station location problem in practice consists of a decomposition of the railway network into independent line segments. Then, for a good solution of the problem the common area between line segments needs to be considered in more details. The problem considered in this paper may be viewed as a first step towards this approach.

Proof. For a given set , Algorithm 2 successively checks if  can be covered by a set of two, three or four stations on the two lines. In case not all points in can be covered by four stations, the result is a covering of the entire common area of the two lines with five stations. Obviously, the running time is in O(n3).

We considered the problem of covering the common area between two inter- secting straight line segments. In general this problem is NP-hard. A char- acterization of solutions to this problem depending on the angle between the line segments is given. This leads to an algorithm with running time linear in the number of discs to find a small, though in general not minimum, number of discs covering the common area. The result is then applied to the station location problem for a railway network that consists of two intersecting tracks forming a sufficiently large angle.

