We solve the satisfiability problem for a three-sorted fragment of set theory (denoted 3LQSTR), which admits a restricted form of quantification over individual and set variables and the finite enumeration operator {-, -,.. ., -} over individual variables, by showing that it enjoys a small model property, i.e., any

More recently, in [9], the three-level quantified syllogistic 3LQSR, involving vari- ables of three sorts has been shown to have a decidable satisfiability problem. The decision algorithm for 3LQSR was inspired by the procedure presented in [4] to prove the decidability of 3LSSPU. In particular, the notion of relativized interpre- tation introduced in [9], can be seen as a variant of the notion of assignment of the small model defined in [4]. The language 3LQSR, as well as its extension 3LQSTR introduced in this paper, does not allow one to express the construct of general union. The latter construct, on the other hand, is a primitive operator of 3LSSPU. Later, in [10], the satisfiability problem for 4LQSR, a four-level quantified syllo- gistic admitting variables of four sorts, has been proved to be decidable. The latter result has been exploited in [8] to prove that the quite expressive description logic

are the atoms allowed in the fragment 2LS (Two-Level Syllogistic) which has been proved decidable in [15]. Since X = {x1,... , xk} is a level 0 quantifier-free atomic formula in 3LQSTR, 2LS with finite enumerations turns out to be expressible by 3LQSTR-formulae.

is not a purely universal formula of level 0, and the variables x1,... , xn are not linked to Z. As we will see below, in the general case we need 3LQSR-formulae of an exponential length in n, thus showing that the fragment 3LQSTR is strictly

D. Cantone, C. Longo, M. Nicolosi-Asmundo, D.F. Santamaria. Web ontology representation and reasoning via fragments of set theory. Proc. of the 9th International Conference on Web Reasoning and Rule Systems (RR 2015), Berlin, August 4-6, 2015. Vol. 9209 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,

