The Invariant Set Hypothesis makes contextuality a readily understandable con- cept, by focusing on the sparseness (measure zero, nowhere dense property) of I. Imagine a world state on I, i.e., corresponding to a state of physical reality. Now per- turb this state by changing one variable or parameter keeping all others fixed. This is the type of perturbation considered when one constructs counterfactual states (what Bob would have measured if, instead of measuring in the x direction, he had measured in the y direction). Because of the sparseness of I, such a perturbation almost certainly takes the world state off to a state of physical unreality.

Application of The Invariant Set Hypothesis in this way implies that the Bell- Kochen-Specker Theorem does not constrain D to be non-local (i.e., to not be locally causal). The reason for this (a reason which Bell himself recognized as valid) is that from the perspective of the Invariant Set Hypothesis, experimental parameters, the orientation of polarisers and so on, cannot be considered as unconstrained free variables.

A key element of quantum physics is the wave nature of coherent quantum objects. Again the fractal nature of the invariant set can explain this. Readers will be familiar with the periodicity found in animations which zoom into the Mandelbrot set. Here positive exponent Lyapunov vectors perform the function of the zoom, periodically revealing the self-similar structure of the partition of the invariant set. The periodicity revealed by the self-similarity of I is manifest at a fixed point through the coherence associated with the family of dynamically defined partitions

As such, there is also nothing fundamental about measurement. Rather, mea- surement is a process which on the one hand reveals to us humans the nature of the invariant set, but on the other hand is merely part of the many interactions which determines the invariant set. The invariant set is an atemporal concept; measurements performed to the future of some point p in state space help deter- mine whether p lies on I or not. This simple fact can be used to understand the apparently paradoxical nature of delayed-choice experiments.

ant set is in part characterised by the properties of the experiments which inform us humans about the invariant set. Hence, the Invariant Set Hypothesis implies that it is not meaningful to regard a quantum particle as having any intrinsic properties independent of the instruments which measure the state of the quantum system. This is one of the key tenets of the Copenhagen Interpretation.

