The method of connecting logics has gained a lot of attention in the knowledge representation and ontology communities because of its intuitive semantics and natural support for modular KR, its generality, and its robustness concerning decidability preservation. However, so far no dedicated automated reasoning solutions have been developed, and the only reasoning available was via translation into sufficiently expressive logics. In this paper, we present a simple modalised version of basic E -connections, and develop a sound, complete, and terminating resolution-based reasoning procedure. The approach is modular and can be extended to more expressive versions of E -connections.

In this paper, we present a simple modalised version of basic E -connections and a sound, complete, and terminating resolution-based reasoning procedure for deal- ing with this kind of combination. We note that E -connections have been widely applied to combining Description Logics [13,7] and that experimental evaluation shows that resolution performs well for such logics [10,20]. The reasoning proce- dure we introduce here is very simple in its structure, keeping the calculi for the component logics disjoint, and introducing a set of resolution-based inference rules that extend the method in [19] to solve the satisfiability problem in logics connect- ing K-components via K-bridge modalities. The approach is modular and can be extended to more expressive versions of E -connections.

The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we present the syntax and semantics of the multi-modal logic K(n). In Section 3, a basic modalised version of E -connections is defined. Section 4 introduces the resolution method for connected logics, together with examples, and Section 5 sketches the correctness proofs. Re- sults and related work are discussed in Section 6.

E -connections were originally conceived as a versatile and well-behaved technique for combining logics [14], but have been quickly adopted as a framework for the integration of ontologies and modular reasoning in the Semantic Web [7]. The general idea behind this combination method is that the interpretation domains of the connected logics are interpreted by disjoint vocabulary and interconnected by means of link relations. The language of the E -connection is then the union of the original languages enriched with operators capable of talking about the link relations.

Let L1 and L2 be two normal multi-modal logics that are to be connected. We assume that the languages L1 and L2, i.e., the propositional variables and modal operators of L1 and L2, are pairwise disjoint; however, for simplicity of presentation

we here identify the (classical) Boolean operators of L1 and L2. Note that separat- ing propositional connectives only becomes relevant when connecting logics with a non-classical propositional base logic, e.g. when combining intuitionistic logic with classical or relevant logic, a topic which we intend to follow up on in future work.

The proof is given in Example 4.2. Moreover, it is easy to see that bridge modalities satisfy the rule of Necessitation. Indeed, this already gives a complete axiomatisa- tion of the basic bridge modalities introduced in Def. 3.3 (as hinted at already in [1]) and shows that they are K-modalities, illustrating that the connection method does not, by itself, introduce additional bridge principles.

In this section we present the resolution-based calculus for CM, RESE. The approach is clausal: a formula to be tested for (un)satisfiability is firstly translated into a normal form, given in Section 4.1, and then the inference rules given in Section 4.2 are applied until either a contradiction is found or no new clauses can be generated. The calculus incorporates inference rules to deal with each of the component logics, which are syntactical variants of the inference rules given in [19], and also inference rules to deal with the connections between these components.

The (sets of) inference rules deal with the different contexts within each compo- nent logic. Therefore, there is a set of inference rules to deal with the propositional part of each component language; a set of inference rules to deal with the multi- modal part within each language; and a set of inference rules to deal with the connection between the two languages. The first two set of rules, related to literal and modal resolution, are a syntactic variation of the calculus presented in [19].

In this section, we sketch the correctness results related to the resolution-based cal- culus for connected logics, RESE, that is, soundness, termination, and completeness results for the method. The soundness proof shows that the transformation into SNFE as well as the application of the inference rules are satisfiability preserving. Termination is ensured by the fact that a given set of clauses contains only finitely many propositional symbols, from which only finitely many SNFE clauses can be constructed and therefore only finitely many new SNFE clauses can be derived. Completeness is proved by showing that if a given set of clauses is unsatisfiable, there is a refutation produced by RESE.

We have also presented a sound, complete, and terminating resolution-based method for dealing with such combinations. Transformation into the normal form separates the different dimensions where reasoning is carried out. Thus, different sets of specialised inference rules are applied to the different portions of the language and the calculi for the component logics remain independent. Information between the different modalities within each component logic is made available through the propositional language that those modalities share. The resolution calculus for connected logics also introduces a set of inference rules to deal with the bridge modalities. Those rules are applied to clauses containing connecting modalities in one logic and literal clauses in the other logic. Therefore, when a set of connecting modalities in one logic cannot be satisfied in the model of the other logic, some restrictions are imposed via the propositional language in the first one.

We strongly believe that the method presented here can be extended to deal with more powerful varieties of connections between logics. For stronger connecting theories, we should be able to establish completeness whenever the bridge inference rules mimic (complete) resolution procedures for logics with corresponding (com- plete) frame properties introduced by the connecting modalities. This idea is not only applicable to the combination of standard, classical normal modal logics, but, importantly, also to other non-classical logics such as intuitionistic, relevant, or paraconsistent logic.

