We address the problem of selecting a model from a list of potential models in the field of dynamical systems. The selection is based on model behaviour specified in temporal logic rather than time series. This provides more global constraints on the system dynamics. Not only to select one model but also to create an ordered structure, we propose the model ordering problem. We suggest and apply several ordering relations comparing models given property specification. To provide a formal method with global results for the proposed setting we employ and adapt model checking and parameter synthesis methods. To evaluate the method, we apply the proposed method to several qualitative models of regulatory networks.

To conclude, model ordering is an approach applicable to many model for- malisms, forms of specification, and analysis frameworks. We believe this approach can greatly simplify the model inference workflow while providing a reliable method for evaluating models across formalisms. We are keen on expanding the usability of the proposed method as its reproducibility.

This work assumes each parametrisation is given as a valuation of model param- eters, such that each parameter is identified using a parameter index. The index uniquely identifies the parameter across all considered models. These indices are written using Roman numerals. In Example 3.1, we consider three models with three parameters, indexed as I, II, and III. Here, the first model contains only parameters I and III, the second model contains parameters I and II, and the third model contains parameters II and III.

Docker (https://www.docker.com/) is a computer software that performs operating-system-level virtualisation also known as containerization. Containers are software packages which are isolated from each other and use their own set of tools and libraries; they can communicate through well-defined channels. All containers are run by a single operating system kernel and are therefore more lightweight than virtual machines.

