In Section 3, we demonstrate that fan categories are also models of FRP. We show that the time-dependent notion of trueness in temporal logic is related to time-dependent type inhabitance in FRP. We use our categorical semantics to explain the correspondence between the temporal modalities and the type constructors for behaviors and events, which are the key concepts of FRP.

In Section 5, we introduce variants of the temporal modalities that refer only to the future. To reflect this in the semantics, we define ideal intuitionistic S4 categories. We prove a relationship between fan categories and ideal intuitionistic S4 categories that is analog to the result from Section 4.

The key constructs of FRP are behaviors and events, which are used to describe temporal phenomena. A behavior is a time-varying value, while an event is an occurrence time with an attached value. The temporal modality 2 corresponds to a type constructor 2 for behaviors, while the modality 3 corresponds to a type constructor 3 for events. This can be seen by looking at the endofunctors 2 and 3, which model the temporal modalities and hence also the type constructors that correspond to them. Remember that for any object A, we defined 2A and 3A as

The classical modal logic S4 corresponds to the class of Kripke frames whose accessibility relation is a preorder. Classical temporal logics with a linear notion of time use totally ordered sets of times as Kripke frames. So a Kripke model for such a logic is also a Kripke model for S4. It is reasonable to assume that a similar connection exists in the case of intuitionistic logics and categorical models. In this section, we show that this is in fact the case.

From Lemma 5.4 and Definition 5.5, it is immediately clear that every ideal intu- itionistic S4 category gives rise to an intuitionistic S4 category. Another important property is that fan categories give rise to ideal intuitionistic S4 categories. We define the ideal temporal functors of a fan category analogously to Definition 2.2 and obtain a fact similar to the one of Theorem 4.4.

Fan categories are rather concrete. In this section, we develop a much more abstract notion of categorical model for temporal logic and FRP. Ideal intuitionistic S4 categories are a good starting point for this undertaking. Their problem is that they do not capture the notion of linear time. This is analog to Kripke models of classical logics, where S4 permits arbitrary preorders as Kripke frames, while linear-time temporal logics only permit total orders. In this section, we enrich ideal intuitionistic S4 categories with further structure that reflects the linearity of time. We call the resulting constructs temporal categories.

Jeffrey [5] presents an implementation of FRP in the dependently typed programming language Agda. Based on this, he develops a category RSet, which expresses the notion of time-dependent type inhabitance and is thus strongly related to our fan categories. Jeffrey also uses FRP analogs of advanced temporal operators to develop variants of RSet that enforce causality of FRP operations.

In Section 4, we discussed the relationships between our intuitionistic S4 categories and the categorical models by Kobayashi [8] and by Bierman and de Paiva [3]. Alechina et. al. [1] show how the latter are related to algebraic models and Kripke models. 3

Krishnaswami and Benton [9] give an FRP semantics based on the category of 1-bounded ultrametric spaces, and Birkedal et. al [4] study the related category of presheaves over the natural numbers. Both approaches use a discrete notion of time, while our work is compatible with any totally ordered set of times. Studying the connections between our developments and the ones of Krishnaswami and Benton as well as the ones of Birkedal et. al. remains a task for the future.

We have defined fan categories, which are categorical models of a subset of an intuitionistic LTL variant and a corresponding flavor of FRP. Fan categories directly express the notion of time-dependent trueness in LTL and the related notion of time-dependent type inhabitance of our FRP dialect. We have furthermore defined the more abstract notion of temporal category based on categorical models of intuitionistic S4 and shown that fan categories are a specialization of temporal categories.

In a future publication, we want to extend temporal categories such that they also cover other modalities of LTL and their FRP counterparts. Furthermore, we want to study how recursion can be integrated into categorical models of FRP. We also want to use concepts from temporal categories in the interface design and possibly the implementation of FRP systems. Furthermore, we are interested in combining temporal logic with other kinds of logic and studying the corresponding programming paradigms. Another task is to find out about relationships to other categorical FRP semantics, as discussed in Section 7.

