Background and aims: Human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common malignancies worldwide. Polymorphisms of the TP53 gene are known to play an important role in HCC. It is aimed to investigate the impact of the Arg72Pro polymorphism of TP53 in the development of HCC among chronic hepatitis C patients with different stages of liver disease.

Subjects & methods: This study included 69 HCC patients, 101 liver cirrhosis (LC) patients and 46 healthy, unrelated, age-matched volunteers as controls, from the same locality of Egypt. The HCC and LC patients were suffering from HCV infection. The Arg72Pro polymorphism of codon 72 was tested by PCR, followed by restriction enzyme digestion (PCR-RFLP).

on chromosome 17p13.1, and it encodes a 53-kDa nuclear phosphoprotein, which plays a central role in safeguarding the integrity of the human genome [7]. In the cell, the TP53 protein binds to the DNA, stimulating the production of a protein, p21. P21 interacts with a cell division-stimulating protein (cdk2), which acts as a tumor suppressor protein. P53 gene mutations and polymorphisms have been widely associated with cancer [8]. Because the loss of TP53 function has been suggested to be the most important step in multi- stage hepatocarcinogenesis, TP53 is a potential candidate to decrease the risk of HCC [9]. The codon 72 polymorphism is

located in exon 4 of the TP53 gene, a region containing very few mutations. The TP53 protein exhibits a common poly- morphism at amino acid 72, resulting in the substitution of an Arginine (Arg) residue (CGC) with Proline (Pro) residue (CCC), designated as TP53 Arg72Pro (ace no dbSNP ID: rs1042522) [10]. The aim of this study was to investigate the association between the TP53 Arg72Pro polymorphism and the risk of HCC in HCV-infected patients. Additionally, we investigated the relation between the TP53 Arg72Pro polymorphism and the

This is a hospital-based caseecontrol study that included 69 HCC patients, 101 LC patients and 46 healthy volunteers as controls. The HCC and LC patients were suffering from HCV infection. All of the patients were recruited from the Clinics of Tropical Medicine Department, Mansoura University during the period from January 2012 to March 2013. An informed consent was taken from all of the participants before the study. In addition, an approval was obtained from the ethical and scientific committees of the local health authorities.

sonography and/or high-resolution contrast computed to- mography. Furthermore, ultrasound-guided liver biopsy was performed, and at least two strips of liver tissue measuring 2 cm in length were obtained. Liver specimens were prepared with the hematoxylin and eosin stains and the Mason tri- chrome stain for histological evaluation. All of the patients were newly diagnosed, previously untreated (neither chemo- therapy nor radiotherapy) and free from any other cancer. The selection criteria for the 101 LC patients with no evidence of HCC were defined either by histology or using the combina- tion of clinical, laboratory and endoscopic tests. The absence of HCC was established by the absence of focal lesions on the

Human HCC is one of the most common malignancies worldwide. However, no therapy has been effective to date. There is an urgent need to identify molecular markers for the prediction of the disease course and for novel therapeutic approaches [11]. The development of HCC depends on

Inactivation of TP53 gene mostly results from mutations of this gene. To enable a TP53 gene response in cells containing mutant TP53 and restore TP53 functions in cancer cells [28], suggested two approaches. These strategies include either the ectopic expression of functional TP53 or the reactivation of mutant TP53 in tumor cells. In contrast [31e33], found an over-expression of TP53 in HCC. These contradictory results may be because TP53 is involved in multiple steps during the development of HCC. Our results indicated that TP53 is expressed in multiple stages. In the early stage of HCC, TP53 may be over expressed, resulting in higher plasma TP53 levels when compared with healthy tissues. In contrast, in the late stage of HCC, TP53 is down regulated, compared with healthy tissues. To resolve this ambiguity, it is necessary to expand the sample size for the study and identify the stage of HCC for each patient, based on histopathological, radiological and clinical examinations.

