Along with the emergence of widespread electronic communications in large-scale computer networks, the problem of malicious or otherwise undesired behaviour among participants has grown into a major problem. The parties involved are often unknown to each other beforehand, and in many cases communication takes place on a temporary basis. Especially in business or otherwise sensitive communication, precaution is crucial in order to avoid fraud, identity theft, or other undesired activ- ities. In light of this, the notion of trust has become an important indicator of which parties are benevolent vs malevolent.

Our model is continuous, in the form we present it. For example, we accept real values as input, we assume that time is continuous, and the resulting trust metric is a real number. However, this should not be seen as if the model would mandate a continuous treatment instead of a discrete one. As computers are discrete machines, all implementations will in any case be discrete, at least at the lowest level of abstraction. The model can also easily be translated into a discrete one, whereby for example integrals are changed into sums. The presentation in this paper is, however, of conceptual and mathematical nature, and as such, we feel that it is appropriate to treat the model in a continuous manner.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In section 2, we introduce a number of concepts that are fundamental to our approach. Section 2.1 presents the report metric, which represents feedback about the test entity as given by the observers.

In the following subsection, the concept of trust area is defined by using the report metric. Furthermore, in section 2.3 we define trust volume as an extension of the trust area, by involving a height function. In section 3, we present aging of trust, which is based on trust mass and density, which are introduced in 3.1. Section 4 is concerned with various constraints on the parameters and functions of our approach, so that the model behaves as desired. We present a number of soundness properties that can be expected from a trust metric, and we show that our model fulfils them. Finally, in section 5, we sum up what we have presented in the paper.

A quantity, which will be referred to as the report metric, is of fundamental import- ance for the approach presented in this paper. It represents the level of trust in the object in question as reported by one or several observer(s). The report metric is a continuous and total function of time, rm = rm(t), defined in an interval [0, tnow]. In the case of several observers, the metric is a function of the individual report metrics, for example a mean value. In that case we calculate the combined trust metric according to the following formula:

The graphical interpretation is thus an area, which is bounded by the report metric function. As the report metric is also allowed to be negative, the (sub)intervals of I in which rm(t) < 0 imply a decrease in the total trust area. The trust base as a whole may also be negative. An important observation is the fact that the trust area is actually a measure of the total amount of trust over the interval. Intervals with a high report metric contribute to the total trust base in a high degree, whereas intervals of low report metric only add a little to it. Furthermore, negative intervals decrease the trust base; a fact that corresponds well to the intuitive interpretation of a trust metric.

be seen as being more untrustworthy than trustworthy. The height, h, is intuitively a value which amplifies the trust base metric, so that a high height implies a large volume. Similarly, a low height leads to a small volume, even though the trust base may be the same. The formula for calculating this volume is:

This extension increases the expressiveness of the concept of trust volume as com- pared to the trust area, as different periods of time may now be given different importance. At periods of time when reliability in the test subject is crucial, the function h(t) may be given a larger value, resulting in a larger amplification in the trust volume. In this way, the implications of the report metrics during these periods of time are given a higher impact. We also note that if using the constant function 1 as height function, the formula simply degrades to the one for trust area. Hence, trust volume can also express everything that trust area can, and is thus superior in terms of expressiveness.

As the behaviour of people and other entities may change over time, it is often reasonable to believe more in feedback reports given recently than those that have been given at an earlier point in time. As the trust volume does not take this aspect into consideration, it is evident that we need to introduce new concepts in order to adapt the model to these facts. To achieve this goal, we will incorporate aging into the model. However, before doing so, we have to present the notions of trust density and trust mass.

To achieve the effect of trust aging, we use another analogy from physics, namely radioactive decay. Still, it is important to stress that this analogy should not be pushed too far. For example, radioactive nuclei decay into other elements and ra- diation, whereas we consider the decayed trust to completely disappear. Another way in which our concept differs from physics is that we permit decay functions of different forms than the one that takes place in nature (and the trust function itself is expressed in another fashion).

As the report metric is the quantity which provides input data to the model, the process of calculating this quantity is not within the scope of this paper. Still, trust metric values about the same entity, given by various observers, can be combined to a single trust metric using a combination function. This matter will be discussed in the following subsection, and was also shortly mentioned in section 2.1.

In section 2.1, we suggested that individual report metrics can be combined by calculating a mean value. However, other functions are possible as well. Many kinds of functions would be plausible from a mathematical perspective, but they should also be sound in practice. A mathematical constraint is that the function must not diverge, and practical constraints involve the fact that the resulting report metric should somehow represent the reports given as input values. Not excluding other possible function, we suggest using a linear combination of the individual report metrics, i.e.:

