The application field of the assistive robot is getting increasingly wide, and the interactions between assistive robot manipulators and the environment, such as opening the door, pulling a drawer, serving the tea, is becoming more and more closely [1e3]. There are various constrained mechanisms in the interactive environment. In the situations where task descriptions of each constrained mechanism are not necessary, manipulators need a way to operate the unknown constrained mechanisms.

The operation of unknown constrained mechanisms is very complicated. For instance, opening the door, which involves a series of problems such as positioning, trajectory planning, and tracking, is a typical problem of the unknown constrained mechanism operation. Most of the traditional opening-door operation needs to model the door first to plan a trajectory, which does not provide the universal solution because different tasks need different task descriptions. For example, Nagatani modeled the door and presented a detailed analysis of the path planning to open the door [4,5]; Peterson used the smallest- model analysis to predict the parameters but the success rate of opening the door is 90% [6]; Pujas proposed a force-position hybrid control method, but the inaccurate task description model might result in positioning errors [7]; Petrovskaya adopted the laser-scanning modeling based particle filter method which also suffered from the defects of inaccuracy [8]. There are also model-free methods. Schmid installed multi- point haptic sensors on the hand claw and force/torque sensors on the wrist to open the door operation, but this kind of method increased the complexity of the controller [9]; Lutscher pro- posed to operate the unknown constrained mechanisms based on

[12] that online chooses traction axis and estimates constraint coordinate system. Besides, the operating space is not limited by the two-dimensional plane. However, because the threshold of the traction axis selection is fixed, this method cannot manip- ulate constrained mechanisms with different resistance.

The constrained moving direction dk is the unit vector of the Z axis with respect to  e. Similarly, the direction of time k-1 is represented by a unit vector dk-1. During the two adja- cent control period, the end effector is moving in the same plane. Thus the X axis of the constrained frame is perpen- dicular with the plane defined by dk and dk-1. And the unit vector of the X axis with respect to the end effector is:

Five experiments have been conducted in this paper. A traditional Impedance control method [11] is adopted in Experiment I. Experiment II, III, IV and V are based on the dynamic interactive control method proposed in this paper. A dynamic velocity method is involved in Experiment III, Iv and

Assume the motion speed of the arm during door opening is not big. The effects of M and D in the impedance control are ignored and only K item is considered, whose diagonal ele- ments are set to 4.0 N/mm. The effects of Mrot in attitude impedance control is also negligible. The attitude of the doorknob need by followed by the end-effector of the arm real-time, Krot is set to zero. Only the item Drot is left, all the diagonal elements are set as 1.9 Nms/rad.

This paper proposed a Dynamic Interactive Control method to operate unknown constrained mechanisms. This method complete the task without the knowledge of the modeling of constrained mechanisms. In operation, on the one hand, the constraint coordinates will be estimated dynamically based on past speed directions, and the selection matrix will be adjusted online to decouple speed control and force control. On the other hand, in order to enhance the adaptability and interactivity of the operation task, the operating resistance and speed will be adjusted dynamically. Finally, the effectiveness and suitability have been verifed by experiments  on  constrained  mechanism  with  different

M.Phil. and Ph.D. degrees in Automation & Com- puter-Aided Engineering from the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, in 2004 and 2007, respectively. From 2007 to 2009, he was a Post- doctoral Fellow and Research Assistant in the Department of Mechanical and Automation Engi- neering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong. He has been with Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China,

since 2009, where he is currently a Professor of Department of Automation. He worked as a visiting professor at University of Zurich in Switzerland. His research interests include visual servoing, service robot, robot control and computer vision. He is a senior member of IEEE. He is an associate editor of Robotics and Biomimetics, Assembly Automation, International Journal of

Humanoid Robotics and IEEE Transactions on Robotics. He served as asso- ciate editor in Conference Editorial Board of IEEE Robotics and Automation Society from 2011 to 2015. Prof. Wang is actively involving in organization of international conferences. He served as organizing committee member for many international conferences such as ICRA and IROS. He was the general chair of the 2016 IEEE International Conference on Real-time Computing and Robotics and the program chair of the 2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetic. He is the program chair of the 2019 IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics.

the Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China. Since 1996, he has been at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University where he is currently Head and Professor of the Department of Automation, and Director of the Institute of Robotics and Intelligent Processing. He is the founder of the Autonomous Robot Laboratory at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University. He was a visiting professor in the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory at

