cidable in polynomial time [6]. The decidability of weak bisimilarity for BPA is an open question. The undecidability proof for PDA does not carry over to BPA, and it is widely conjectured that this problem is decidable for BPA. It is known that weak bisimilarity is decidable for the subclass of totally normed BPA [5]. The best known lower bound for weak bisimilarity of general BPA

The set ERROR contains exactly those pairs that cannot occur in correct computations of the LBA M. Thus ERROR depends on M. To define this formally, we first construct the set CORR of all correct pairs of this form, i.e., the complement of ERROR.

BPA correspond to the subclass of pushdown automata with a finite control of size 1. Undecidability of weak bisimilarity for general (normed) pushdown automata has been shown by Srba in [20] by a reduction from Minsky 2- counter machines. The reason why this proof does not carry over to BPA is that BPA lack a global finite control and thus cannot remember control- information when decreasing the stack. (However, while increasing the stack, the top stack symbol can be used to encode a control-state.) The question arises how many control-states are needed in pushdown automata to make weak bisimilarity undecidable. It follows directly from the construction in [20] that a certain fixed number suffices, since one can apply this reduction to the fixed universal Minsky machine, but the number obtained in this way is certainly much bigger than 2.

Remark 7.2 Note that in this undecidability proof the stack of the PDA is first only increased and then only decreased. In other words, there is only one reversal between stack-increasing and stack-decreasing mode. (The proof in [20] used an arbitrary number of reversals.) Thus, weak bisimilarity is also undecidable for normed 1-reversal-bounded PDA with just two control-states.

Remark 7.3 It has been shown in [11] that weak bisimilarity is undecidable even for (normed) 1-counter machines (just one-counter instead of a stack). In fact, it is undecidable for an even weaker model: one-counter nets, i.e, Petri nets with just one unbounded place. However, one-counter nets/machines and BPA are incomparable in their expressive power.

