In this paper we present a definition of weak bisimulation for action-type systems. A typical example of an action-type system is the familiar labelled transition system (LTS) (see, e.g., [20,18]), but also many types of probabilistic systems (see, e.g., [16,27,11,3,26]) fall into this class. In order to emphasize the role of the actions we view coalgebras as arising from bifunctors over the category Set.

In the context of concrete probabilistic transition systems, there have been several proposals for a notion of weak bisimulation, often relying on the par- ticular model under consideration. Segala [27,26] proposed four notions of weak relations for his model of simple probabilistic automata. Baier and Her- manns [3,2,4] have given a rather appealing definition of weak bisimulation for the case of generative probabilistic systems. Philippou, Lee and Sokolsky [21] studied weak bisimulation in the setting of the alternating model [14]. This work was extended to infinite systems by Desharnais, Gupta, Jagadeesan and Panangaden [9]. Desharnais et al. also provided a metric analogue of weak bisimulation [8].

The concrete notion of bisimilarity for LTSs and generative systems and the respective coalgebraic definitions coincide. For the case of LTSs a direct proof can be found in [25], for example. For generative systems this fact goes back to [30] where Markov chains were considered, and was treated in [6] for generative systems with finite support.

Here, we describe a general procedure to obtain coincidence results of this kind. It applies to LTSs as well as to generative systems in their full generality. Additionally, we will apply the method for obtaining a concrete characteriza- tion, Lemma 2.12, of bisimilarity for a functor discussed in Section 5.

In the remainder of this section we gather some results related to the weak preservation of pullbacks. A functor is said to weakly preserve total pullbacks if it transforms any pullback diagram with epi legs into a weak pullback dia- gram. The restriction to pullbacks with epi legs, rather than arbitrary ones, is a novel technicality, that is needed below.

Next, we focus on the weak pullback preservation of the functor GA. For the functor defining generative systems with finite support weak pullback preser- vation was proven by De Vink and Rutten [30], using the graph theoretical max-flow min-cut theorem, and by Moss [19], using an elementary matrix fill- in property. We follow the latter approach for arbitrary, infinite, matrices here.

In this section we present a general definition of weak bisimulation for action type systems. Our definition has been inspired by the definitions of weak bisimulation for concrete systems. Starting point is the idea that a weak bisimulation for a given system arises as strong bisimulation for a system obtained from the original one.

In this paper we have proposed a coalgebraic definition of weak bisimulation for action-type systems. For its justification we have considered the cases of the familiar labelled transition systems and of generative probabilistic systems and have argued that the coalgebraic notion coincides with the concrete definitions. Additionally, the paper also comprises a few other, smaller contributions.

Our handling of probabilistic distributions avoids restricting the cardinal- ity of the support set, a fact of some technical interest. The results hold for arbitrary discrete distributions captured by the functor D of Section 2. Although we do not impose cardinality restrictions on the state spaces con- sidered, generative probabilistic system are discrete in nature. The work of Baier and Hermanns treats finite systems only, also because of the algorith- mic considerations addressed in [3,4]. As we do not touch upon such matter here, the definitions, both concrete and coalgebraic, are given for systems of arbitrary size.

