Topology selection in wireless sensor networks (WSNs) is the paramount reason that limits the performance of sensor nodes. Due to the wireless nature of sensors, they are mostly battery pow- ered devices and hence can operate for a limited time period [2]. Moreover, when the sensors deplete their energy, the data from sensor nodes become unavailable and therefore the network becomes fragmented. In such situations, the battery of dead

Based on the extensive literature survey, several issues are found which can be mitigated using the proposed solution. On the contrary, our research work not only considers an appropriate topology selection, but also implements the concept of recharging and load balancing with appropriate topology to extend network lifespan. Further, UAV moves around the pre-defined Anchor Points (APs) to recharge the node which falls within its transmission range. It computes the migration tour of UAV based on the joint consideration of recharging demand and data gathering performance.

WSNs are subset of sensor nodes that consists of a sink node (base station) and several batteries operating wireless sensor nodes. The sink node in general has considerably high data storage and data processing abilities than the other nodes in WSN. WSNs consist of many components such as: Sensor Node, Gateway, Bridge, Aggregator and Sink Node. A wireless sensor network is a smart sensor that can gather the sensory information, provides processing and communication within other linked nodes in a net- work. Routers are responsible for forwarding of data packets amid two or more computer networks. Gateways on the other hand have the responsibility to perform protocol translation within distinct networks and can operate at any network layer. The one that con- nects two or more than two segments of network along the layer 2 is called bridge. Sink Node is responsible for reducing the overall size of the data. The role of Sink Node is to forward data from

Star and Ring topology outperforms cluster topology. However, more residual energy in star topology is because of the failure of central node. Due to this, the communication between the sensor nodes becomes fragmented and energy gets saved. Although, the maximum energy is saved in star topology, but the energy saved in this way affect other parameters like throughput, PDR and many more in a negative way. Overall, Ring topology performs better in comparison to star and cluster topology as this provides jamming-less service without breaking the communication.

After extracting the statistical data for various topologies, ring topology seems to outperform star and cluster topology by provid- ing reliable and long-lasting communication. Thus, we merged ring topology in existing J-ERLB to ameliorate the performance of J- ERLB. In the next section, existing J-ERLB and J-MERDG techniques are discussed.

The existing J-ERLB approach used a three-phase algorithm to increase the lifespan of WSNs which is our previous proposed work [14]. In the first phase, recharging of sensor nodes having energy less than the threshold level is considered. Then, the SenCar ran- domly moves across the network to compute the residual energy of static sensor nodes in network. If the value of the calculated energy level of a node is below the threshold value, then the Sen- Car will recharge that specific node with half amount of value (10

Till date, none of the researcher implemented and tested the concept of regular topologies like bus, ring, star, cluster and hybrid topologies in WRSNs. This can greatly help in improving the overall performance of the WSNs by not only easing the selection of pre- defined trajectory but also help the mobile node to locate the posi- tion of the nodes accurately for recharging their batteries. After analysing J-ERLB and J-MERDG in detail, reduced throughput and less residual energy are noticed. Therefore, in order to overcome these drawbacks, 3SM is implemented for testing its effectiveness over J-ERLB and J-MERDG in WSNs.

In this paper, we have studied various topologies and its imple- mentation in WRSNs by exploiting mobility using UAV. Specifi- cally, J-ERLB is implemented on various regular topologies like ring, star and cluster topology. Then, the optimum topology is cho- sen based on performance metrics packet delivery ratio, through- put and delay. Then the selected ring topology is merged with J- ERLB to formulate 3SM model, 3SM uses three step methods in which first step involves choosing an appropriate topology, second step involves the recharging process that can be implemented using UAV and last step is implementation of MAODV which involves the function of balancing the load among sensor nodes. UAV migrates along pre-defined APs, performs the function of wireless power transmissions and collects the sensed data from sensors in hop-by-hop routing. We also proposed a three-phase algorithm as a solution to limited lifespan of WRSNs. The proposed solution could be used in the real-time applications such as agri- culture automated watering system. Further, extensive numerical outcomes demonstrate that 3SM can effectively achieve high net-

