thailand is a world famous market of colored stone. this is because of the good quality of natural gemstones sources, especially ruby and sapphire, together with the skilled craftsman for gem cutting as well as professional jewelry design and setting. recently, good quality gem materials have reduced against increasing of price. this situation makes the lower quality gem material attracted the suppliers since their quality can be improved by heating process. according to the process heating with gas feeding, the changes in chemical structure of trace elements inside the stone may improve their color and clarity; this process is then so-classical[chucharuwong, 1999]. this process has been widely accepted in



bcr 3(oxidation step) usually yielded the highest effect on extraction. except samples from factories 1 and 7, bcr 1 obtained higher lead concentrations than those of bcr3. for samples of factories 2 to 6, cracks of rubies were appeared significantly by bcr3 step which they are compatible to lead concentrations in leachate. on the other hand, samples of factories 1 and 7 were clearly cracked after bcr1 test.



according to series i, treated rubies yield the highest lead content in bcr 2. for series ii, bcr 2 has been carried out initially but it yield lower lead contents than that obtained from series i. this can suggest that bcr 2 may yield higher efficiency after activated by other bcr steps.



this research is financially supported by the gem and jewelry institute of thailand(git) and national research university project of chulalongkorn university. the authors appreciate dr. bhuwadol wanthanachaisaeng for his coordinating and collecting ruby samples from many sources. thanks also go to git and environmental research institute of chulalongkorn university for laboratories and analytical



kanjanabut, k, chotipong, a, and sutthirat, c,. working towards a procedural standard in the testing for both stability and assessment of the impact on health of lead glass-treated rubies and beryllium-treated sapphire. the journal of the gemmological association of hongkong. 2010; 31:48-54.



