in this paper the approach is extended to the case of multifunctions. such functions appear very naturally in applied mathematics, logic and theoretical computer science. various ways of coding(indexing) sets are discussed and effective versions of several continuity notions for multifunctions are introduced. for each of these notions an indexing system for sets is exhibited so that the multifunctions that are effective with respect to this indexing system and possess certain witness functions are exactly the multifunction which are effectively continuous with respect to the continuity notion under consideration. important special cases are discussed where such witnessing functions always exist.



there are many more examples showing that multifunctions occur very naturally in mathematical practice. they have indeed been used with great success in various branches of mathematics, logic and computer science and there is already a vast literature(cf. e.g.[1,2,16,21,8]).



usually, set inclusion between basic open sets is not completely enumerable. but in the applications we have in mind there is a canonical relation between the descriptions of the basic open sets(respectively, their code numbers), which in many cases is stronger than set inclusion. this relation is r.e. we assume that the topological basis b comes with a numbering b of its elements and such a relation between the codes.



in the previous sections we have investigated effectiveness properties in t0 spaces. to this end we encoded the essential objects, the points and the basic open sets. in this section we will study ways of assigning indices to subspaces. for cardinality reasons, in general not all subspaces can be given an index.



by applying theorem 5.9 again we obtain an analogue to theorem 5.13 for the case of upper semi-continuity. now recall that by lemma 4.4 we can compute a complement exhaustion index from any covering index. therefore, every compactvalued multifunction that is effective with respect to complete covering indices and has values in an effectively given metric space is both effectively lower and upper semi-continuous.



