supervised domain adaptation methods can exploit labeled samples from both source and target domain. thereby, labeled samples in the target domain are substantially less numerous than labeled samples available in the source domain(otherwise there would be no need to render the estimation problem as a domain adaption problem, i.e., solely using a supervised learning algorithm in the target domain would be appropriate). in contrast, unsupervised domain adaptation methods assume that two unlabeled domains need to be matched. if there is prior knowledge available in the source domain but not in the target domain, and if the joint distributions of source and target domain are different, but related enough to ensure that the source domain information can be of help for solving the prediction problem in the target domain, we can regard the situation as a semi-supervised domain adaptation problem.



source-target domain combinations by computing a variety of similarity metrics, ensemble pruning for identifying a set of robust similarity metrics(sec. 2.2), implementation of a voting strategy to select a favorable source-target domain combination and learning a regression model thereof(sec. 2.3).



first, it can be noted that the unadapted models, despite featuring the largest deviations in this setup, yield accuracy levels that indicate that the models did not fail when applied to a new domain. this can be attributed to the exhaustive set of spectral-spatial features which imposes invariance in the models. however, when actually aligning source and target domains, a substantial decrease of mae can be achieved. compared to the domain adaptation strategy which solely foresees to align domains, our proposed additional mechanisms to select a proper source domain for an aligned target domain enable on average a further increase of 4.7 and 4.9 percentage points(p.p.) regarding built-up density and height, respectively. expectably, maes are by far the lowest when learning and applying a model within a domain. thus, the difference in accuracy compared to the domain adaptation settings can be regarded as an error cost, that is related to the acquisition of training data for a target domain.



encourage further deployment for remote sensing data analysis. given the modular nature of the method, we are interested in adapting the method for multiple image modalities, e.g., integrating sar measurements with corresponding feature set. further, we aim to integrate this domain adaptation approach, which is independent of the learning algorithm, in supervised multitask ensemble learning models[15,29].



