with these problems. differential evolution(de) is a stochastic population-based search method, proposed by storn and price. de is considered the most recent eas for solving real-parameter optimization problems. while de shares similarities with other eas, it differs significantly in the sense that in de, distance and direction information is used to guide the search process. in this research, two models of stochastic programming(sp) problems are considered: linear stochastic fractional programming problems and multiobjective stochastic linear programming problems. for lsfpp and moslp, the models proposed by charles and



in the data by assuming that the input or a part there of is specified by a probability distribution, rather than being deterministic. the problem of optimizing sum of more than one ratios of function is called stochastic sum-of-probabilistic fractional programming(ssfp) problem when the data under study are random in nature. the following section gives the general model of the ssfp problems.



p(5x1+ 4x2+ 2x3 6 b1) p 0.95, p(7x1+ 3x2+ x3 6 b2) p 0.95, p(2x1+ 7x2+ 3x3 6 b3) p 0.95, p(2x1+ 3x2+ 2.5x3 6 b4) p 0.95, p(5x1+ 2x2+ 1.5x3 6 b5) p 0.95, x1, x2, x3 p 0.



a total of 50 runs for each experimental setting were conducted and the best solution throughout the run was recorded as global optimum. results obtained by the desp versions are compared with lde, basic de, basic pso and also previously quoted results[19,20]. the results provided by these approaches were directly taken from. refer to for more details about lde algorithms.



how to control the crossover rate by self-adaptive mechanism. besides, another benchmark constrained and mixed integer programming problems will be solved using desp. additionally, future research will investigate the performance of the desp algorithm in solving unconstrained and constrained multi-objective optimization problems as well as real world applications. additionally, the promising research direction is joining the proposed triangular mutation with evolutionary algorithms, such as genetic algorithms, harmony search and particle swarm optimization, as well as foraging algorithms such as artificial bee colony, bees algorithm and ant colony optimization.



