a logical framework, on the other hand, may provide this level of generalization. in an intuitive and non-technical language, this can be stated as follows. consider a logic l with its formulas and structures where these formulas are semantically evaluated. we need to be able to answer the following questions:



for each modal logic that we consider for this task, there are two issues involved. the first one is whether the modal language has enough expressive power to describe the graph property that we want. in case the answer is negative, we need to search for a language with greater expressive power. in case the answer is positive and we are able to find such a formula, then we need to estimate how complex(computationally) it is to use the inference mechanisms of the logic to actually test, using the formula that we found, whether a given graph has the hamiltonian property.



as was shown in the previous section, the language of the basic graph logic does not have enough expressive power to describe the property that we want. in order to achieve our goal, we need a logic that has a language with more expressive power but, if possible, is still decidable with respect to the problems stated in the definitions 2.5 until 2.8.



before trying to find a formula to describe the hamiltonian graphs, we need to consider some graph-theoretical issues. in graph theory, there is no known result that states a necessary and sufficient condition for a graph to be hamiltonian. if we could find a formula that describes the hamiltonian graphs without having to describe the hamiltonian cycle itself, we would be finding such necessary and sufficient condition. thus, what our formulas do is to inspect all of the paths in the graph, searching for a hamiltonian cycle. not surprisingly then, a formula for a graph with n vertices uses n nominals.



this is the simplest and most direct attempt to describe the hamiltonian property: pure brute force. the formula has factorial length on the size of the graph, which makes it impossible to be frame-checked. however, the length of the formula is not the only problem. in order to see that, we present an alternative formula that has polynomial length on the size of the graph.



