the graphical calculus of string diagrams is an important ingredient in many abstract approaches to quantum mechanics and quantum informatics, as well exemplified in this volume. the objects of a category are pictured as strings, and the arrows as dots. an arrow is thought of as an operation, and in a plain category each operation has precisely one input(source) and one output(target). arrows can be such that s is injective and i is a fixpoint-free involution. for the present purposes we also need to impose a connectedness condition. the set v is the set of vertices. the set h is the set of half-edges or flags: these are pairs consisting of a vertex together with the germ of an emanating edge. finally the set e is the set of oriented edges. the involution i reverses the orientation. the map t forgets the emanating edge. the map s returns the emanating edge in the direction pointing away from the



vertex. a port is by definition an(oriented) edge in the complement of the image of s. the set of ports of a graph is called its interface. an inner edge is an i-orbit both of whose elements are in the image of s.



this definition is essentially just the coloured version of the definition of getzler and kapranov. a formal argument why this endofunctor has a monad structure can be found in. exploiting the third characterisation we can give a heuristic argument(which can be made into a formal proof): f[n] is the set of isomorphism classed of n-f-graphs: it is the set of ways to decorate n-graphs by the graphical species f. now f[n] is the set of n-graphs decorated by f-graphs: this means that each vertex is decorated by a graph with matching interface. we can draw each vertex as a circle with the decorating f-graph inside, and the monad structure then consists in erasing these circles, turning a graph with vertices decorated by f-graphs into a single f-graph.



the proof follows the ideas and techniques of, and. the main point is to prove that a certain left kan extension is preserved by the monad, which in turn relies on the generic/free factorisation. the details will soon be made available.



