bicategories have been used for many years to model computational phenomena such as concurrency and binders. the collectivity, bicat, of bicategories has the structure of a tricategory, which have occasionally appeared explicitly and more often implicitly in the programming semantics literature. but what is a weak n-category in general? strict n-categories for arbitrary n have been used to model concurrency and in connection with rewriting. so it seems only a matter of time until weak n-categories for arbitrary n prove to be of value for programming semantics too. here, we explore, enrich, and otherwise mildly generalise a prominent definition by batanin, as refined by leinster, together with the surrounding theory: they assumed knowledge of sophisticated mathematics, glossed over the inherent recursion, and did not consider the concerns of programming semantics.



in this section we show that the forgetful functor from the category of strict ndimensional v-categories to that of n-dimensional v-graphs has a left adjoint. we assume throughout that v is extensive and has finite limits. it follows that v-gph and v-cat are likewise(by propositions 2.5, 2.6 and 2.7), and so, by induction, for each natural number n, the categories v-gph(n) and v-cat(n) are also extensive with finite limits.



example 5.4 if we let c= n-gph= set-gph(n) and t= t(n) be the free strict n-category monad, then t(n)-operads are known as n-globular operads[16, section 9.3]. the arities form a n-graph t(n)1, whose element can be seen as a globular pasting scheme.



example 5.5 if we let c= u-gph(n) for an extensive category u with finite limits and t= t(n) be the free strict n-dimensional u-category monad, then the t(n)operads are an enriched version of n-globular operads. they are pretty much the same as n-globular operads, the only difference being that it no longer makes sense to talk about individual n-cells; they now form an object of u.



in this section we describe the notion of contraction, introduced by leinster, and generalise it to the enriched setting. we follow garner and define contraction as a choice of certain diagonal fillers. the following definition is an example of the construction described in[11, proposition 3.8].



