Array19(2023)100315
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/array
Affective state prediction of E-learner using SS-ROA based deep LSTM
Snehal Rathia,*, Kamal Kant Hiranb, Sachin Sakharea
aDepartment of Computer Engineering, Vishwakarma Institute of Information Technology, Pune, India
bSchool of Computer Science and IT, Symbiosis University of Applied Sciences, Indore, India
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: An affective state of a learner in E-learning has gained enormous interest. The prediction of the emotional state of
E-learning a learner can enhance the outcome of learning by including designated mediation. Many techniques are
Higher education developed for anticipating emotional states using video, audio, and bio-sensors. Still, examining video, and audio
Affective states
will not confirm secretiveness and is exposed to security issues. Here the creator devises a fusion technique, to be
Deep LSTM
specific Squirrel Search and Rider optimization-grounded Deep LSTM for affect prediction.
Squirrel search algorithm
Rider optimization algorithm The Deep LSTM is trained to exercise the new fusion SS-ROA. Then, the SS-ROA-grounded Deep LSTM clas-
and Interaction log sifies the states like frustration, confusion, engagement, wrathfulness, and so on. It is based on the interaction log
data of the E-learner. In conclusion, the course and student ID, predicted state, test marks, and course completion
status are taken as result information to find out the correlations. The new algorithm gives the best performance
in comparison to other present methods with the highest prediction accurateness of 0.962 and the most note-
worthy connection of 0.379 respectively. After discovering affective states, students may get the advantage of
getting real comments from a teacher for improving one’s performance during learning. However, such systems
should also give feedback about the learner’s affective state or passion because it greatly affects the student’s
encouragement toward better learning.
1. Introduction that rates of completion using these platforms are as low as 7–11%. Less
motivation among students and a lower perception of the value of
The emergence of E-courses helps to increase learning opportunities courses are some causes of this [6]. So, it is crucial to understand and
for individuals by allowing them to access premium courses at any time provide comments on the engagement of the learner in real-time [7].
and from any location. As a result, the sharing of educational resources By analyzing interaction logs or educational data, one can forecast a
can greatly improve the spirit of learning [1]. Throughout many years, a learner’s performance [8]. Due to the diverse motivations of learners for
vast range of online learning platforms have emerged. As a result, the attending the course, the free online course has low commitment and
quality of online education is regarded as a key component of an knowledge transfer [9]. In corporate training, businesses in the USA
educational system [2]. invest roughly in billions. Employers, however, are not pleased with the
In contrast to traditional learning methods like in-person instruction, knowledge transfer [10].
research indicates that e-learners are less committed and transmit less Research in specific fields such as data mining in education, cogni-
knowledge. These poor results have ascribed to an asynchronous nature tive science, multimodal learning, and psychology has made compelling
of interaction and hence lack of learning [3]. In a traditional classroom, progress in learning analysis. It is guaranteed to monitor learner
it is possible to dynamically monitor student moods, lack of inspiration engagement and improve learning effectiveness in online learning [7].
or focus, and interest in a particular subject. Yet, in digital learning Data mining provided relationships between various variables
platforms, this kind of sentiment analysis becomes a significant problem developed based on activity records of students and student perfor-
[4]. mance. Attributes that show a reasonably high correlation with the
Even though e-learning platforms offer convenient learning ways performance of students are used as improved predictors. These vari-
and plentiful qualitative courses around the globe, they still face the ables are said to be relevant because they can be used to predict at-risk
problem of low completion rates [5]. Previous studies have expressed students [11]. Affordable online education has attracted the attention of
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: snehal.rathi@viit.ac.in (S. Rathi), kamalkant.hiran@suas.ac.in (K. Kant Hiran), sachin.sakhare@viit.ac.in (S. Sakhare).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2023.100315
Received 18 April 2023; Received in revised form 25 July 2023; Accepted 30 July 2023
Availableonline2August2023
2590-0056/©2023TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierInc.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NC-NDlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).S. Rathi et al. A r r a y19(2023)100315
the government, which provides educational guidelines [12]. 2. Motivation
Given the classical teaching method and the high student-teacher
ratio, the teacher has additional problems in the auditorium. Tradi- With conventional presentation strategies and a high learner-
tionally, trainers delivered content and learners learned it. This instructor ratio, an instructor faces extraordinary obstructions in the
approach usually does not allow the teacher to respond to the individual study hall. Generally, instructors convey the teaching material and un-
requirements of the learners [13]. Also, due to the large number of derstudies learn it. With this approach, instructors are typically not
learners in the auditorium, the instructor cannot focus on individual ready to react to the individual necessities of learners. Besides, because
learners [14]. For evaluation, they conduct examination at the end of of the huge quantities of learners in a study hall, educators can’t
each course. Despite the large number of learners in the classroom, concentrate on every individual learner. For learners’ assessment, they
skilled teachers typically observe, address, and identify learners’ often take a test toward the finish of the course. In any case, even though
emotional states [15]. there is a high number of learners in a study hall, experienced educators
Research in areas such as multimodal learning, psychology, and normally notice, recognizes, and address the emotional states of the
other fields has made significant progress and has attracted a great deal learners.
of attention to improving learning efficiency in e-learning platforms The talented educator makes an appropriate move to impact learning
[16]. Most of the applications focus on achieving learning engagement positively. Yet, the question is what these accomplished educators
or identification. Efforts focus on the learner’s emotional state, including “see”? How do they turn up at a course of action? Does that action drive
anxiety, learner attention, boredom, frustration [17], or evaluation by the student in a useful way? Students’ knowledge gain is not only
quizzes and coursework [7]. depending on factors like the educator’s presentation, student’s capa-
Additionally, Predictive Learning Analytics (PLA) [3] helps in- bility, and prerequisite knowledge but it also depends on the compati-
structors improve course quality. At-risk student predictions [3], exam bility of learning styles and the affective state of the student.
grades, and quiz scores [3] show that is likely to have an absolute impact Many times, educators don’t have information about, the level of
on the learning experience. The best-known predictive model for pre- emotional upset that can interfere with a learner’s learning. Learners in
dicting the performance of students is the Artificial Neural Network angry, restless, or discouraged states experience difficulties in learning;
(ANN) [18]. individuals trapped in such states don’t take information effectively
Affect in learning play a very prominent role in education. Accu- [20].
rately predicting emotional states can improve learning outcomes using The connection between learning and emotions is not simple and
interference, which fine-tunes changes in a learner’s emotional state straight. Affirmative and depressing affective states generate diverse
[19]. Various methods are available to classify emotions using acoustic, sorts of thinking and this may hold significant implications from a
video, and biosensors. However, systems relying on these modalities learning viewpoint. A reliable way out which will synchronize both
cannot ensure confidentiality and are subject to privacy concerns. cognitive and emotional factors is firmly required [21].
It is very essential to apprehend the course complexity of engineering Talented teachers change their teaching style and their presentation
courses and their impacts on the state of E-Learners. Therefore, we want style as indicated by understudies’ feedback signals. E-learning plat-
to devise an algorithm for E-Learner’s affective state prediction by forms don’t consider these input signals and act similarly for all un-
considering engineering courses of different complexity. At first, three derstudies. Many existing e-Learning frameworks consider only
courses, Data Structure and Files (C1), Data Base Management and knowledge acquisition and don’t take care of student emotions. While
System (C2), and Human Computer Interface (C3) are viewed for the developing such a framework, affective states, are taken into consider-
experimental study. The above noted three courses have High, Medium, ation while organizing the contents and offering them. To make learning
and Low complexity. Different learners are made to learn these courses effective and to convey customized content, versatile frameworks
online. Based on the studying behavior of learners in LMS, a log file is depend on learners’ objectives, knowledge, and preferences. Thus, a
recorded. learning model which incorporates knowledge and inspiration would
Each learning behavior log file carries the important points of course lead to more effective and personalized [22].
ID, topic ID, Lecture ID, lecture type, time spent, opening time, closing Converting an e-learning framework of a non-affect sensitive state
time, and the examination rating of the learners. Then, the feature in- into a framework that incorporates the learner’s emotional states re-
dicators are extracted. Based on the features and using Deep LSTM, the quires going through the affective loop. This includes recognition of a
affective states of the learners are predicted. The proposed SS-ROA is learner’s affect, proper action selection, and the fusion of an accurate
used to train Deep LSTM. The SS-ROA is devised through a combination inspirational state by the system [23]. Learners, who become trapped in
of Squirrel Search and Rider Optimization Algorithm. Thus, SS-ROA- emotional states, for example, anger or sadness don’t process and take in
based Deep LSTM predicts the different affective states. data proficiently. From this, it can be inferred that a learner’s emotions
The key contributions of this paper are: have an important role in getting better the effectiveness of online
learning [24].
• Proposed SS-ROA: This algorithm is devised through a combination The goal of the educational institutions is to provide quality educa-
of Squirrel Search (SS) and Rider Optimization Algorithm (ROA) and tion [25]. The improved education system discovers knowledge using
it optimizes the training of neural network and hence enhances the educational data and studies the parameter which impacts students’
performance. performance. The acquired information from this data is utilized to
• Proposed SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM for prediction of affective states: predict academic performance. However, the prediction of learning
The affective states of E-learner are predicted using Deep LSTM performance in students is a complex task because of the fundamental
which is trained using proposed SS-ROA infrastructures [26,27] and customized requirements of different in-
dividuals. The aforementioned limitation and the challenges of the prior
Other sections of the paper include: Section 2 displays an explanation methods are taken as an inspiration for developing a new student af-
of affective state prediction methods used in earlier works. The proposed fective state prediction model.
method for affective state prediction using SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM is
shown in the 3rd Section. The analysis of techniques is depicted in 2.1. Literature survey
Section 4 and Section 5 provides the conclusion.
Emotions and online learning are related to one another. The
learning execution mirrors, the emotional circumstance of online
learners in education. There has been a lot of enthusiasm among laptop
2S. Rathi et al. A r r a y19(2023)100315
researchers and designers looking for methods for the enhancement of wearable devices like smartwatches and fit bands. Authors have uti-
human-computer interfaces by way of synchronizing emotion and lized here Emotion Wear Framework [42]. In the Emotion Wear
knowledge [28]. Affective Computing makes the chance of developing framework, a person sees the content material which is saved on the
computational frameworks for acknowledgment of human affective cloud via a smartphone used in the VR headset. The person wears gloves
states. It minimizes the gap between intensely emotional individual and that produce quite several signals, which are utilized to understand
the emotionally challenged computer [28]. Subsequently, Affective thoughts. The thoughts detected had been specific but there was a delay
Computing research is an interdisciplinary area. It investigates human in investigation and the sensor price was associated with it [42,43].
affective involvement with technology by combining engineering and Raviraj and colleagues [44] have introduced approach for speech
computer knowledge with different domains like brain science, intel- emotion recognition using a hybrid meta-heuristic ensemble based
lectual science, humanism, education, and morals [29]. classification technique. The collected audio speech signals were
A modern couple of years have considered a flood in the utilization of pre-processed and features are extracted from it, which are used to train
multidisciplinary techniques to consider the hard position of feelings in the model. Here, the authors suggest using a “optimized RNN, DBN, and
learning. Affective computing is a growing subject uniting scientists and ANN” as part of an ensemble classifier. The DBN and ANN findings will
professionals from distinctive fields, extending from Artificial Intelli- be used as input to the optimized RNN, which will then provide the
gence (AI), and Natural Language Processing (NLP) to cognitive and output. The weight of RNN was fine-tuned to increase the precision of
sociology [30]. Emotion data is utilized to enhance studying [31]. Here, speech emotion classification using a hybrid optimization model called
affirmative and distrustful feelings are perceived with the aid of the the Arithmetic Exploration updated Wildbeast Model, which combines
usage of two models, particularly behavioral logs and biosensors. Fusion two optimization models, namely the Arithmetic Optimization Algo-
of it is done using a Bayesian Network [32]. rithm (AOA) and Wildebeest herd optimization (WHO). Only basic
Neurological proof indicates that the online studying surroundings emotions like happy, sad etc. are detected here.
will no longer be luxurious if the affective states or psychological stip- The method for facial emotion recognition utilizing a novel hybrid
ulations of learners are not considered. Here authors have featured a few deep belief rain optimization algorithm has been presented by Alamgir,
consequences from the neurological literature which display that emo- F.M., and Alam, M.S [45]. This method combines Rain Optimization
tions play a critical job in individual thoughts and knowledge, but in Algorithm (ROA) with Deep Belief Network (DBN). This classifier can
addition in critical thinking and conclusion-making of humans. Personal classify fundamental emotions like happiness, surprise, fear, etc. with
Computers (PCs) that will collaborate logically and cleverly with greater accuracy. To increase the stability of training even when trained
humans have to apprehend and express affect [33]. for a greater number of iterations with a wider range of data samples,
Sandanayake and team [34] have constructed a gadget to compre- more optimized models must be created.
hend college students online learning to know overall performance A hybrid optimization algorithm has been created by Vedavathi and
whilst estimating the emotional state. They utilized a regression a colleague [46] as a method for an effective e-learning recommendation
approach to categorize emotions. They have gathered the time used up system for user preferences. They have employed an improved whale
on lessons, studying action, chat gathering, taking a look at marks, optimization algorithm (IWOA) and deep recurrent neural network
perusing, and course time on LMS. Surveys have been utilized for (DRNN). IWOA depends on the chasing conduct of humpback whales.
perceiving the learners’ affective states. Premature convergence causes WOA to become trapped in local optima.
The assessment was carried out by using Khan F.A and group [35] In IWOA, this problem is solved. Here authors has proposed an
set-up methodology to get more correct outcomes. Here learners are e-learning suggestion approach that is based on DRNN and IWO calcu-
given a chance to finish lessons at their speed and preferences. The re- lations for prescribing e-learning assets to students in e-learning situa-
cords used to be gathered in the log report and a Bayesian network is tions. The new method had demonstrated more accurate results when
used to classify affective states. Correlation between interaction log and compared to the existing algorithms.
questionnaire response used to predict the same. The effects had been From the literature survey, it is found that a range of modalities like
practically the same, but larger realness was once obtained via the facial expression recognition, questionnaires, interaction log conduct,
interaction log method. The model used in this research demonstrates a and sensing techniques such as Galvanic Skin Response (GSR), Electro-
real-time method of getting learners’ affective states through the log of cardiogram (ECG), Electroencephalography (EEG), etc. have been used
interaction and preferences. This effect constantly evaluates modifica- by researchers to predict emotions. Facial expressions and sensors have
tions in the learner’s emotional states. privacy issues related to them. There may be a bias from learners when
V. Chitraa [31] led a study on pre-processing techniques for behav- questionnaires had been used. So, an interaction behavior log [47] is an
ioral logs utilized in web usage mining. The facts were once excellent way to predict an affective state of a learner.
pre-processed to clean the records and afterward put in an information The literature survey indicates that most of the researchers have
set. Session ID, Learner ID, and path completion records were used in the developed tools, envisioned thoughts, or tried to devise methods of
dataset. The Apriori algorithm was utilized for finding the patterns. adapting content or providing responses to the learner. Due to the
According to investigations of Pekrun [36], the thoughts related to response, the enhancements have been determined in the performance.
learning change on a massive scale. Anxiety is the most straight was Many of the researchers have used the techniques such as Neural
inferred. Aside from this, the accompanying emotions related to study- Network, RNN and Deep LSTM.
ing had been boredom, anger, relief, satisfaction, and enjoyment. Optimization has a lot of importance in Neural Networks. Optimizer
However, their assessment had a constraint of no longer enabling an are a significant piece of the neural network, seeing how they work
actual conclusion structured on motives of feelings. would assist us with picking which one to use for application. In deep
According to Manasi Chakurkar [37], user logs had been saved to learning, there is an idea of loss; it reveals to us how ineffectively the
analyze an area of interest of users. This gave customized advice struc- model is behaving at that current moment. Then, at that point we
tured on the learner’s behavior. The result of this web usage content require utilizing this loss to train our network so it can act upon well.
mining was utilized to personalize the e-learning framework itself. Basically, we have to assume the loss and attempt to limit it, in light of
Some experiments perceived feelings using biosensors [38,39], and the fact that a lower loss implies our model will do better. The most
some made use of a fusion of bio-sensors and facial expressions. The common way of limiting (or expanding) any statistical expression is
sensors would record changes in the nervous system of the body. They called enhancement. Optimizer are techniques used to alter the traits of
utilized SVM calculations for making ready data and perceiving feelings the neural network like weights and learning rate to lessen the losses.
[40,41]. Optimization algorithms help in decreasing the losses and to give the
In a few experiments, information is collected from sensor-based most exact outcomes achievable. Different optimizers are explored in
3S. Rathi et al. A r r a y19(2023)100315
the couple of years. Few of them are “I) Gradient Descent (GD), II) 2.2. Challenges
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), III) Mini-Batch Stochastic Gradient
Descent (MB-SGD), IV) SGD with Momentum, V) Nesterov Accelerated The issues suffered by the classical learning management system are
Gradient (NAG), VI) Adagrad, VII) AdaDelta and VIII) Adam”. Each one enlisted below.
of it is enjoying its benefits and inconveniences. They have challenges
like may get trap at local minima, Takes quite a while to converge and • To alleviate the impact of lack of supervision.
computationally costly. To overcome these challenges a novel optimizer • Performance prediction due to per-student assessment response
is required. sparsity is challenging [10].
By looking at literature survey, now, it is time to do an investigation • Procrastination is one of the biggest challenge [11].
of “How to beautify the accuracy of the technique used to predict af- • Identifying affective states for course is a big challenge.
fective state?” and “Will this prediction have any relationship with the • The factors affecting student performance due to course complexity,
complexity of the course taken by the students? What is the effect of learning styles, and affective states need to be addressed
optimization algorithm while training the Deep LSTM for prediction of • Need to identify a novel method for the detection of Affective States.
affective states? • Need to have a novel optimization algorithm for training neural
Here, it is proposed to construct an efficient and accurate prediction networks while predicting Affective States.
algorithm that will pick out the learners’ affective states during learning • No standard dataset based on interaction logs is available.
online engineering courses of different complexity. Affective states get • No benchmark for labeling the dataset is available.
recognized through the use of an interaction behavioral log. The novel
optimization algorithm is designed to train neural networks used for the
prediction of affective states.
Fig. 1. Perceived course complexity: Survey outcome.
4S. Rathi et al. A r r a y19(2023)100315
3. Proposed SS-ROA-based deep LSTM for affective state videos of 1 h, two documents, one PDF, one PPT, and two exams. The log
prediction is recorded for more than 100 students while studying these subjects.
Student ID, Course ID, Topic ID, Lecture ID, Type of document (Video/
An e-Learning system should focus on the acquisition of knowledge PPT/PDF/DOC), Opening and Closing time is recorded.
and cognition. The system can use affective state recognition for iden- Extracted Features from the recorded data are.
tifying emotions while structuring the courses. This research aims to EF1: Signifies the number of lectures covered.
develop an efficient method of recognizing e-learners’ emotions for HCI EF2: Indicates the number of topics covered.
study applied to courses of varied complexity. The three courses that EF3: Represents the number of videos covered.
were selected for the experimental study are Data Structures and Files EF4: Symbolizes the number of documents covered (pdf/doc/ppt).
(C1), Data Base Management and System (C2), and Human-Computer EF5: Indicates the number of exams attended.
Interaction (C3) have High, Medium and Low complexity respectively. EF6: Signifies frequency ID (Morning/evening/afternoon/night).
These courses were selected after analyzing data of perceived EF7: Denotes learning time.
complexity collected from the survey of professionals and teachers. EF8: Represents occurrence of sign_in.
To measure the perceived cognitive complexity of various engi- The feature vector can be modeled by combining all the aforemen-
neering courses, a survey of teachers and computer and IT professionals tioned features.
is conducted. As shown in Fig. 1, Data Structures and Files (C1), Data
Base Management and System (C2), and Human-Computer Interface (C3)
are considered High, Medium, and Low complex subject respectively. 3.1. Affective state prediction of the student using proposed SS-ROA-
A log of interaction with the Learning Management System (LMS) based deep LSTM
was recorded to capture the learning behavior. The log file comprises the
details of the course, topic, type of topic explored, time spent on Affective states are events that are used for representing short and
different activities, and the exam score of learners. Then, the features long-term emotions that are experienced by the user while doing some
were identified and Deep LSTM [48–50] was performed to identify the activity. Knowing the changes in the affective states of the learner is very
learner’s affective state. It was trained using the proposed SS-ROA which helpful in the education field and it is associated with an increase in
was developed through a combination of the Squirrel Search Algorithm learning outcomes. Here, the proposed SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM is
(SSA) [51] and Rider Optimization Algorithm (ROA) [52]. Hence, the developed for the affective state prediction of students daily. The fea-
SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM was found more effective in predicting the tures are given as input to the Deep LSTM [18,22]. The Deep LSTM is
different affective states including engagement, frustration, confusion, trained using the proposed SS-ROA and is obtained by integrating SS and
boredom, anger, and surprise. Finally, a correlation study was per- ROA. The proposed algorithm effectively predicts affective states, such
formed between affective state outcome with exam scores and course as frustration, engagement, boredom, confusion, anger, and surprise.
completion. Fig. 2 portrays the block diagram of the affective state The architecture of Deep LSTM, training of Deep LSTM and the gener-
prediction model using proposed SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM. ated output are illustrated below.
As shown in Fig. 2, the learner’s behavior data is recorded for
identified 3 subjects namely data structures and files, database man- 3.1.1. Why deep LSTM
agement and system, and human-computer interface. These subjects Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) can also handle sequential data.
have High, Medium, and Low complexity respectively. Each course has They can memorize previous inputs. They suffer from short-term
five units and each unit has topics with ten lectures which contain four memory. For long sequences, it is difficult for RNNs to consider the in-
formation from previous steps. The major concern associated with RNN
Fig. 2. Block diagram of an affective state prediction model using proposed SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM.
5S. Rathi et al. A r r a y19(2023)100315
is, it suffers from the vanishing and exploding gradient problem. Gra- Least Mean Squared Error (MSE) is calculated. The outcome with the
dients are values that are used for updating the weights of neural net- least MSE is considered the best solution.
works. It never finds optimal weight in both cases.
1∑d
“intI en
r
nL aS lT mM
e
mar oc rh yi ”te ac tt u er ae c,
h
t h ste
e
pn .e Btw
y
o dr ok
i
n“ gd e sc oi ,d te hs e” lw ayh ee rt h cae nr t ko
e
em po td raif cy
k
i ots
f
MS err=
d
c=1[ExpectedOutput(cid:0) PredictedOutput]2 (1)
important events from earlier time steps to later ones, allowing for much
richer inference. So Deep LSTM is used for the prediction of affective where, d is number of samples, such as 1<c≤d.
states. Step 3) Estimate updates position:
For determining the winner, the rider’s position is updated. The
3.1.2. Architecture of deep LSTM update of the position is explained below:
The resultant extracted features (EF) acquired from interaction logs According to the Rider Optimization Algorithm, the over-taker’s
were fed to the deep LSTM for prediction. It is more beneficial rather update position increases the rate of getting success. So formula used for
than other classifiers. It is exceptionally effective to achieve the the same is used in this algorithm. It is represented as,
[ ]
emotional state forecast, using the memory cell of the classifier. Deep A e+1(h,i)=A e(h,i)+ DR e(h)∗AL(L,i) (2)
LSTM uses the previous states and information related to their neigh-
boring states for anticipating further states. It offers prediction by setting where DR(h) signifies direction indicator, i symbolizes coordinate
e
up the encoding layers. Gates can regulate the flow of information. It
selector, AL indicates leading rider’s position, and L indicates leading
makes use of three gates Forget, Input, and Output. These gates have a
rider’s index.
very important role in LSTM.
In Squirrel Search Algorithm, squirrels are allocated arbitrarily at the
Forget gate: This gate decides to remember or forget information.
start. The algorithm consists of three cases in all. As per SSA [20], the
Input Gate: It decides what data to add from the current input.
updated position of squirrels is expressed as,
Output Gate: The output gate decides the next hidden state.
When information is passed and the gate is activated, the informa- A e+1(h,i)=A e(h,i)+p rB dA e(f,i)(cid:0) p rB dA e(h,i) (3)
tion is fed to the memory cell. The significant benefit of adjusting the cell
and the gates is to deal with the information flow. Here, the classifier where Ae(h,i)indicates flying squirrel location that acquired hickory nut
utilizes the past condition of neighbors and the input cell to assess the tree, pr represents random gliding distance, Bd symbolizes gliding con-
further cell state. stant, Ae(f,i)indicates flying squirrel on acorn nut tree.
After rearranging equation (3), we get
3.1. T3 h. eD ae fe fep
c
L
t
S isT M
pr
et dra icin tein dg tu hs ri on ug gp hr o dp eo es ped
L
SS TS- MR ,O tA
ra ined by projected SS- A
e(h,i)=A e+1(h, 1i) (cid:0)(cid:0) pp
r
BB dA e(f,i)
(4)
r d
ROA. The proposed SS-ROA is devised through a combination of SS and
ROA. Here, the SS [51] is obtained by the dynamic foraging actions of Substitute equation (4) in equation (2)
s frq ou mir r oe nls e. tI on aw na or tm
he
w
r
te ra et eh e ar n,
d
t h ee
x
psq osu eir tr oe l ds ifi ffn ed
re
t nh te li or
c
f ao to iod nst su off
f
b thy
e
g fl oid rein stg
. A
e+1(h,i)=A e+1(h, 1i) (cid:0)(cid:0) pp
r
BB dA e(f,i)
+DR e(h)∗AL(L,i) (5)
r d
SSA acquires optimum global solutions with good convergence and
poses the ability for solving complex problems. SSA assists to provide After rearranging above equation (5), we get the final updated
constant effectual accuracy. The update equation used in this algorithm equation of the proposed SS-ROA as
[ ]
is considered further in the SS-ROA algorithm. 1(cid:0) pB (cid:0) pB A(f,i)
Meanwhile, ROA [52] is propelled by deeds of rider gatherings, A e+1(h,i)= (cid:0) pBr d 1r (cid:0)d pe B +DR e(h)∗AL(L,i) (6)
r d r d
which travel to acquire the target to become a winner. Every single
gathering plays out a few procedures for arriving at the target. Subse- Step 4) Riding Off time:
quently, it is noticed that it performs affective state prediction with The steps in the algorithm are repeated till a winner is exposed.
enhanced accuracy. Likewise, the ROA is exceptionally powerful. It
undergoes fictional computing to settle the optimization issues. It has 3.1.4. Output
less convergence rate and it is more receptive to hyper-parameters. Thus, the affective state is predicted using the proposed SS-ROA-
Besides, it follows the multi-directional search space and hence it has based Deep LSTM. The various states, like confusion, engagement, etc.
a fast convergence rate that depends on the over-taker position. are predicted. Here, the states are predicted for all students of every
The ROA considers the four groups of riders. Every group follows its course daily. The affective state having maximum frequency is termed
approach to arrive at the target position. As the name implies the bypass an output state.
rider tries to win by bypassing the leading path. The follower goes after
the rider who is in the lead position. The over-taker overtakes to arrive at 4. Results and discussion
the leading position. The attacker takes the position by taking the
maximum speed to attain the goal. The effectiveness of developed SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM using ac-
According to the researchers [52], the update strategy used by curacy and correlation is presented. The analysis of every method is
over-takers elevates the rate of success so it is used further in SS-ROA. done by changing courses. Then, the performance is calculated by
Henceforth, by consolidating SSA with the ROA, the presentation of varying students’ performance.
an emotional state forecast can be altogether improved. Thus, the newly,
devised SS-ROA updates the weights of the Deep LSTM. The SS-ROA has 4.1. Experimental set-up
the capability of fast convergence by avoiding local minima that mini-
mizes the error while mapping the input feature vectors. Thus, a more As shown in Fig. 3, the experimentation is performed using two
accurate affective state classification is performed. Besides, the cost and setups.
training time is also being reduced through the optimization process. Set-up-1: The analysis of methods concerning accuracy considering
The step of proposed the SS-ROA are given as follows, affective states with varied courses. In addition, the correlative study is
Step1) Random Initialization of Riders: analyzed by performing an analysis of affective state versus exam score,
The preliminary step is the random initialization of riders in groups. affective state versus course completion.
Step 2) Error Determination: Set-up-2: The analysis of methods concerning accuracy considering
6S. Rathi et al. A r r a y19(2023)100315
Fig. 3. Analysis of affective state prediction method.
affective states with varied student performance. In addition, the Fig. 4 displays the analysis of methods with accuracy considering
correlative study is analyzed by performing an analysis of affective state affective states with courses. Considering courses 1, 2, and 3, the ac-
versus exam score, and affective state versus course completion. curacy measured by projected SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM are 0.898,
0.843, and 0.930 respectively. It is higher as compared to the other
4.2. Methods used for comparison reputed algorithms Deep LSTM and SVM.
Fig. 5 displays the comparison of techniques with correlation for
The methods, like Deep LSTM, SVM, and proposed SS-ROA-based affective states vs. exam scores. Considering courses 1, 2, and 3, the
Deep LSTM are used for the comparative study. accuracy measured by projected SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM are 0.379,
0.337, and 0.238 respectively. It is higher as compared to the other
reputed algorithms Deep LSTM and SVM.
4.3. Comparative analysis
Fig. 6 displays the comparison of techniques with correlation for
affective states vs. course completion. Considering courses 1, 2, and 3,
The analysis of techniques using accuracy and correlation is done by
varying courses and students’ performance. the accuracy measured by projected SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM are
0.200, 0.241, and 0.127 respectively. It is higher as compared to the
4.3.1. Analysis using set-up =1 other reputed algorithms Deep LSTM and SVM.
The analysis of affective state prediction techniques in terms of ac-
4.3.2. Analysis with set-up =2
curacy is described with varied courses. In addition, the correlative
The analysis of affective state prediction techniques in terms of ac-
study is analyzed by performing an analysis of affective state versus
curacy is described with varied student performance. In addition, the
exam score and affective state versus course completion.
Fig. 4. Analysis of methods with accuracy considering affective states with courses
a) Analysis in terms of accuracy considering affective states with courses.
7S. Rathi et al. A r r a y19(2023)100315
Fig. 5. Comparison of Techniques with correlation for affective states vs. exam score
b) Correlation study (Affective state versus exam score).
Fig. 6. Comparison of techniques with correlation for affective states vs. course completion
d) Correlation study (Affective state versus course completion).
correlative study is analyzed by performing an analysis of affective state 4.4. Comparative discussion
versus exam score and affective state versus course completion.
Fig. 7 displays the comparison of techniques with accuracy for af- Methods are analyzed by using Setup-1, considering different courses
fective states with student performance. Considering courses 1, 2, and 3, concerning accuracy and correlation parameter. Through analysis, it is
the accuracy measured by projected SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM are observed that maximum accuracy of 0.930 is calculated by projected SS-
0.949, 0.949, and 0.962 respectively. It is higher as compared to the ROA-based Deep LSTM in course 3. The maximum correlation of 0.379 is
other reputed algorithms Deep LSTM and SVM. measured by projected SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM for course 1. Hence, it
Fig. 8 displays the comparison of techniques with correlation for can be observed that projected SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM shows
affective states vs. exam scores. Considering courses 1, 2, and 3, the improved performance in affective state prediction.
accuracy measured by projected SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM are 0.236, Methods are analyzed by using Setup-2, considering varying student
0.190, and 0.138 respectively. It is higher as compared to the other performance concerning accuracy and correlation. Throughout the
reputed algorithms Deep LSTM and SVM. analysis, it is noted that the highest accuracy of 0.962 is calculated by
Fig. 9 exhibits the comparison of techniques with correlation for the proposed SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM for the high-performance stu-
affective states vs. course completion. Considering courses 1, 2, and 3, dent category. The maximum correlation of 0.236 is calculated by the
the accuracy measured by projected SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM are proposed method in affective states with exam scores for the low-
0.227, 0.164, and 0.161 respectively. It is higher as compared to the performance student category. Hence, it can be observed that the pro-
other reputed algorithms Deep LSTM and SVM. posed SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM shows improved performance in af-
fective state prediction.
8S. Rathi et al. A r r a y19(2023)100315
Fig. 7. Comparison of techniques with accuracy for affective states with student performance
a) Analysis in terms of accuracy considering affective states.
Fig. 8. Comparison of techniques with correlation for affective states vs. exam score
b) Correlation study (Affective state versus exam score).
The developed affective state method (SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM) techniques.
obtained the best performance in terms of accuracy and correlation. The
newly devised SS-ROA algorithm has the capability of fast convergence 4.5. Statistical analysis
rate with the avoidance of local minima. Besides, the most significant
feature selection it also reduces the computational complexity of the The proposed SS-ROA algorithm outperforms the other algorithms
network, and the Deep LSTM predicts the time series data more accu- concerning accuracy and correlation. If Null Hypothesis is “H0: The SS-
rately. Thus the tuning of the Deep LSTM with the novel SS-ROA opti- ROA-based Deep LSTM method doesn’t have a significant effect on enhancing
mization enhances the prediction accuracy that leads to the better the accuracy of prediction of affective states in E-learning scenario”. After
performance of the system. performing a t-Test on the proposed SS-ROA based Deep LSTM and SVM
The affective state prediction using the Deep LSTM obtained an ac- results shows that, |t stat|>T Critical and P value <0.05. So, the Null
curacy of 0.825 for low performance category students as shown in Hypothesis can be rejected, and the Alternate Hypothesis “HA: The SS-
Fig. 7, which is 13.07% lower than the newly devised SS-ROA-based ROA-based Deep LSTM method has a significant effect on enhancing
Deep LSTM technique. Here, the best performance is achieved due to the accuracy of prediction of affective states in E-learning scenario”
the novel optimization technique that tunes the weights of the classifier can be accepted.
with the fast convergence rate by avoiding the premature convergence The result of the t-Test is shown in Table 1.
that makes the more accurate affective state prediction. The accurate
affective state prediction makes the correlation study more useful.
Similarly, the proposed method outperformed all the other state of art
9S. Rathi et al. A r r a y19(2023)100315
Fig. 9. Comparison of techniques with correlation for affective states vs. course completion
d) Correlation study (Affective state versus course completion).
Resources, Software, Validation, Sachin Sakhare: Writing - Review,
Table 1
Validation, Investigation.
Result of t-Test of SS-ROA based Deep LSTM and SVM.
t-Test: Two-Sample Assuming Equal Variances Declaration of competing interest
Mean 0.921833333
Observations 6 The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
t Stat 3.479428884
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
P(T ≤t) one-tail 0.00296343
the work reported in this paper.
t Critical one-tail 1.812461102
P(T ≤t) two-tail 0.005926859
t Critical two-tail 2.228138842 Data availability
The authors are unable or have chosen not to specify which data has
5. Conclusion
been used.
This paper devises a strategy for affective state prediction. Initially,
References
three courses Data Structures and Files (C1), Data Base Management and
System (C2), and Human-Computer Interface (C3) are employed for the
[1] Qiu L, Liu Y, Liu Y. An integrated framework with feature selection for dropout
experimental study. The three courses can be modeled as High complex prediction in massive open online courses. IEEE Access 2018;6:71474–84.
subject, Medium complex subject, and Low complex subject. These [2] Mane A Abhijeet, Waykar B Sanjay, Dhanesh Narvekar S. Multimedia resource
library using video streaming. Proceedings of the International Conference &
courses are studied by different learners using LMS wherein the log file is
Workshop on Emerging Trends in Technology 2011:1378–9.
created based on the learning patterns. Thereafter, the features are [3] Chen W, Brinton CG, Cao D, Mason-Singh A, Lu C, Chiang M. Early detection
extracted which is further utilized for affective state prediction of the prediction of learning outcomes in online short-courses via learning behaviors.
IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies 2018;12(1):44–58.
learners using Deep LSTM. The Deep LSTM is trained using the proposed
[4] Ghasem Aghaei R, Arya A, Biddle R. A dashboard for affective e-learning: data
SS-ROA and is formulated by combining Squirrel Search Algorithm visualization for monitoring online learner emotions. In: Media+innovate
(SSA) and Rider Optimization Algorithm (ROA). Here, the predictions of learning, association for the advancement of computing in education (AACE); June
affective states like engagement, boredom, anger, happiness, etc. are 2016. p. 1536–43.
[5] Liyanagunawardena TR, Parslow P, Williams S. Dropout: MOOC participants’
performed. At last, the course and student ID, affective state, exam score, perspective. 2014.
and course completion are considered for correlation study. The pro- [6] Sujatha R, Kavitha D. Learner retention in MOOC environment: analyzing the role
posed algorithm outperformed than other methods with the utmost ac- of motivation, self-efficacy and perceived effectiveness. International Journal of
Education and Development using ICT 2018;14(2).
curacy of 0.962 and the utmost correlation of 0.379 respectively. The
[7] Yue J, Tian F, Chao KM, Shah N, Li L, Chen Y, Zheng Q. Recognizing
developed model was stable for the varied levels of complexity of multidimensional engagement of E-learners based on multi-channel data in E-
courses. It is useful for the applications like course recommendation learning environment. IEEE Access 2019;7:149554–67.
[8] Hone KS, El Said GR. Exploring the factors affecting MOOC retention: a survey
systems, finding students at risk, improving the quality of online cour- study. Comput Educ 2016;98:157–68.
ses, and tracking learners’ progress and performance. In the future other [9] Komal V Aher, Waykar SB. A survey on feature based image retrieval. Int J Adv Res
databases can be considered for providing briefer analysis. It may be Comput Sci Software Eng 2014;4(10):241–5.
[10] Yang TY, Brinton CG, Joe-Wong C, Chiang M. Behavior-based grade prediction for
possible to develop a multi modal approach that may take input in the
MOOCs via time series neural networks. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal
form of facial expressions, sensor data, and gestures along with a log file. Processing 2017;11(5):716–28.
[11] Oliv´e DM, Huynh D, Reynolds M, Dougiamas M, Wiese D. A quest for a one-size-
Credit author statement fits-all neural network: early prediction of students at risk in online courses. IEEE
Transactions on Learning Technologies 2019;12:171–83.
[12] Huang L, Wang CD, Chao HY, Lai JH, Philip SY. A score prediction approach for
Snehal Rathi: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis optional course recommendation via cross-user-domain collaborative filtering.
IEEE Access 2019;7:19550–63.
10S. Rathi et al. A r r a y19(2023)100315
[13] Khan FA, Weippl ER, Tjoa AM. Integrated approach for the detection of learning Sharon Y, Tettegah, Gartmeier Martin, editors. In emotions and technology,
styles and affective states in EdMedia+Innovate Learning. Association for the emotions, technology, design, and learning. Academic Press; 2016. p. 89–114.
Advancement ofComputing in Education (AACE); 2009. p. 753–61. 9780128018569.
[14] Cocea M, Weibelzahl S. Log file analysis for disengagement detection in e-Learning [34] Sandanayake TC, Madurapperuma AP, Dias D. Affective ELearning model for
environments. User Model User-Adapted Interact 2009;19(4):341–85. recognizing learner emotions. International Journal of Information and Education
[15] Wampfler R, Klingler S, Solenthaler B, Schinazi VR, Gross M. Affective state Technology 2011;1(No. 4). October.
prediction based on semi-supervised learning from smartphone touch data. In: [35] Khan F.A, Akbar A, Muhammad Altaf, Shujaat Ali Khan, Ayaz Ahmed, “Automatic
Proceedings of the CHI conference on human factors in computing systems; 2020. student modelling for detection of learning styles and affective states in web based
p. 1–13. learning management systems”, DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2937178, [IEEE
[16] Francis BK, Babu SS. Predicting academic performance of students using a hybrid Access].
data mining approach. J Med Syst 2019;43(6):162. [36] Pekrun Reinhard, Goetz Thomas, Titz Wolfram. Academic emotions in students’
[17] Kai S. Modeling student affective state patterns during self-regulated learning in self-regulated learning and achievement”: a program of qualitative and
physics playground”. Doctoral dissertation Columbia University); 2019. quantitative research. Educ Psychol 2002;37.
[18] Ibrahim Z, Rusli NM, Janor RM. Predicting students’ academic achievement: [37] Chakurkar Manasi, Prof. Deepa adiga: “A web mining approach for personalized E-
comparison between logistic regression, artificial neural network, and neuro-fuzzy. learning system”. Int J Adv Comput Sci Appl 2014;5(No.3).
In: Proceedings of the international symposium on information technology; 2008. [38] Han-Wen Guo, Yu-Shun Huang, Chien-Hung Lin, Jen-Chien Chien, Koichi, editors.
[19] Shen L, Wang M, Shen R. Affective e-learning: using “emotional” data to improve Heart rate variability signal features for emotion recognition by using principal
learning in pervasive learning environment. Educ Technol Soc 2009;12(2):176–89. component analysis and support vectors machine; 2016.
[20] Goleman D. Emotional intelligence. NewYork: Bantam Books; 1995. [39] Abdi H, Williams LJ. Principal component analysis, vol. 2. Wiley Interdisciplinary
[21] Kort B, Reilly R. Analytical models of emotions, learning and relationships: Reviews: Computational Statistics; 2010. p. 433–59.
towardsan affect-sensitive cognitive machine, vol. 548. MIT Media Lab Tech [40] Rigas G, Katsis CD, Ganiatsas G, Fotiadis DI. A user independent biosignal based
Report No; 2001. emotion recognition method. Lecture Notes In Artificial Intelligence 2007;45(1):
[22] Cocea M, Weibelzahl S. Eliciting motivation knowledge from log files towards 314–8.
motivation diagnosis for adaptive systems. In: Conati C, McCoy K, Paliouras G, [41] Wang C, Wang F. An emotional analysis method based on heart rate variability.
editors. User Modeling 2007: 11th International Conference, UM 2007, Corfu, Biomedical and Health Informatics IEEE-EMBS International Conference on; 2012.
Greece, June 25-29, 2007, Proceedings (4511 ed., pp. 197-206). (Lecture notes in p. 104–7.
computer science; No. 4511). Springer; 2007. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540- [42] Terence KL, Hui, Simon Sherratt R, editors. Coverage of emotion recognition for
73078-1_23. common wearable biosensorgs; 2018.
[23] D’Mello SK, Craig SD, Witherspoon A, McDaniel B, Graesser A. Automatic [43] Deigh J. William James and the Rise of the Scientific Study of Emotion. Emotion
detection of learner’s affect from conversational cues. Journal of User Modeling Review 2013;;46(1):4–12.
and User-Adapted Interaction 2008;18(1–2):45–80. [44] Darekar R, Chavan M, Sharanyaa S, Ranjan NM. A hybrid meta-heuristic ensemble
[24] Weimin X, Wenhong X. E-learning assistant system based on virtual human based classification technique speech emotion recognition. Adv Eng Software
interaction technology, ICCS2007, LNCS. Springer Berlin/Heidelberg; 2007. 2023;180:103412. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.advengsoft.2023.103412.
https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12324. [45] Alamgir FM, Alam MS. An artificial intelligence driven facial emotion recognition
[25] Singh SV, Hiran KK. The impact of AI on teaching and learning in higher education system using hybrid deep belief rain optimization. Multimed Tools Appl 2023;82:
technology. Journal of Higher Education Theory & Practice 2022;12(13). 2437–64. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-022-13378-x.
[26] Hiran KK. Investigating factors influencing the adoption of IT cloud computing [46] Vedavathi N, Anil Kumar KM. An efficient e-learning recommendation system for
platforms in higher education: case of Sub-Saharan Africa with IT professionals. Int user preferences using hybrid optimization algorithm. Soft Comput 2021;25:
J Hum Cap Inf Technol Prof (IJHCITP) 2021;12(3):21–36. 9377–88. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-021-05753-x.
[27] Hiran KK. Impact of driving factors on cloud computing adoption in the higher [47] Rathi Snehal, Deshpande Yogesh, Nagaral Shashidhar, Narkhede Ankita,
education. In: IOP conference series: materials science and engineering (Vol.1131, Sajwani Radhika, Takalikar Varad. Analysis of user’s learning styles and academic
No. 1, p. 012016). IOP Publishing; 2021. April. emotions through web usage mining. In: 2021 international conference on
[28] Calvo Rafael, D’Mello K, Sidney. Affect detection: an interdisciplinary Review of emerging smart computing and informatics (ESCI). IEEE; 2021. p. 159–64.
models, methods and their applications. T. Affective Computing; 2010. https://doi. [48] Xingjian SHI, Chen Z, Wang H, Yeung DY, Wong WK, Woo WC. Convolutional
org/10.1109/T-AFFC.2010.1. 1. 18-37. LSTM network: a machine learning approach for precipitation now casting. In:
[29] Picard, R.W. (1995) Affective Computing. M.I.T Media Laboratory Perceptual Advances in neural information processing systems; 2015. p. 802–10.
Computing Section Technical Report No. 321. [49] Waykar Sanjay B, Bharathi CR. Video object retrieval mechanism with the effective
[30] Poria Soujanya, Cambria Erik, Bajpai Rajiv, Hussain Amir. A review of affective video tracking model based on Deep long-short term memory. International
computing: from unimodal analysis to multimodal fusion. In: Information fusion. Journal of Advanced Science and Technology 2020;29(No. 7).
Elsevier; 2017. p. 98–125. 37, September. [50] Rathi SR, Deshpande YD. Course complexity in engineering education using E-
[31] Chitraa V, Dr Davamani AS. A survey on pre-processing methods for web usage learner’s affective-state prediction. Kybernetes 2022. https://doi.org/10.1108/K-
data. Int J Comput Sci Inf Secur 2010;7(3). 09-2021-0806. ahead-of-print No. ahead-of-print.
[32] Ashwin TS, Guddeti RMR. Impact of inquiry interventions on students in e- [51] Jain M, Singh V, Rani A. A novel nature-inspired algorithm for optimization:
learning and classroom environments using affective computing framework. User squirrel search algorithm. Swarm Evol Comput 2019;44:148–75.
Model User-Adapted Interact 2020:1–43. [52] Binu D, Kariyappa BS. RideNN: a new rider optimization algorithm-based neural
[33] Jason Matthew Harley. Chapter 5 - measuring emotions: a survey of cutting edge network for fault diagnosis in analog circuits. IEEE Trans Instrum Meas 2018;68
methodologies used in computer-based learning environment research, editor(s. In: (1):2–26.
11