Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
AASRI Procedia 4 ( 2013 ) 64 – 71
2013 AASRI Conference on Intelligent Systems and Control
Cultural Heritage Sites Visualization System Based on Outdoor
Augmented Reality
Jong-Gil Hana, Kyoung-Wook Parkb, Kyeong-Jin Bana, Eung-Kon Kima*
aDepartment of Computer Engineering, Sunchon National University, Korea
bDivision of Culture Contents, Chonnam National University, Korea
Abstract
Recently, as importance of history is being emerged, IT-grafted cultural contents industry has been extensively grown. In
particular, a study on development of cultural heritage sites, architectural cultural property and digital contents for
historical remains restoration by using augmented reality technology has been performed. However, most of the existing
restoration system of digital contents is being mainly performed indoors in reality. In this paper, 3D model visualization
system of cultural heritage sites by using outdoor augmented reality, not indoor augmented reality, is intended to be
presented. Presented visualized system augments 3D model of cultural heritage sites in video image inputted from outdoor
by using object panorama, SURF and GPS. And the users may be provided with information for cultural heritage sites
without difficulty through this visualized system.
©© 22001133 T. hPeu Abluitshhoerds. bPyu bElilssheevdi ebry B E.lVse.v ier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
SSeelleecctitoionn a nadn/do/ro pre peer erer vrieevwi euwnd uenr dreesrp roensspiboinlistyib oifli Atym oefr iAcamn eAripcpaline dA Spcpielinecde SRceiseenacrceh R Inessteitaurtceh Institute
Keywords: Augmented Reality, Cultural Heritage Sites, SURF, Object Panorama
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +82-10-7250-3627; fax: +82-10-755-7999.
E-mail address: kek@sunchon.ac.kr.
2212-6716 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
doi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2013.10.011Jong-Gil Han et al. / AASRI Procedia 4 ( 2013 ) 64 – 71 65
1. Introduction
Recently, as importance of history is being emerged at home and abroad, cultural contents industry has
been developed. IT-grafted restoration contents field among those industries is drawing attention from the
relevant industry. As smart phone was emerged, a lot of applications have been developed. In particular, as
application based on augmented reality technology has been developed, such application is being utilized in
architectural cultural property, cultural heritage sites and restoration contents of historical remains of cultural
contents industry. Only traces of most of cultural heritage sites, architectural cultural property and historical
remains are left or negligent management for such heritages continues. In order to ensure efficient
management of cultural heritage sites being left in traces only or managed negligently, contents restoration by
using augmented reality would be effective. But as most of existing contents restoration is being taken place
indoors, such efforts faces with locational limitation.
In this paper, 3D model visualization system of cultural heritage sites by using outdoor augmented reality,
not indoor augmented reality, is intended to be presented. Presented visualized system augments 3D model of
cultural heritage sites in video image inputted from outdoor by using object panorama, SURF algorithm [1]
and GPS. The objective of this study is to have students, teachers and general public watch cultural heritage
sites with immersion and realistic sense through 3D model visualization system of cultural heritage sites.
2. Relevant Research
Augmented reality (AR) is a field of virtual reality (VR) in which actual world visually watched by the
users and virtual world having additional information are shown as one image through its combination. AR is
a term derived from virtual environment and reality and this technology is to make the users enhance
understanding for the real world and a realistic sense by providing an image in which image of actual world
being watched by the users and virtual image generated by computer are synthesized in real time by mixing
real time image with virtual image after inserting computer graphic image in actual environment [2].
Outdoor augmented reality is a technology of implementing augmented reality by using outdoor (not
indoor) GPS, compass, gyroscope sensor based on augmented reality technology. Contrary to indoor
augmented reality, outdoor augmented reality is not subject to spatial limitation. While indoor augmented
reality uses a marker for ensuring convenient synthesis of virtual object as it is taken place in relative narrow
space, outdoor augmented reality uses location information as well, not a marker being used in indoor system
as it is taken place in relatively wide area [3-4].
3. Design of 3D Model Visualization System of Cultural Sites
In this study, 3D visualization system configuration of cultural sites based on outdoor augmented reality is
as shown on Fig. 1.66 Jong-Gil Han et al. / AASRI Procedia 4 ( 2013 ) 64 – 71
GPS Transmission
Panorama Image
Mapping
Augmented of 3D Model
Feature Matching
Wireless
Fig. 1. Cultural sites 3D visualization system configuration
In order to implement 3D model visualization system of cultural sites based on outdoor augmented reality,
3D model of cultural sites to be shown in actual world is required. In order to create actual 3D model, stone
tomb and dolmen were targeted.
Fig. 2. Creation of Stone tomb 3D models
3D stone tomb was created by utilizing 3ds Max, a program of creating 3D model, as shown on Fig. 2. As
utilization to other contents form is not easy when data of 3D model is enlarged, this model was created by
minimum capacity by using triangular polygon.
As 3D model visualization system of cultural sites augments 3D model based on cultural sites, video
generation based on object panorama, not on existing background panorama, is required. Object panorama is
to show object-based panoramic video in order to provide realistic video information for a specific object to
the users in a virtual space. Contrary to background panorama, in case of panorama space model for observingJong-Gil Han et al. / AASRI Procedia 4 ( 2013 ) 64 – 71 67
object in object panorama, spatial form should be modeled considering not only shooting angle ((a) of Fig. 3)
but also camera moving location ((b) of Fig. 3)
Object Object
Camera
Camera
(a) (b)
Fig. 3. Object panorama creation process
By using object panorama of cultural sites, it is created depending on each angle as shown on Fig. 5.
Created video could be matched with inputted camera image at diversified angles with ease.
In order to match image inputted from smart phone with object panorama image, exact feature point
matching is required by using feature point algorithm. Typical feature point algorithm includes SIFT (Scale
Invariant Feature Transform) [5] and SURF (Speeded up Robust Features) [6]. And these two algorithms have
something in common in that feature point invariant to scale and rotation transform is searched from black
and white image and its descriptor is configurated. Time of extracting feature point by SURF is faster than
that of SIFT by app. 4 times and so, in mobile devices such as smart phone or tablet PC of which processing
speed is restricted, feature point is matched by application of SURF algorithm rather than SIFT.
(0 ) (45 )
(90 ) (135 )68 Jong-Gil Han et al. / AASRI Procedia 4 ( 2013 ) 64 – 71
(180 ) (225 )
(270 ) (315 )
Fig. 4. Cultural sites-object panorama
Fig. 5. Object panorama creation processJong-Gil Han et al. / AASRI Procedia 4 ( 2013 ) 64 – 71 69
As shown on Fig. 5, feature point is matched with background image of cultural sites and camera image by
using SURF algorithm.
4. Design of 3D Model Visualization System of Cultural Sites
Proposed 3D model visualization system of cultural sites is as shown on Fig. 6.
GPS Coordinates Representation-
Panorama Image
Acquisition/storage Feature storage
3D Model
Making/ Representation-
Building
Feature Compression
Feature, GPS Coordinates
Matching
Cultural heritage sites
recognized Feature & GPS Camera
Coordinates Image
Fig. 6. Cultural sites 3D visualization system process
Fig. 6. shows 3D model visualization process of cultural sites through feature point matching of image of
cultural sites inputted from smart phone camera and stored object panorama image.
Android 2.3.4 developed by Google through use of minimum system implementation environment was
used. Library used for cultural sites 3D model visualization system is as shown on below Table. 1.
Table. 1. Min3D Library
Library Function
Animation 3D Model Motion Setting
Core Color, Edge, Object, Texture
Interfaces Object, Interface70 Jong-Gil Han et al. / AASRI Procedia 4 ( 2013 ) 64 – 71
Vos Camera, Light, Render, Type
Parser 3D Extension Load, Object Angle
For Min3D library, Parser library that may load 3D object, object movement and core library that enables
texture mapping were used together with camera review and rendering of 3D object.
Through above visualization system process as shown on Fig. 10, 3D model visualization system of
cultural sites based on outdoor augmented reality was implemented. As shown on Fig. 10, 3D model was
augmented in cultural sites by using smart phone camera. In diversified angles of camera, free augmentation
of 3D model is allowed.
Fig. 7. Implementation of Cultural Sites visualization system
5. Conclusion
In this paper, 3D model visualization system based on augmented reality in which overall 3D cultural sites
model image is visualized in smart phone by using video image of actual cultural sites was proposed..
Existing method was to show restored contents of cultural sites being progressed based on marker that is
usable under indoor environment only to the users. However, as watching cultural sites was allowed in a
limited space, it was hard for the users to use such method. If 3D model visualization system of cultural sites
of this thesis should be utilized, the users may utilize information for cultural sites without difficulty at any
outdoor place as well as indoor.
6. Acknowledgements
This research was financially supported by the Ministry of Education, Science Technology (MEST) and
National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) through the Human Resource Training Project for Regional
Innovation.
References
[1] H. Bay, E. Andreas, T.Tuytelaars and L.V. Gool, “Speeded-up robust Features”, Computer Vision and Image Understanding,
2008;346-359:110
[2] Azuma, R. T.“A Survey of Augmented Reality”, Teloperators and Virtual Environment, 1997;355-385:6-4Jong-Gil Han et al. / AASRI Procedia 4 ( 2013 ) 64 – 71 71
[3] Kamat, V. and EI-Tawil, S. “Evaluation of Augmented Reality for Rapid Assessment of Earthquake-Induced Building Damage”,
Computing in Civil Engineering, 2007;303-310: 21
[4] S.Feiner, B.MacIntyre, T. Hollerer, and A.Webster, “A Touring Machine:Prototyping 3D Mobile Augmented Reality Systems for
Exploring the Urban Environment”, Proc, of International Symposium on Wearble Com-puters 1997;74-81
[5] D.G. Lowe, “Distinctive image Features From scale invariant keypoints”, preprint 2004;91-110:60-2
[6] D.Lowe, “Object Recognition from Local Scale-Invariant Features”, International Conference on Computer Vision, 1999;1150-
1157;2