Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
AASRI Procedia 3 ( 2012 ) 474 – 480
2012AASRRIConferenceonModeling,IdentificationandCControl
DDeveloppment off Omni DDirectionnal Mobiile Roboot Navigation
Systemm using RFID foor Multiple Objeect
a,1 bb.2 c,3
M.M. Rasshid Norr SaidahbtMMohdZain ,Faridatuunbinti Mohhammad Zain
,
1,2,,3Department ooff Mechatronicss Engineering, IInternational Isslamic Universiity Malaysia
a
Gombak, Kuuala Lumpur. mmahbub@iium.eedu.my
Absttract
Naviigation is an immportant techniqque in the fieldd of mobile robotics. A major field of mobilee robot system is required to
naviggate in unknowwn environmentts accurately. BBy determining the positions aand selecting a motion controll of the robot,
naviggation is fulfilleed through somme technique. Inn this paper, a mmodular navigaation technique in relation witth signal from
RFIDD tags, and RFIID reader is developed. The mmain idea is to test the ability of mobile roboot to navigate thhe location in
indooor environmentts. The RFID reeader is mounteed on the mobile robot to commmunicate withh the RFID tagss to determine
robott’s position whiile the RFID taggs is are placedd at difference loocation . The position of mobiile robot is deteermined based
on thhe location of RRFID tag. The aactuator will bee move accordinng to the angle between the roobot’s current ppositioned and
the taarget tag.
©© 220001122 T Phue bAliusthheoddrs .b Pyu Ebllissehveide rb yBB E.Vls.e v ier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
SSeelleeecctitoionn a nadn/do/ro pre ppere ererv rieevwi euwnd uernn rdeesrp orenssipboilnitsyi bboifl iAtym oefri cAamn Aerrpipclained A Spcpielnieced RSecsieeanrcceh IRnestsieetuatrech Institute
Keywwords: Omni roboot; Robot navigatiion; Reader; trannsponder
1. Inntroduction
MMobile robot navigation syystem has beecome an apppealing challeenge in both research andd production
induustry. It is impportant due to its ability to navigate the location in unnknown enviroonment. Naviigation is the
abiliity of a robott to determinee its own possition in its ffrrame of referrence and then find its targget location.
Navigation can be divided intoo three main fundamental which are seelf-localizationn, path planniing and map
buildding.Self-locaalization meanns robot’s abillity to establissh its own poosition and oriientation withhin the frame
of reeference. Pathh planning is eeffectively ann extension off localization, in that it requuires the determination of
the rrobot's currentt position and a position of a goal locatioon while map bbuilding can bbe any notatioon describing
locattions in the roobot frame of rreference.
The aim of thhis project is tto develop Ommni Directionaal Robot Naviigation systemm using RFID for multiple
2212-6716 © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
doi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2012.11.075M.M. Rashid et al. / AASRI Procedia 3 ( 2012 ) 474 – 480 475
destinations. Both Omni robot and RFID system must be integrated to each other in the way of controlling the
whole system. Omni robot is concerned due to its capability of mechanical manipulator and is capable of
tethered and autonomous operation. It also focuses on RFID system which relies on navigation module using
customized features of RFID technology. RFID system consists of tags, reader with antenna, and software.
When an RFID reader scans the tag, a pulse of radio energy is sent out and the tag sends back the inventory
control number.
The objectives of this paper are;
To design and develop Omni directional mobile robot that can move in indoor environment.
To perform navigation by allocating identification tag at certain located area.
To develop an efficient algorithm in providing better solution during navigation and to go particular
target.
2. Methodology
Following is the desired algorithm of mobile robot navigation system to navigate desired location of RFID
tag by identifying the angle between the tags and the reader which is mounted on the mobile robot.Navigation
elaborates the desired algorithm of mobile robot navigation system to navigate location of RFID tag by
identifying the angle between the tags and the reader which is mounted on the mobile robot.
Initially, the robot is pre-programmed with an order list of tag numbers in defining the position of the tag
whereas the current target angle is determined by calculating current goal location. When the known ID is
achieved, the target transponder is detected through the signal backscattered from all the tags within the
communication range. The calculation after input received by the two antennas is recorded and computed
using;
(1)
The mobile robot is then updating its headed by turn right and left and checked whether the angle between
calculated and compass is reached. If not, it will turn until it found the correct angle. If yes, mobile robot is
moving forward and detected more points. Mobile robot is then identifying current tag whether it is goal or
not. If goal, it will stop. If not it will calculate current to goal angle and compare through continuous loop
until it find the goal.
3. Omni Robot
The Omni directional mechanismhave three axis and angle (x,y, ) movement abruptly in a two
dimensional space, which ease to increase robot mobility and more keen access to limited spaces compared
withconventional two wheel driven robot [1]. Yukawa et al. further explained that Omni-directional
mechanism in the robot consists of four wheel units with a driving mechanism and a steering wheel
mechanism. Since the four wheel units drive and steer independently, the position and direction of the mobile
robot can be controlled with a high degree of accuracy [2]. Omni robot is becoming technically demanding for
users in industrial and business sectors Figure 1. Many Omni robot navigation system products are appearing
within medium and long term propositions that lead to development of variety technology advancement in the
future. The most common and popular navigation techniques suggested in the state of the art generally fall
under one of the following categories: dead-reckoning based, landmark-based, vision based, and behaviour
technique based [3].476 M.M. Rashid et al. / AASRI Procedia 3 ( 2012 ) 474 – 480
Figure 1: Two wheel mobile robot
A. Navigation
The fundamental requirement for mobile robot through navigation is to estimate the position of the
autonomous mobile robot. In earlier research, there are several methods used to estimating the robot position
for example path planning, trajectory planning, algorithmic exploration and path execution with self-
localization. The goal of autonomous robot navigation is built for a system in which dynamically guide and
control the mobile robot from its start positions to a predefined end position. According to the previous
research, it is state that the robot successfully done their task if the robot can efficiently interpret the data from
the sensor [4]. The first method used in previous research is self-localization. This method used the passive
RFID tag where placed on the floor. The advantages of this method is that there does not required any
information regarding the RFID tag except their ID number. Besides that, this method is used without need
for the robot to stop temporarily to observe the RFID tag [5].
In addition, it is required to calculate the distance between the robot and the wall at the time robot passes
the specific area to smoothly organize the movement of the robot. Other than that, by using the trajectory
planning and path planning, we can estimate the position of the mobile robot. The differences between this
method is that the presence of moving and avoiding the obstacle. The path planning used common approach
by performing the specific algorithm to determine the shortest path. While for the trajectory planning in the
presence of obstacle and find out the path and motion along the path. Furthermore, effective approach can be
used by combining the dead reckoning and external sensing by using the metric model. By using the odometry,
the approximate current pose can be obtaining but maintain the pose estimate [4].
Figure 2: Active–Driving Wheel in Two Dimensions
B. Two wheel mobile robot
Omni Directional robot locality is identical by 3-coordinates: position (x, y) and robot direction angle in
an absolute frame. Therobot can mimic the waywhich [5-8] acquired from the current posture (x, y, ) in
analignment space. Figure 2 shows an active driving two-wheeled robotwhereC is the centre ofmotion of the
robot. The platformscentre of gravity of is at the origin (o), and (Vx, Vy)represents linear speed or tangential
velocity, and w is the angular velocity. Here,r is the radius of the wheels, and D for azimuth length between
the wheels [9]. Robot linear speed is defined by the absolute velocity (Vx, Vy) (Cartesian)in the platformM.M. Rashid et al. / AASRI Procedia 3 ( 2012 ) 474 – 480 477
coordinate system at the origin (o), and w for the angular velocity [9-11]. Theta ( ) denotesthe heading angle
of the turn in radians. The system is represented in (x, y) coordinate (and orientation) varying with respect to
time. At any instant, the x the y coordinates of the robot’s centre point are changing based on its speed and
orientation. While the time varying states, the physical laws governs the behaviour of the mobile robot but the
system is time invariant. ….(1), (2), …..(3),
(4) ….(5), (6), (7), (8),
…..(9) ….(10) …..(11)
Where: = right wheel angular velocity, = left wheel angular velocity,D = azimuth distance between the
wheels, = wheel radius, = tangential velocity, or linear velocity, and = angular velocity, or steering
velocity of the robot. The control inputs = ( , ) and our control outputs = (X, Y, ). Therefore, desired
trajectory is X (t), Y (t), (t).However, it is difficult to study 3rd order and nonlinearsystem. Some nonlinear
equations can be approximated by linear equations under certain conditions. Most of the system behaves like
a linear system has a trajectory called the nominal trajectory. In this case chosen conditions for the system
behaviour and modelled a linear system are followed. (12), (13)
…….(14), (15),
(16), (17), (18) (19)
………(20)
……….(21) (22)
Both wheels have the same initial speed.
4 Result
Data from in table 1 are collected to check whether the tag is detected fast or not. This experiment is
aimed to verify the counting number of passive tag that can be detected in 5.3 sec at a distance of 1cm.This
passive tag can be detected at the range of 150mm.Each trial is tested to check detected tag during navigation.
Each trial in figure 4 summarizes the path taken by mobile robot to reach its target.For trial 1 and 2, only five
tag is detected, while trial 3, 4, and 6, six tag is detected and both trial 4 and 5, seven tag is detected. This
experiment results in random decision path which will be taken by each trial.
Table 1: Numbers of ID tag detect in 5.3 sec
Trial vs Tag Detected
Trial Tag Detected(name) Count
1 Red 93
2 Stop 79
3 Blue 82
4 Blue black 84
5 Dark blue 88
Figure 3: ID detection for each trial
Several trials as shown in table 2 have been conducted to evaluate time elapse for the mobile robot to reach
the goal from the starting point. Each of tag has been named accordingly based on the ID tag positions.478 M.M. Rashid et al. / AASRI Procedia 3 ( 2012 ) 474 – 480
Accoording to figuure 5, mobile robot navigaation is alwayys updating itss angle until it finds the goal. Current
headding can be caalculated usingg;
…..(23) , ………(24), … (25)
To gget exact rotatiion of mobile robot;
……….(26) (27)
…….(28)
Figurre 4: Time elapse to reach goal possition
a) Testing and Evaluation
To verify whhether the moobile robot ismmoving accorrdingly and acchieved the oobjectives, sevveral testing
needd to be considdered literallyy. At first, proogramming innstruction is uuploaded to thhe microcontrooller to turn
rightt if compass angle is greaater than headding, turn leftt if compass angle is less than headingg, and move
forwward when commpass angle iss equal to headding angle. Hoowever, the roobot doesn’t mmove accordinngly because
the pprobability forr the robot to mmove forwardd by ±1 is imppossible. Thenn, the instructioon is adjustedd by ±3.
The results dooes not accuraately headed tthe mobile robbot to the goaal, but in ideall condition thee calculation
has pproved that evverything should be in the right track if the procedurees is follow acccordingly. Thhis might be
due to late reactioon of RFID anntenna to read the tag at timee it reached taag. Moreover, the programmming is quite
longg and thus causes delay for llooping. Durinng the processs, the antennacould not reaad tag accordinngly when it
headded to the tagg, instead thee antenna coils must be att the centre oof the tag so that it can rread the tag
simuultaneously. SSome readingg is missed duuring navigattion process aas this probleem occurs. Thhis problem
happpens due to leess read range of the reader. Mobile roobot somehoww didn’t movee to the centrre of the tag
althoough it reacheed the tag point. Trials show that possibbility to reducee error is wheen the displacement taken
by thhe mobile robot is closed too the ideal dispplacement.
5. Conclusion
Basic developpment of this robot has beeen constructedd and tested. GGenerally, the objectives off this project
havee been met sinnce the aims aare to developp and design thhe Omni mobbile robot usedd for navigatioon in indoor
enviironment. Thee result shows that the proototype modeel of mobile rrobot with RFFID system iss able to beM.M. Rashid et al. / AASRI Procedia 3 ( 2012 ) 474 – 480 479
applied in real situation. In addition, the position of the mobile robot is determined based on information
provided by the tag and the orientation information by the compass while the angle between the robot’s
current direction and the target tag is used to provide action to the actuators.Intelligent controller might be
applied to the system to reduce an error. Moreover, suitable sensor such as ultrasonic sensor might be used to
avoid obstacles in indoor environment.
Figure 5: Navigation path
References
[1] San, K. and Dong H. K., (2007). A design and implementation of moving object tracking system for
omni-directional robot, International Conference on Control, Automation and Systems 2007 Oct. 17-20, 2007
in COEX, Seoul, Korea, 1790-1793.
[2] Yukawa, T., Matsumoto, T., Okano, H., & Hosoya, O. (2006). Development of an omni-directional
mobile robot with two or more cameras and navigation based on cell map information, 32nd Annual
Conference onIEEE Industrial Electronics, IECON 2006, 213-218.
[3] Miah, M.S., & Gueaib, W. (2007). An RFID-Based Robot Navigation System with a Customized RFID
Tag Architecture, 18, 25-30.
[4] Feng Lu (2004), Shape Registration using optimization for mobile robot navigation, 1-153.
[5] Kimuro, Y., Takarabe, S., & Hasegawa, T.(2007). Machine Learning Approach to Self-Localization of
Mobile Robot using RFID Tag,Advanced intelligent mechatronics, 2007 IEEE/ASME international
conference,1-6.
[6] Martinussen, E. S., and Arnall, T. (2009). Designing with RFID, Proceedings of the Third International
Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction (TEI'09), Feb 16-18 2009, Cambridge, UK, 343-350.
[7] Miah, M.S., & Gueaib, W. (2007), Intelligent Parallel Parking of a Car- Like Mobile Road Using RFID
Technology, International Workshop on Robotic and Sensors Environments, 1-6.
[8] Hae, D.C., Sibum, J., Heejae, J., & Sang, W. A. (2004). Using RFID for Accurate Positioning:Journal of
Global Positioning Systems, 3, 32-39.
[9] Nuha.N (2005), H-Infinity Control Of An Autonomous Mobile Robot, 1-85.
[10] Finkenzeller.K (2003), RFID Handbook: Fundamentals and Applications in Contactless Smart Cards and
Identification(2nd Ed.),Germany, John Wiley & Sons Ltd.480 M.M. Rashid et al. / AASRI Procedia 3 ( 2012 ) 474 – 480
[11] Heesung Chae & Sangik Na (2007). Mobile Robot Navigation using RFID and Vision Sensor. 2007
International Symposium on Information Technology Convergence, 52-57.