Array14(2022)100136
ContentslistsavailableatScienceDirect
Array
journalhomepage:www.elsevier.com/locate/array
Knowledge-definednetworking:Applications,challengesandfuturework
SepehrAshtaria,∗,IanZhoua,MehranAbolhasana,NeginShariatia,JustinLipmana,WeiNib
aUniversityofTechnology,Sydney,Australia
bTheCommonwealthScientificandIndustrialResearchOrganisation,Sydney,Australia
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: Future6Gwirelesscommunicationsystemsareexpectedtofeatureintelligenceandautomation.Knowledge-
6G definednetworking(KDN)isanevolutionarysteptowardautonomousandself-drivingnetworks.Thebuilding
Knowledge-definednetworking(KDN) blocksoftheKDNparadigminachievingself-drivingnetworksaresoftware-definednetworking(SDN),packet-
Software-definednetworking(SDN) level network telemetry, and machine learning (ML). The KDN paradigm intends to integrate intelligence
Open-radioaccessnetwork(O-RAN)
to manage and control networks automatically. In this study, we first introduce the disadvantages of
Localization
current network technologies. Then, the KDN and associated technologies are explored with three possible
Machinelearning
Mobilitycoordination KDN architectures for heterogeneous wireless networks. Furthermore, a thorough investigation of recent
Networkmanagement survey studies on different wireless network applications was conducted. The aim is to identify and review
Resourcemanagement suitable ML-based studies for KDN-based wireless cellular networks. These applications are categorized as
resourcemanagement,networkmanagement,mobilitymanagement,andlocalization.Resourcemanagement
applications can be further classified as spectrum allocation, power management, quality-of-service (QoS),
base station (BS) switching, cache, and backhaul management. Within network management configurations,
routingstrategies,clustering,user/BSassociation,trafficclassification,anddataaggregationwereinvestigated.
Applicationsinmobilitymanagementincludeusermobilitypredictionandhandovermanagement.Toimprove
theaccuracyofpositioninginindoorenvironments,localizationtechniqueswerediscussed.Weclassifyexisting
researchintotherespectiveKDNarchitectureandidentifyhowtheknowledgeobtainedwillenhancefuture
networks;asaresult,researcherscanextendtheirworktoempowerintelligenceandself-organizationinthe
networkusingtheKDNparadigm.Finally,therequirements,motivations,applications,challenges,andopen
issuesarepresented.
1. Introduction for recommendation and automation across different applications in
wiredandwirelessnetworks.Therefore,knowledgecanbereferredto
Fifth-generation (5G) wireless communication systems provide asintelligenceoveranetwork,andhavingintelligenceoveranetwork
higher data rates, massive connectivity, and low-latency communi- withdifferentenvironmentalcharacteristicscanbeabreakthroughin
cation. However, the current 5G cellular architecture lacks intelli- networkperformance.Forinstance,inresourcemanagementproblems,
gence and sufficient flexibility to handle massive machine-type com- parameters such as bandwidth, quality of service (QoS), and power
munication (mMTC), low-latency, and enhanced mobile broadband can be obtained and processed using an ML algorithm in different
(eMBB)[1].Thesixth-generation(6G)cellularnetworkisapromising
networksituations.TheoutputofMListhenstoredasknowledgefor
technologytoaddress5Gshortcomings.Toachievethis,6Gwillenable
network automation. Moreover, in networking applications, routing
greater intelligence within the network to overcome a number of
decisionscanbenefitfromknowledgeforbetterroutediscoverywhile
challengesandimproveperformance[2].Asaresult,anarchitectural
thenetworkisoverpopulated.Further,userinformation,includingmo-
transformationisrequiredfor5Gto6Gcellularnetworks.
bilitypatternsandvelocity,canbeusedasaninitialstagetogenerate
Theconceptoftheknowledgeplane(KP)wasintroducedbyClark
knowledgetoimprovetheaccuracyoflocalizationandhandover.
etal.[3].AsshowninFig.1KPisanadditionalplaneoveranetwork
KDN can also be referred to as an application of autonomous
with inbuilt machine learning (ML) capabilities. The incorporation of
networking. The concept of an autonomous network comes from the
KPinsoftware-definednetworking(SDN)architectureisreferredtoas
growthofMLandartificialintelligence(AI);forinstance,inself-driving
knowledge-definednetworking(KDN)[4],whereknowledgeisthepro-
cessednetworkinformationusinganMLalgorithm.Knowledgeisused cars,anMLagentwillrunthecarwithoutahumanoperator.Similarly,
∗ Correspondingauthor.
E-mailaddress: sepehr.ashtarinakhaei@student.uts.edu.au(S.Ashtari).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2022.100136
Received29September2021;Accepted22February2022
Availableonline4April2022
2590-0056/©2022TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyElsevierInc.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NC-NDlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Fig.2. TheSDNnorthboundandsouthboundinterfaces.
years, various efforts from the research industry have been made to
enhance the radio access network (RAN) [7,8]. Among them, cloud-
RAN or centralized-RAN (C-RAN) is a promising RAN architecture
that helps to reduce base-band expenses. Further, a virtualized radio
accessnetwork(V-RAN)bringsthebenefitofcloudandvirtualization
to increase the network’s agility, scalability, and flexibility. This ar-
chitecture has helped RAN with new opportunities for virtualization
andcostreduction.V-RANsimplifiedthemanagementofRANdevices
and deployment. Although C-RAN and V-RAN are both cost-effective
andreadilyavailabletoanychangestoservicerequirements,theylack
openness to maximize the benefit of virtualization. To overcome the
limitations associated with both C-RAN and RAN, O-RAN accommo-
Fig.1. Knowledge-definedorchestrationinwirelessnetworks. dates the baseband unit (BBU) and remote radio unit (RRU) software
andhardwarefromdifferentvendors[9].O-RANisopenhardwarewith
an operator-defined RAN architecture that provides intelligent radio
an autonomous network can manage and optimize network applica- control for future cellular networks. The other innovative technology
tions without human intervention. In autonomous networks, network thatisgoingtohelpaccommodateintelligenceinthenetworkisdisag-
information or telemetry is collected and used by ML techniques to gregatingthetraditionalcontrolanddataplaneoftheRANtointroduce
automatically troubleshoot, instruct, or manage the network. Hence, an RAN intelligent controller (RIC) [10]. O-RAN uses the SDN and
monitoring and retrieval of network telemetry data in real time will networkfunctionvirtualization(NFV)principlesandapplytheMLal-
provideanopportunityforML-basedoptimizationalgorithmstoenable gorithmtocreateautomationincellularnetworks.O-RANstandardizes
intelligencefor6Gnetworks. the control plane using open infrastructure and provides programma-
The fundamental building blocks in KDN are network telemetry, bility. These are clear indications of demand for KDN architecture to
SDN,andML.Networktelemetryisnetworkinformation,suchasNet- simplifytheprocessbyaddingtheKPandincorporatingMLalgorithms
Flowdata,sFlowdata,queueoccupancy,policyrules,andprocessing toempowernetworkintelligencewithML-enabledapplications[11].
time.However,tofullyauto-matethenetwork,informationsuchashop Owing to the evolution of ML applications in wireless networks
latency,linkutilization,packetdrop,andqueuecongestionstatesare and the presence of SDN, less effort has been made to survey related
also required. This temporary data is available through in-band net- studiesthatarecompatiblewithKDNarchitecture.Theauthorsof[4]
worktelemetry(INT)orpacket-levelnetworkstates.Thepacket-level introduced the basics and applications of ML algorithms in KDN to
network state information can be collected using a new southbound control and operate networks. They used SL to obtain an intermedi-
domain-specific language called P4 [5], which allows the collection ate knowledge of the traffic load to perform network configurations.
of information directly from the data plane. As shown in Fig. 2 the In [12], a deep RL with a convolutional neural network (CNN) in
southboundandnorthboundinterfacesarepartoftheSDNcommuni- the context of KDN was utilized to make routing decisions based on
cationprotocol,wherethesouthboundinterfaceallowscommunication QoS in complex networks. In [13], deep learning (DL) algorithms
between controllers and switches, and other low-level network com- wereproposedtoproducethreeartificialintelligence(AI)modulesto
ponents.Thenorthboundinterfaceenablescommunicationwithhigh- manage the scalability and energy consumption in data center net-
level components [6]. The next building block of KDN is SDN, which work (DCN) systems. In this study, a hybrid optical/electronic DC
enablestheglobalnetworkview,networkprogrammabilityfunctions, network is designed with the management of the knowledge-defined
and flexibility to manage the network. The combination of network networkorchestrator(KD-NO)softwaremodule.Thesoftwaremodule
analyticsandSDNprovidesafoundationfortheKDNparadigm.How- uses the KDN architecture and deploys three DL-based AI modules in
ever,anMLalgorithmwillbetheheartofKDN,meaningthatanML theknowledgeplaneoftheKD-NOtomakeintelligentdecision-making
techniquecanprovideanefficientandoptimizedstrategytooperatethe and precise predictions of traffic volume, data latency, and hardware
network autonomously.ML is a key component of the KDN paradigm demands. In [14], the authors presented a new network architecture
thatprovidesasolutiongiventhetelemetrydata. and networking solution for high user density in 5G. Their research
OneoftheindicationsoftheKDNconceptistheopenradioaccess utilizes SDN, KDN, and NFV, where they take advantage of ML in
network (O-RAN). O-RAN is an emerging technology that enables the context of KDN. Additionally, owing to the massive connectivity
service heterogeneity, on-demand service deployment, and simulta- ofdevices,theconceptofself-drivingnetworksbyapplyingKDNand
neous coordination of heterogeneous devices [7]. Over the past few network telemetry was proposed [15]. Although there are studies on
2S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Fig.3. Thepaperstructure.
KDN, there is no survey that comprehensively studies applications of and localization. ML is the heart of the KDN and any future network
MLindifferentlayersofwirelessnetworkingwiththeirrelationshipand that needs automation and self-organization must adapt the KDN-
usageintheKDNarchitecture.Moreover,thereexistsomelimitations based ML algorithm. This is why we are conducting a comprehensive
in recent works and the overall challenges in applying KDN, which study about all the research conducted in the ML categories that suit
also need attention for KDN to be fully functional. Furthermore, the network automation. The focus of the study is to realize the new ML
benefitsofhavingaKDNinthenetworkareclearlystatedinthepro- achievementsandtakeadvantageofeachtoadaptthemostcompatible
posedresearchstudies.Forinstance,theauthorsof[4,15]investigated ML-basedalgorithminnetworkingproblems.WethenmappedtheML
the general advantages and use cases of the KP and introduced the methodtothemostappropriateKDNarchitecture.Themappingaims
KDNswitchoperatoralongwithitsarchitecture.Moreconcretely,the to help researchers identify the target area and the relevant ML with
work in [12] examined deep reinforcement learning (DRL) for QoS- the support of a suitable KDN architecture. This survey aims to offer
awarerouting.Theliteraturein[13]proposedasolutionformitigating acomprehensiveanalysisofKDNapplicationsusingML-basedstudies
datacentercongestionissuesbydeployingKDNinthenetwork.Such to enable intelligence and automation for current and future wireless
worksdemonstratethebenefitsofadaptingknowledgebeforemaking networks.Ourcontributionsaresummarizedasfollows:
decisionsinwirelessnetworks.
Themotivationofthisstudycomesfromthelackofintelligenceand (1) Providingaconciseexplanationabouttheshortcomingofwire-
automatednetworks.Inthenearfuture,networkcongestionandsmart lessnetworksandpotentialsolutionsfornetworkautomation.
applicationswillforcethenetworktohaveself-managingsystems.Con- (2) An introduction to KDN and representation of the main build-
sideringtheshortcomingsof5Gandthecontinuousresearchactivities ing blocks in KDN, such as SDN, network telemetry, and ML
inwirelessnetworkstoenableintelligenceandautomationinwireless algorithms,isdelivered.
networks, specifically in 6G, a more structured and comprehensive (3) A complete comparison discussion between SDN and KDN is
survey is required to understand the potential advantages of KDN- offered.
basedMLnetworks.Specifically,wefirstintroducethreepossibleKDN (4) WeintroduceandanalyzethreepossiblearchitecturesofKDNin
architecturesadaptedinwirelessnetworks,includingcentralized,dis- wirelesscellularnetworks.
tributed,andhybrid.Then,weconcentrateonthelatestachievements (5) Acomprehensivestudyofpacket-levelprogrammingandsouth-
inapplicationsofMLfromtheMAClayeruptotheapplicationlayer, bound interfaces of SDN, including Open Flow (OF) and the
including resource management, networking, mobility management, domain-specific language (DSL), known as P4, is discussed.
3S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Where, packet-level programming is used to perform ML algo-
rithm on collected data and apply the ML-based instructions
afterthelearningprocedure.
(6) An overview of supervised learning (SL), unsupervised learn-
ing (UL), reinforcement learning (RL), transfer learning (TL),
and neural networks (NNs) with basic principles and common
applicationsinwirelessnetworksisprovided.
(7) A thorough review of the applications of ML within the KDN
paradigmispresented,coveringresourcemanagement,network-
ing,mobilitymanagement,andlocalization.Thissurveyfocuses
ontheMAClayer,networklayer,andapplicationlayer(thePHY
layerisoutsidethescopeofthisstudy).Tocovereveryaspectof
a wireless network, resource management is broken down into
Fig.4. TraditionalnetworkarchitectureversusSDNarchitecture.
resourceallocation,powermanagement,QoS,basestation(BS)
switching,cache,andbackhaulmanagement.Networkingappli-
cationsarefurtherclassifiedintorouteselection,clustering,user
number of connected devices increases [2]. Consequently, one viable
association,trafficclassification,anddataaggregation.Mobility
solution is to use KDN to automatically optimize, diagnose, and trou-
prediction and handover management lie within the mobility
bleshootthenetwork[4].ToenableKDN,acentralizedcontrollerwith
section,andfinally,indoorlocalization.
ML capabilities must collect information from the network to create
(8) Finally,thetermsandconditionsassociatedwithMLalgorithms
knowledgeviaanappropriateMLalgorithm.Thecentralizedcontroller
for generating knowledge and motivations for applying KDN
wereidentified.Then,asummaryofthechallengesandcurrent forcollectingtelemetrydatamusthaveSDNfunctionalities.
issuesinKDNisdiscussed,followedbytheconclusion. Software-definednetworking(SDN)isanewnetworkingparadigm
for decoupling data and control planes [22]. Decoupling these two
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 planes enables SDN to operate as a centralized controller to manage
KDN, the enabling technologies for KDN are explained, such as SDN, thenetwork.TheglobalviewoftheSDNcontrollerprovidesadvantages
network telemetry, and ML. Then, in Section 3, SDN and KDN are suchasnetworkflexibility,programmability,andefficientmanagement
compared, and the potential architecture of the KDN is illustrated. In over the traditional network. In the conventional network architec-
Section4,thesouthboundinterfacesforpacket-levelprogrammingare ture, network administrators are required to manually configure and
thoroughly studied, OF and P4, in addition to some of the disadvan- troubleshootswitchesandrouterswithintheirorganization[23].From
tagesofcurrentsouthboundinterfacesandapplicationsofP4.Section5
Fig. 4, the difference between traditional network architecture and
describes some of the popular ML techniques utilized in KDN with
SDN can be seen. SDN provides network programmability within the
a brief introduction of their applications in wireless communication
controlplane,whereastraditionalnetworksdonotofferanyflexibility.
networks. In Section 6, a complete study of resource management,
Traditionalnetworksrelyonlyonthephysicalinfrastructuretocreate
networking,mobilitymanagement,andlocalizationispresented.Later,
connectionsandrunthenetwork.Ontheotherhand,SDNenablesusers
in Section 7, terms and conditions associated with ML algorithms
tousesoftwareprogramsinsteadofphysicalinfrastructuretoprovision
forgeneratingknowledgearediscussed,includingidentifyingsuitable
newdevices[24].
ML algorithms, implementation complexity, time consumption, suit-
In addition to network softwarization, adequate data collection is
able dataset availability for training, and suggestions for choosing
required in KDN to make appropriate and accurate decisions. With
MLalgorithms.Moreover,inSection8,motivationsforapplyingKDN
the new advancements in data plane elements, routers and switches
arepresented,includingalackofnetworkknowledge,self-organizing
are capable of computation and storage, which makes the network
networks, achieving reliable and high performance, learning patterns
monitoringandnetworktelemetryaccessible[25].Networktelemetry
and predicting the future, ability to handle complex problems, and
provides flow information, real-time packet information, and other
avoiding a wrong decision, followed by challenges and open issues
criticalpacket-leveldata,aswellasnetworkstatemonitoringandorga-
in KDN in Section 9. Finally, Section 10 concludes the study. Fig. 3
nizationwithcentralizednetworkanalytics.Hence,networktelemetry
depictsthesurvey’sstructureasagraphicalrepresentationforabetter
and network analytics present a richer view of network performance
understanding of how the survey is shaped and analyzed according
metrics,providinganextraadvantageoverconventionalnetworkman-
to each section. Further, for readers’ convenience, Table 1 lists the
agementtechniques.TheincorporationofSDNandnetworkanalytics
abbreviationsusedthroughoutthissurvey.
providesessentialelementsrequiredbytheKP.However,thelastpiece
ofthepuzzletomaketheKDNfullyfunctionalistointegrateML.ML
2. Theroadtoknowledge-definednetworking
usesnetworktelemetryandhistoricaldatatoprocessandfindvaluable
It is estimated that by 2030, the number of connected devices in information about the network, where this information is stored as
cellularnetworkswillreach100billion[16].Furthermore,themajority knowledgetoimprovenetworkperformance.
of network occupancy is due to the demand for high-definition video MLalgorithmsaregenerallyclassifiedassupervised,unsupervised,
data,whichleadstomassivedatatraffic[17–19].Hence,manyexisting andreinforcementlearning[26].InSL,thelearningagentlearnsusing
algorithmscannotprocesstrafficflows,resultinginalossofinforma- a dataset as an input vector and maps the inputs to the outputs
tion. Moreover, algorithms are incapable of offering optimum system basedonthepreviousinputswiththeirprovidedoutputs.Thedataset
performancewhenthenetworkenvironmentisdynamicandrandom. is a collection of labeled samples, where each element is called a
Therefore, these algorithms are unable to meet the requirements of featurevector.InUL,thedatasetisthecollectionofunlabeledsamples,
the 6G cellular networks. To overcome these problems and achieve where the learning agent tries to categorize the input. Finally, in RL,
betterperformance,researchershavedevelopedoptimizationmethods the machine continuously observes the environment to improve the
to attain effective solutions to get closer to optimal and suboptimal decision-makingprocess.Thistechniquecontinuouslyprovidesupdated
performance.However,manystudiespresumeastaticnetworkenviron- policies based on environmental feedback. Each ML algorithm can
mentratherthanconsideringtherandomnatureofnetworks[20,21]. assistinthedifferentapplicationsofwirelessnetworks.Forinstance,in
Additionally, traditional centralized algorithms for network manage- SL,theKPlearnsthebehaviorofthenetworkvariables,suchasnetwork
ment and simultaneous collection of global data are affected as the configurationandtrafficload,whichwillenablethesystemtoincrease
4S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Table1
Abbreviations.
5G 5thgeneration MBS macro-basestation
6G 6thgeneration MDP markovdecisionprocess
AI artificialintelligence ML machinelearning
ANN artificialneuralnetwork mMTC massivemachinetypecommunication
AoA angleofarrival mmWave millimeterwave
API applicationprogramminginterface MPLS multiprotocollabelswitching
ASIC applicationspecificintegratedcircuit MRE modifiedRoth–Erev
BBU basebandunit MS mobilestation
BM behavioralmodel NE Nashequilibrium
BS basestation NFV networkfunctionvirtualization
CHO conditionalhandover NLOS non-line-of-sight
CNN convolutionalneuralnetwork NN neuralnetwork
CP controlPlane OF openflow
C-RAN cloudradioaccessnetwork ONF opennetworkfoundation
CRE cellrangeextension O-RAN open-radioaccessnetwork
CRN cognitiveradionetwork OSPF openshortestpathfirst
CSI channelstateinformation OVS openvSwitch
D2D device-to-device PBS pico-basestation
DCN datacenternetwork PCA principalcomponentanalysis
DL deeplearning PISA protocolindependentswitcharchitecture
DNM deepneuralmodel POF protocolobliviousforwarding
DNN deepneuralnetwork PU primaryuser
DPDK dataplanedevelopmentkit PVS POFswitch
DPPO distributedproximalpolicyoptimization QoE qualityofexperience
DQN deepQ-network QoS qualityofservice
DRL deepreinforcementlearning RAN radioaccessnetwork
DSL domain-specificlanguage RB resourceblock
DT decisiontree RIC RANintelligentcontroller
ECR energyconsumptionratio RL reinforcementlearning
ELM extremelearningmachine RNN recurrentneuralnetwork
eMBB enhancemobilebroadband RRH remoteradiohead
eNB evolvednodeB RRU remoteRadiounit
ESN echostatenetwork RSRP referencesignalreceivedpower
ETL extract-transform-load RSRQ referencesignalreceivedquality
FBS femto-basestation RSS receivedsignalstrength
FC femtocell RSSI receivedsignalstrengthindicator
FFNN feed-forwardneuralnetwork RSU roadsideunit
GF gradientfollower SBS smallbasestation
gNB gigabitnodeB SCN smallcellnetwork
GPU graphicsprocessingunit SDN software-definednetworking
HAL hardwareabstractionlibrar SINR signal-to-interference-plus-noise
HetNet heterogeneousnetwork SL supervisedlearning
ICIC inter-cellinterferencecoordination SMU spectrumselectionutility
IDE integrateddevelopmentenvironment SNR signal-to-noiseratio
INT in-bandnetworktelemetry SOM self-organizingmap
IoT Internetofthings SON self-organizingnetworks
IP Internetprotocol SSU spectrumselectionutility
ISP Internetserviceprovider SVD singularvaluedecomposition
IVN intelligentvehicularnetworks SVM supportVectorMachine
JSON javaScriptObjectNotation SU secondaryuser
KDN knowledge-definednetworking TL transferlearning
KD-NO knowledgedefined-networkorchestrator TLV type-length-value
KNN k-nearestneighbors TTP tabletypepatterns
KP knowledgeplane UAV unmannedaerialvehicle
LFU leastfrequentlyused UDN ultradensenetworks
LOS line-of-sight UE userequipment
LRU leastrecentlyused UL unsupervisedlearning
LTE long-termevolution V2I vehicletoInfrastructure
LTE-U LTE-unlicensed V2V vehicle-to-vehicle
M2M machine-to-machine VANET vehicularadhocnetwork
MAB multi-armedbandit V-RAN virtualradioaccessnetwork
MAC mediumaccesscontrol WMMSE weightedminimummeansquareerror
MBM modifiedBushandMostelle WSN wirelesssensornetwork
thenetworkperformanceoncethefeaturesarefedtothealgorithm.UL the advantage of overcoming the drawbacks of conventional resource
assiststhenetworkoperatorbyfollowingthecorrelationsinthedata. management,mobilitymanagement,networking,andlocalization[4].
For example, ML may predict the mobility effect on a user’s network
link. Moreover, in RL, the learning algorithm will discover the best
actionthatleadstoanoptimalconfigurationinanetwork.AsRLadapts 3. Introductiontoknowledge-definednetworking
totheenvironment,iteventuallydeterminesthetargetpolicy.Thisap-
proachreturnstheoptimalactionbasedonthetargetstrategyandthen
appliesthemtotheKDNcontrollertoenablethebestconfiguration.RL Traditional cellular networks suffer from complexity, lack of flex-
providesextensivebenefitsforresourcemanagement[27].Asaresult ibility, proprietary and expensive equipment, and compound control-
of network softwarization, network telemetry, and integration of ML planeprotocols.However,applyingtheideaofrunningnetworkappli-
in the KP, the foundation of KDN has emerged, which will provide cations to a logically centralized controller changed everything. SDN
5S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
networkingconfigurations,mobilitymanagement,andlocalization.In
thislayer,knowledgeiscreatedbyMLalgorithms,andnewpoliciesare
obtained.
3.2. KDNarchitecture
AnumberofstudieshaveintroducedtheKDNarchitecture.Forin-
stance,theauthorsof[28]restatedtheconceptoftheKPinthecontext
ofSDNarchitectureinadditiontothetwoplanesoftheSDNparadigm.
As can be seen in their network architecture, the KP is located on
top of the control and management planes. The integration of the
KP generates behavioral models and reasoning processes for decision
making.ThisarchitectureenablestheKPtohaveafullviewandcontrol
of the network through the control and management plane. Other
researchstudies[12,14,29]haveasimilararchitecturetoKDN.In[14]
the same KP is utilized on top of all the layers, but it uses a cross-
Fig.5. KDNarchitecture.
layermanagementandmonitoringplanewithMLalgorithmstomanage
the rest of the planes. The method proposed in [14] utilizes an ML-
based algorithm in both separate orchestration layers and embedded
architectureenablesprogrammability,morestraightforwardconfigura-
inthemanagementplane.Therefore,itisimportanttoinvestigatethe
tions,andnetworkmanagement.Togoonestepforwardinsoftware-
architectureofKDNinwirelessnetworkstoidentifythemostsuitable
defined cellular networks, KDN introduced intelligence in addition to
programmabilityandcentralizedcontrolofSDN. architectureintermsofflexibilityandperformance.
ItispredictedthatthearchitectureoftheKDNinwire-lessnetworks
3.1. Software-definednetworkingversusknowledge-definednetworking canbecentralized,distributed,orhybrid.Inacentralizedarchitecture,
as shown in Fig. 6(a), the SDN controller is located at the center
TheintegrationoftheKPinSDNisanewconceptcalledknowledge- of the network and collects information from nodes using OpenFlow
defined networking (KDN). The concept of KP is to add one more (OF),P4,networkmanagement,etc.Then,thegatheredinformationis
planetothetraditionaltwoplanesofSDN.Thisnewparadigmincor- processedthroughacentralizedknowledgeplane,andtheninstructions
porates SDN, data analytics, and ML. The KDN paradigm has several andrulesaretransmittedbacktoeachnode.Thenewrulesareupdated
advantages: first, it has a global view of the network, and second, it using both direct and indirect approaches. The direct approach uses
enables telemetry data to be collected by the management plane to
the previously processed information and sends new strategies imme-
transform the data into knowledge via ML. The knowledge will later
diately back to the user equipment (UE). The indirect approach uses
turn into decisions by nodes to achieve efficient network operations
an ML algorithm to determine new rules before being sent to UEs. In
[18,19]. The benefit of having the KDN over traditional networks is
the distributed architecture illustrated in 6(b), the individual devices
that it automatically operates based on the knowledge obtained from
maintainlocalknowledge.Inthisarchitecture,eachnodecollectsdata
thenetwork.Fig.5illustratestheKDNarchitecture,includingthedata
from the environment and its surroundings, and then independently
plane,controlplane,managementplane,andKP.
appliesagreedy-basedMLstrategytoacquireknowledge.Thegreedy
The data plane in KDN is responsible for forwarding, dropping,
strategy may be determined from prior knowledge (such as TL) or
processing, and packet modification. This layer works precisely like
thedataplaneinSDN,whereitconsistsofphysicalandvirtualdevice usingnewML-basedoptimizationalgorithms.Forinstance,inarouting
elements. This layer operates unaware of the rest of the network and scheme,anodecancollectinformationfromothernodesanduseML-
reliesontheinstructionsandcontrolrulescomingfromotherplanes. based approaches to find the best routes and then share the acquired
The control plane exchanges information and updates the data knowledgewithothernodes.Inthehybridarchitecture,asdepictedin
planeprocessingandmatchingstrategyrules.Thelogicallycentralized Fig.6(c),knowledgeismaintainedatboththeextremeedgeandcore.
controller exchanges data and updates policies using a southbound Where it is just a matter of keeping the knowledge either updated or
application programming interface (API). The controller gathers the synchronized.Boththecontrolleranddevicesactintelligentlytogether
dataandnetworkstatefromthedataplaneandupdatestheflowtables based on the information they collect. This information is processed
to perform actions. In KDN, the data are also utilized to allow the by ML algorithms to acquire knowledge and injects new rules into
KPtoknowwhichappropriateactionisrequired.Then,thecontroller the system. The hybrid approach combines the greedy strategy and
receivesanactionfromtheKPandupdatestheflowtablesaccordingly. centralized knowledge to increase the network performance. Further,
These actions are usually used for forwarding and routing packets,
there can also be a switching strategy to switch between centralized
whilethedataplaneispopulated.
anddistributedaccordingtotheapplication.
Themanagementplanefacilitatesnetworktopologies,supportser-
vices,andconfigurationofthenetworkdevices.Thislayermustensure
thatthenetworkoperatesfullywiththemaximumperformance.This 4. Southboundprotocols
functionality of the network in KDN is handled by the centralized
controlleraswell,beingresponsibleformonitoringthedataplaneand
observing network analytics. The network analytics will then be col- In this section, a brief history of SDN and its enabling standards
lectedandstoredasanetworkstateandtelemetry.Thisinformationis are presented. Then, complete clarification of P4 against OF and the
alsomonitoredbytheKPforpossibleupdatesofthenetworktopology. benefits of P4 over the network are presented. For KDN to be fully
KP is the brain of the architecture and responsible for modeling functional, data collection is the key, and two powerful tools to do
network behavior and decision-making. These decisions are made for this are OF and P4.Both advantages and disadvantages of these two
different applications in the network, such as resource management, protocolsarestatedinthissection.
6S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
distributednatureofthetraditionalarchitectureanddifficultiesinthe
manualconfigurationofnetworkingdeviceshaveledtothecreationof
theSDNparadigm[31].TherearedifferentwaysofimplementingSDN
— overlay networking and the use of the OF protocol API to control
virtualswitches.
Overlay networking was the first deployment of the SDN concept
and has been used in data centers before the popularity of the SDN
paradigm.Intheoverlaynetworkarchitecture,anetworklayerisadded
abovethebasictransportlayer(physicallayer).Overlaynetworksuse
virtuallinkstocreateavirtualnetworkontopofanunderlyingphysical
platform. A virtual connection between the two nodes at the end of
the network is created using tags/labels to create a virtual tunnel
(overlay link) from one end to another. The network is programmed
tomanagethetunnelsbetweenthenetworkswitchesandhypervisors
(anintermediatelayerbetweentheSDNcontrollerandtheassociated
virtual SDN network). Nodes in overlay networks act based on an
overlay topology, which consists of certain behaviors: cooperative or
selfish.Incooperativemode,eachnodecreatesanoverlaylinktoallow
othernodestoroutetheirtrafficthroughdifferentnodes.Intheselfish
mode,nodescreateoverlaylinkstomakeconnectionsinthenetwork
to maximize their benefit. Overlay networks aim to improve QoS by
optimum routing decisions. Overlay networks can be deployed by
overlayprotocolsoftwarewithouttheinvolvementofInternetservice
providers(ISPs).However,therearesomedrawbackstothistechnique,
suchasincreasinglatency,slow-spreadingdata,andduplicatepackets.
Moreover, the overlay has no control over routing packets; it only
knowsthemessagetrajectorybeforeitreachesitsdestination[32–34].
ThedevelopmentoftheSDNparadigmin2008andtheseparation
of the control and data planes from the individual network devices
solved many previous problems in traditional networks. Furthermore,
the programmability functionality of SDN in network simplified net-
work management and enabled innovation [34]. The SDN controller
interacts between the switches via the OF protocol API, where OF
switchescontainflowtables,includingrulesforhandlingpacketswith
specific actions [35]. With the arrival of OF, the term SDN was born
andusedbytheresearchcommunityasearlyas2009[36].However,
itdidnothavemuchimpactonnetworkingvendorsuntil2011,when
OF eliminated the configuration complexity and automated network
management. The development of OF started in 2011, and the latest
version was released in 2016. The summary of each version is as
follows[37–39]:
• ThefirstOFversionwasreleasedinMarchof2008.However,it
wasnotuntilDecember2009thatOFVersion1.0reshapedlarge
enterprisesandserviceprovidernetworks.
• Version 1.1 enables innovation by adding multiple flow tables
and multiprotocol label switching (MPLS), including modifying
packets,complexforwardingactions,andupdatinganaction.This
versionwasintroducedinFebruary2011.
• In December 2011, Version 1.2 added flexibility by authorizing
communication between a switch and multiple controllers and
supportingIPv6forthematchingprocess.
• In June 2012, OF Version 1.3 was released, which addressed
backbonebridging,per-flowtrafficmeters,andtunneling.
• Version1.4appearedinAugust2013andofferedmoreaccessible
waystoaddnewfeaturestotheprotocol,includingtype-length-
value (TLV) formatting to match fields, role status events, flow
Fig.6. ProposedKDNarchitectures.
monitoring,etc.
• OF Version 1.5 was released in December 2014, enabled fast
synchronization among multiple switches and processing and
4.1. Theroadtosoftware-definednetworking
matching ingress packets by adding an egress table. Finally, the
latest version of OF Version 1.6 was approved, but it was only
There are two main problems with the traditional IP network,
availabletotheopennetworkfoundation(ONF)group.
mainlythecomplexityanddifficultyofnetworkmanagement[30].The
complexity is due to the configuration of individual network devices, All the versions above have subversions that include bug fixes and
suchasroutersandswitches.Thedifficultyinmanagingthenetworkis minorimprovements.However,themajortransitioninversionupgrade
duetothecloseattachmentofthedataandcontrolplanes.Hence,the occurs between different version volumes (1.x). OF can populate the
7S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
forwardingtablesofswitches,anditcanalsoaddanddeleteforwarding
entries of almost 50 different header types. Accordingly, the vendors
dictate the control plane to which the header they support using
the table-type patterns (TTPs) provided by ONF. To manage large-
scale networks, SDN operates with OF standards to provide simpler
configurationoptions.WhileSDNseparatesthecontrolanddataplanes,
OF only applies a fixed set of protocols to populate the rules in
the data plane by using the control plane. However, these protocols
are understandable by the fraction of available hardware routers and
switches[40].Therefore,theOFdoesnotcontroltheswitch’sbehavior
ofthesupportedprotocols.Itonlyprovidesawaytopopulatethetables
in theswitch. Moreover, the currentOF hasspecificprotocol headers
for forwarding a packet. Forwarding a packer requires forwarding
tables, which are known as flow tables in the OF standard. These
tables define how a frame is forwarded out of a switch, where the
tables operate by matching specific header fields. These tables have
grown from 12 to 41 fields in just a few years, presenting a huge
challenge.Thisincreasedthecomplexityofthespecificationswithout
Fig.7. P4withOpenFlowarchitecture.
providing any flexibility by adding new headers. P4 is a tool that
reduces the complexity of OF. The necessity of P4 alongside (or op-
eratingseparatelywithoutOF)OFforimprovingnetworkfunctionality
ispromising[5,41].Fig.7depictsthehybridnetworkutilizationofthe
OFandP4[40].
4.2. P4
Theprogrammingprotocol-independentpacketprocessorlanguage
is abbreviated as P4. In 2013, the P4 high-level language for pro- Fig.8. P4forwardingmodel.
grammable protocol-independent packet processors was developed
through the collaboration of Barefoot Networks, Intel, Stanford Uni-
versity, Princeton University, Google, and Microsoft [5]. P4 enables (1) Behavioral Model (BM): This is a P4 software switch compiler
theprogrammabilityofthedataplaneandallowsswitchestoprocess written in C and C++. The compiler takes a P4 program as
the packet. Hence, vendors and enterprises will be able to develop an input and then creates a C/C++ program based on the
their own application-oriented software for a programmable switch input. The first version of BM is called p4c-behavioral, which
chip, resulting in several benefits to the network, such as reducing depends on a program to generate a high-level intermediate
the packet processing time, modifiable packet headers, and switch representationofP4(nicknamedP4-HLIR).P4-HLIRproducesa
protocolindependence.Theseprogrammableswitchchipsarebasedon target-independent P4 parser in the Python programming lan-
aprotocol-independentswitcharchitecture(PISA). guage, which assists the compiler in developing the correct C
P4 was first introduced in 2014 to address the limitations of the
codefortheintendedtargets.However,thisbehavioralversion
data plane by providing flexibility in programming the data plane
hassomeissues,suchasgeneratingextracodesandrecompiling
in network switches that support OF standards [42,43]. The original
codes every time a modification is made to the P4 program.
P4 language was called 𝑃4 which only assumed distinct/specific
14 Later, the new version of BM was introduced, 𝐵𝑀 , which
devicecapabilitiesandwasabletoprogramasubsetofprogrammable
𝑣2
is written in C++ and supports static behavior. To run a P4
switches [40]. With the evolution of the language, 𝑃4 brought new
16 programontheswitch,theP4sourcecodeisfirstconvertedtoa
functionalities, such as stable language definition, supporting many
JavaScriptObjectNotation(JSON)file,whichisthencombined
switches,andremovedtheassumptionofdevicecapabilities.Generally,
with the P4 file and fed as an input to the interpreter. There
P4processespacketsbythepipelineofnetworkingelements,including
is a module in 𝐵𝑀 called p4c-bm that generates the JSON
switches,routers,etc.Itisbasedonafundamentalforwardingmodel 𝑣2
configuration and C++ code. The C++ file enables communi-
that uses a parsing of the packages and applies match+action table
cationbetweenthecontrolplaneanddataplaneontheswitch.
recoursestoingress[41],wheretheabstractpacketforwardingmodel
Finally,the𝐵𝑀 compilersupportsboth𝑃4 and𝑃4 ,andhas
isshowninFig.8.Theparseristheprocessofidentifyingtheheaders 𝑣2 14 16
practicalcapabilitiessuchassupportingdifferenttools(e.g.,con-
fromeachincomingpacket.Astheheaderisidentified,alookupfunc-
trolplane,integrateddevelopmentenvironment(IDE)software,
tionisperformedtofindtheappropriatematchaccordingtotheheader
etc.),multiplebackends,andextensiblearchitecture[44].
fields, and then applies the action corresponding to the match within
(2) Independent Hardware Target: The authors in [45] proposed a
thetable.TheP4programminglanguagefocusesonthespecifications
of these two procedures and the control flow through the pipelines. target-independentcompilersothatitcanreducethecomplexity
These specifications are controlled by programmers who write and of implementation. In their technique, the independent target
execute P4 files. Translation tools are required to execute a file from program is linked to a library called the hardware abstrac-
the P4 program. There are two options for translation: one is by the tion library (HAL), where this library is implemented for each
interpreteroneverycycleofexecution,andthesecondisbyacompiler target. They separate hardware specifications and hardware-
once the program is executed. Both approaches possess advantages; independent functionalities to improve portability. However,
whiletheformerhastheabilitytominimizetheerrorinoptimization their method was only implemented for the Intel platform and
operations, the latter method can reduce the translation time of each the Intel data plane development kit (DPDK). In addition, the
cycle between the development and runtime of the program. The P4 performance of the compiler is lower than that of hardware-
compiler consists of different parts, as depicted in Fig. 9. Some of dependentcompilers.
the most commonly used compilers available to execute a P4 file are (3) Protocol-Independent Software Switch: This is a programmable
summarizedasfollows: protocol-independent software switch, also known as PISCES.
8S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
computer vision, and signal processing applications [49]. As a result,
research studies based on ML on various aspects enable the KDN
paradigm to access and adapt a suitable ML algorithm for the ap-
propriate task. In this section, we survey a number of KDN-relevant
ML methods, including SL, UL, RL, NNs, and TL. We briefly explain
eachalgorithmandexploredifferenttechniquesbeforeusingthemin
Section6.Therefore,anyoneinterestedinthefieldwillacquireabstract
knowledgeofML-basedtechniquesandunderstandwhyandhowanML
algorithmcanbeutilizedinwirelesscommunicationapplications.
5.1. Supervisedlearning
Supervised learning (SL) is a basic ML algorithm that takes an
inputfeaturenetwork𝑥andtriestoproduceamodelfromtheoutput
information 𝑦. SL is further divided into two categories: regression
and classification. In regression problems, we try to predict continu-
Fig.9. InsideP4compiler. ous value output, and in classification problems, the prediction is for
discrete value output. Classification problems are used to distinguish
between different things, such as prediction in image processing, to
PISCES is a software switch in which forwarding behavior is differentiate between a cat and a dog [50]. In contrast, regression
obtainedbyhigh-levelDSLorP4.PISCESisderivedfromOpen problems cannot be considered as a classification problem [51]. The
vSwitch(OVS)andisconfiguredbyP4.Inthisprotocol,thepro- followingarethepopularsurveyworksonSLtechniques:
grammermustspecifyhowtoprocessthepackets.Forinstance,
(1) Linear Regression: Linear models are provided for prediction as
ifinP4weassignPISCEStoprocessIPv6packets,theprogram-
a weighted sum of feature inputs. Linear regression uses gra-
mer needs to introduce IPv6 packets, including the format and
dient descent to minimize the loss function and optimize the
fieldsoftheIPv6headers.PISCESbringsseveralbenefits,suchas
systemperformance.Linearregressioncanonlyrepresentlinear
apersonalprotocolheader,adding/removingastandardheader,
relationships,whichreducesthepredictionperformance,butde-
andeasytoaddnewfeatures[46].
liversafastandacceptableresultformanyapplications.Further
Most of the available P4 programming translators are compilers. specifications and information regarding linear regression are
However,thereexistsresearchfordevelopinginterpreters[47],which availablein[52].
still needs further attention. Currently, most of the focus is on pro- (2) Logistic Regression: Classification problems are used for logistic
grammable hardware switches with PISCES that are compiled to a regressiontoassignobservationstoadiscretesetofinputclasses.
customized software-based POF switch (PVS), where POF stands for For example, the common use of this algorithm is to predict
protocolobliviousforwarding. spam emails, student pass or fail grades, fraudulent websites,
Therefore, P4 enables a new functionality for controlling the for- and so on. This learning algorithm uses the gradient descent
warding behavior of the switch by populating the tables. Moreover, methodtooptimizethesolution.Incontrasttolinearregression,
P4 compilers allow us to use different APIs for switch chips. For in the logistic regression model, a number between 0 and 1 is
mostofthecurrentswitchesinthemarket,thischiphasanon-board assigned to each data point instead of fitting a straight line or
invariant programmed module. These APIs are auto-generated by the hyperplane.Thepredictedvaluesaretheprobabilitiesgenerated
P4 compilers to populate the switch tables. The new capability to bythesigmoidfunction.Inotherwords,fromthefunctionout-
utilize programmable switches will change the way switches operate, puts,thelearningalgorithmdecideswhichcategorytheoutput
but never the less OF is still useful in networking for the old fixed- databelongs.Thisalgorithmhassomedrawbacksthatcanalso
function switches. Therefore, a program called openflow.p4 has the be applied to linear regression. For instance, if the data are
abilitytoprogramswitchchipswiththesupportofOF.Hence,P4and perfectly separated, the algorithm can no longer be trained, or
OF can work together for networks such that P4 is the language and interpretation is more difficult because the interpretation uses
OF is the program. Additionally, while OF was essentially designed multiplicationratherthanaddition.However,someadvantages
for SDN networks where the control and data planes were separated, make the algorithm interesting, including multiclass classifica-
P4 was designed to program the behavior of the switch or the router tion and the probability distribution of the data. More details
withnorestrictiononwhethercontrolledlocallybyaswitchoperating aboutthelogisticregressionarefoundin[52].
systemorautomaticallybyanSDNcontroller.Networkinformationcan (3) Support Vector Machine (SVM): This method is a linear clas-
be obtained using both OF and P4, and can be processed in the KDN sifier that separates the training data that are 𝑛-dimensional
to inform the data plan for the new policy. Researchers can choose vector by using an 𝑛−1 hyperplane. The optimum hyperplane
their own plan toward how and which protocol suits their work, and must be selected to increase the marginal space between the
based on that, they can identify the appropriate translation tools for two given classes. Furthermore, this algorithm works for non-
packet-levelprogramming. linearly separable (non-linear classifier) datasets using kernel
functions,includingGaussianandpolynomialkernels.Although
5. Overviewofmachinelearningtechniques SVMrequiresalongtimetodistinguishthealarmeddatasetand
degradeasthenoiseincreasesinthedataset,thismethodworks
Artificialintelligence(AI)isaprogressivebranchofcomputersci- effectively with high-dimensional spaces. This method uses a
ence that deals with automation across various fields, and ML is an fractionofthememoryandtightlymarginstheseparation[53,
application of AI. ML is applied to developing systems to learn from 54].
patternsanddatawithoutexplicitlybeingprogrammed[48].TheKDN (4) K-NearestNeighbors(KNN):TheKNNalgorithmisastraightfor-
architecturerequiresadaptinganMLtechniquetooptimizeandcreate ward and valuable algorithm with no explicit training require-
intelligence for the network. ML applications have been successfully ments.Thismethodisusedforbothclassificationandregression
utilizedfornetworkanalysis,onlinecustomersupport,searchengines, problems,wheretheinputdataconsistofthe𝐾 closesttraining
9S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Fig. 11. An illustration of decision tree model to find out whether a person is
overweighted.
Fig.10. AnabstractmodeloftheKNNalgorithm.
datasetinthefeaturespace.The𝐾 valueisthehyperparameter
and should be selected carefully, but the optimal K-value can
be chosen after running the KNN several times with different
K-values.TheresultingKNNoutputscanbeusedforbothclassi-
ficationandregression.Inclassification,thebasicprincipleisto
decidethecategoryofatestpointbasedonthedecisionmadeby
themajorityvotesofKnearestneighbors.Intheregression,the
test point is categorized in a class by the average values of its
K nearest neighbors. Additionally, this method can be adapted
by assigning weights to neighbors such that the nearest points Fig.12. AnabstractviewofK-meanclustering.
are more involved than the distant points. The KNN method is
illustrated in Fig. 10. A more detailed explanation of KNN can
beobtainedin[55]. (1) ClusteringAlgorithms:Inclusteringalgorithms,K-meanclustering
(5) Decision Tree: One of the most common ML algorithms is DT, iswidelyusedtosegregate𝑛unlabeleddatapointsinto𝐾 clus-
whichisastatisticalmodelforclassificationproblems.ThisML ters.Toinitiatethisalgorithm,onlythedatasetandthedesired
technique is used to classify data and formulate a dataset in a number of clusters are required. The most popular version of
hierarchical structure, such as a flowchart representation. This thismethodisiterativerefinement,where𝐾israndomlychosen,
flowchart is usually a tree-based structure, and the algorithm andaftereveryiteration,thealgorithmcorrectsitself[55].The
startsfromtherootandclassifiesthedatasetuntilitreachesthe difference between this algorithm and KNN is that in every
leaf.TherepresentationofoneclassDTisasfollows:Eachsplit iteration,everypointisassignedtoaclusterusingtheEuclidean
ofthetreeisbasedonaconditiononaparticularattribute,and
distance(closesttothecentroid).Ineachiteration,thealgorithm
leavesaretheclasses.ForasimpleexampleofDT,theiterative
learnsandupdatesthecentroidsofeachcluster.Thealgorithm
Dichotomiser3(ID3)isexplainedasfollows:
operatesuntiltheendoftheiterations,orwhenthecentroidsof
the clusters do not change significantly. A basic observation of
(i) First,itassignstheoriginaldataset(𝐷)totherootnode.
thisalgorithmisshowninFig.12.
(ii) Iterativelycalculatetheentropy𝐻(𝐷)ortheinformation
(2) Principal Component Analysis (PCA): This is a statistical proce-
gain𝐼𝐺(𝐷)ofeveryattributeofset𝐷.
dure that transforms a set of correlated variables into a set
(iii) Then, it partitions set 𝐷 into subsets using the smallest
of linearly uncorrelated variables using orthogonal transforma-
resultingentropyfromstepii.
tions [55]. The fundamental idea of PCA is to reduce the di-
(iv) MakingaDTnodeconsistingofthatattribute.
mensionality of the data and optimize it to major components
(v) Recurseon𝐷usingtheremainingattributes.
or features. This statistical method represents the datasets in
The DT method works for both regression and classification moreeconomicalandsmallerobservedvariablesforfasterdata
problemswithmanyadvantages,suchaseaseofinterpretation, processing in ML. Moreover, PCA works optimally with linear
requiresfewerdatapointstolearn,andworkswellwithalarge modelsforfeatureextraction,datacompression,andredundancy
dataset.However,minorchangestothelargedatasetrequirea of variables, such as image processing, signal processing, com-
newtrainingsequence,andoverfittingisthealgorithm’slimita- munications,andcontrolsystems/theory[57].Inthisalgorithm,
tion.Forimplementationandfurtherinformation,referto[55]. singular value decomposition (SVD) plays an essential role in
Fig.11providesasimpleexampleofadecisiontree. computinglower-dimensionaldata.SVDextractstheeigenvalues
fromthecovariancematrix,whichisthebestapproximationof
5.2. Unsupervisedlearning theoriginaldatasetwithfewerarguments.Formoreinformation
oncomputationandsimulation,referto[55,58].
In unsupervised learning (UL), the input data are unlabeled data,
wherethealgorithmhastofindpatternsandhiddenstructurestolearn 5.3. Reinforcementlearning
ausefulfunction.Theenormousdatacollectionbydevicesandsensors
resultsinalackoflabelingduetotheunavailabilityoffundstopayfor Reinforcement learning is a popular ML techniques that through
manualallocationorthenatureofthedataitself.TheULisextensively interaction with the environment, the RL agent learns from trial and
usedinclusteringanddataaggregation[56].Thefollowingalgorithms errorusingconsequencesofitsexperiencesandactions[59].Someof
arethemostcommonULtechniques: thecommonlyusedRL-basedalgorithmsaredescribedbelow.
10S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Fig.13. AnabstractviewofQ-learningmethod,whereeveryactiontakeninanystate
Fig.15. Anillustrationofactor–criticlearningalgorithm.
willbeobservedbytheenvironmentandgeneratesarewardtoprovideinsightsabout
howgoodwastheagent’saction.
Fig.16. Jointutilityandstrategyestimation-basedlearningprocess.
(3) Actor–Critic Learning: There are two main types of RL: value-
based and policy-based. Value-based attempts to approximate
theoptimalvaluebymappingbetweentheactionandvalueto
Fig.14. Theprocedureofdeepreinforcementlearning. findtheoptimalpolicywithouttheQ-value.Atthesametime,
policy-basedpoliciessuchaspolicygradientsrelyuponoptimiz-
ingparametrizedpolicies.Totakeadvantageofbothtypes,these
(1) Q-learning:Q-learningisthemostpopularRLtechniquethatuses two were merged and established actor–critic learning, which
Q-valueandQ-functiontofindoptimumactionpolicies.Specifi- means that one will compute an action based on the current
cally,theagentinteractswiththecurrentgivenenvironmentto stateandtheotherapproximatestheQ-valueoftheaction[68].
continuously learn the Q-values and maximize this value. This An actor–critic learning method comprises an actor for error
algorithm starts with an initial state and an action, followed correction, a critic for interaction, and an environment where
bytheepsilon-greedypolicy.Foreachperformedaction,theQ- theactorinteracts.Asaresult,theactorselectsanactionbased
value is learned through the optimal (greedy) policy, enabling on the current policy, producing a cost metric. Subsequently,
theagenttotakeanyactionbasedonthelargestQ-valueunder the critic updates the state value function according to the
thecurrentstate.DetailsoftheQ-learningmethodcanbefound time-differenceerror.Finally,theactorupdatesthepolicy.Each
actionisrevieweda finitenumberoftimesforeachstatesuch
in[26,60].Moreover,fuzzyQ-learningisusedtodealwithcon-
thatthealgorithmconvergestooptimalvalues.Additionally,the
tinuousstatespaceswithacertainnumberofgivenrules[61].
strategyofthesystemisupdatedaccordingtothelearnedpoli-
AflowchartoftheQ-learningmethodispresentedinFig.13.
ciesusingtheBoltzmanndistribution[69].Thebasicprinciples
(2) Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL): Deep RL is a combination
andproceduresareshowninFig.15.
of deep learning and RL, which correlates the value function
(4) Joint Utility and Strategy Estimation Based Learning: The util-
with corresponding actions and states [62]. DRL uses these
ity and strategy estimation-based learning relies on the same
twoprinciplestoapproximatetheoptimalQ-values.Moreover,
concept as the classical RL. However, the main difference is
DRL techniques facilitate an NN with an RL architecture to
that the agent receives an estimation of the expected utility
enable agents to learn the best action in a specific environ-
from the environment and the updated reward. The probabil-
ment. DRL is mostly used in complex decision-making tasks ity distributions are modified based on the utility estimation,
withunstructuredenvironmentsandcanhandlelargedatasets. where the probabilities (also known as strategies) are selected
Recently,DRLhasmadegreatstridesinvehicle-to-vehicle(V2V) actions[70,71].Usingthisalgorithm,theregretofeachactionin
communication[63],wirelesscommunications[64],andvideo theprocesscanbeobtainedusingthereceivedrewardandutility
games[65,66].MoredetailsonDRLcanbefoundin[67]forthe parameters.Then,regretcanbeusedtoupdatethestrategy.The
readers.AnoverviewofthisconceptisshowninFig.14. main advantage is that the algorithm can be fully distributed
11S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Fig.17. ThearchitectureofDNN. Fig.19. ThearchitectureofRNN.
1980s[74].ACNNisdesignedtoadaptivelyandautonomously
learn spatial hierarchies of patterns by using different building
blocks, including convolution layers, pooling layers, and fully
connected layers. Among them, convolutional and pooling op-
erations are the two main building blocks in CNNs, which are
featureextraction[75].UsingthesetwolayersenablestheCNN
to solve relatively complex models based on the progressive
natureofthestructure,asshowninFig.18.
(3) RecurrentNeuralNetwork(RNN):TheprincipleofRNNistosave
Fig. 18. An overview of training process of a convolutional neural network thepreviousoutputandfeeditbacktotheinputwhilehaving
architecture. hiddenstatestoassistthealgorithminpredictingtheoutcomeof
thelayer[76].Additionally,thereareconnectionsinthehidden
layers of the RNN architecture, where all the inputs, including
whentherewardisimmediatelycalculatedlocally;forinstance, thecurrentandformerinputs,impacttheoutput.Hence,anRNN
thetransmissionratebetweenthetransmitterandreceiver.This hastheabilitytoremember[26].Fig.19showsthehiddenlayers
algorithm is often referred to as an equilibrium concept in andconnectionsoftheRNNarchitecture.
game theory in many survey papers, such as coarse correlated (4) Autoencoder: The autoencoder aims to model a set of data to
equilibriumandlogitequilibrium.Theconceptofthisalgorithm learn and approximate the system function. The autoencoder
isillustratedinFig.16. hasothervariations,suchassparseautoencoderanddenoising
autoencoder.Theautoencoderalsoappliesbackpropagationand
5.4. Neuralnetwork sets the target output equal to the input. The components and
process of the autoencoder are shown in Fig. 20; after the
Aneuralnetworkisatypeofartificialintelligenceforinformation autoencoder is fully trained, the decoder is removed from the
processingthatimitatesthehumanbrain.Theneuralnetworkstructure network,andonlytheencoderiskeptasafeatureextractor.This
consists of thousands of closely connected, simple processing nodes. powerfulNNcanlearnarobustrepresentationoftheinputwith
Neural networks are organized into layers, and in each layer, many alimitednumberofneuronssuchthatthenetworkcanconstruct
the input at the output. However, the autoencoder has some
nodes move the data. With the development of graphics processing
disadvantagesthatworthmentioning.First,anautoencoderre-
units (GPUs) to accelerate the processing time, NN has attracted con-
quires an identical distribution of the training data at its input
siderableattentionfromresearchersandcompanies[72].Thefollowing
beforeitcanworkproperly.Second,thenumberofneuronsin
NNtechniquesareexplainedinthisstudy.
thehiddenlayerhasadirectimpactonitsperformance[26].
(1) Deep Neural Network (DNN): As shown in Fig. 17, the compo- (5) ExtremeLearningMachine(ELM):Theextremelearningmachine
nents of the structure are densely connected by the neurons in is an NN with multiple hidden layers with randomly chosen
the network layer. Each neuron in a layer is connected to the parameters, often referred to as a feed-forward neural network
(FFNN). This is the simplest and the first artificial neural net-
restoftheneurons,resultinginthestructureoftheDNN.Each
work, which aims to approximate a function to map an input
neuroncorrespondstoaweightfortheinputandanactivation
toanoutputsuchastheXORfunction.Differentlayersconnect
function for the output. The input data are transformed from
eachnodetoothernodesinthenetwork,includingthehidden
layertolayer,withnodirectconnectionbetweenthetwonon-
layer, input, and output layers. The information flows only in
consecutive network layers. The main advantage of a DNN is
onedirection,anditdoesnotincludeanyfeedback,orthenodes
thatitcanautomaticallydeductandtunethefeaturestoobtain
donotformacycle,differentiatingitfromtheRNN.
thedesiredoutput.Fortheoptimizationofnetworkparameters,
DNN uses backpropagation (one of the most popular learning
techniquesformultilayerneuralnetworks)andvariousgradient 5.5. Transferlearning
descentalgorithms,suchasAdamandMomentum[73].
(2) Convolutional Neural Network (CNN): The convolutional neural Transfer learning is the process of avoiding learning from scratch
networkisaclassofartificialNNthatwasdevelopedduringthe and utilizing knowledge from a specific task to the target domain to
12S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
and machine-to-machine (M2M) communication requirements make
traditionalnetworkingintolerable.Toovercomesuchissues,keytech-
nologicaladvancesinthenetwork,suchastheKDN,cansupportand
potentiallysolveourproblems.Inthefollowingsubsections,fourmajor
parts of the communication stack are reviewed based on previous
research.
(1) Resource management applications based on spectrum utiliza-
tion,powerallocation,QoS,BSswitching,cache,andbackhaul
managementwereinvestigated.
(2) Networking applications, such as routing, clustering, user/BS
association,anddataortrafficaggregationhavebeenexplored.
(3) Mobility issues, such as user mobility prediction and handover
management,wereinvestigated.
(4) Theimportanceofindoorlocalizationispresented.
These four criteria are the essential parts of each network, and they
need optimization to keep up with standards and demands in future
heterogeneousnetworks.Inthissection,wediscussrecentMLstudiesin
awirelessnetwork.Here,ML-basedinformationisstoredasknowledge
forthatspecificnetworktofacilitateothersimilarnetworks.
6.1. Resourcemanagement
Nowadays, resources among networks are scarce and expensive.
Manystudieshavestartedtouseoptimizationmethodsandintroduced
Fig.20. Illustrationofthestructureofanautoencoder.
newideasforresourcemanagement[78].However,recentstudieshave
utilizedMLalgorithmstoimprovetheefficiency.Thesestudiesfocused
onspectrumallocation,powermanagement,QoS,BSswitching,cache,
assistlearningmorerobustly.FordeeplearningandRL,knowledgecan
andbackhaulmanagement.KnowledgethatKDNprovidesisbeneficial
be defined as weights and Q-values, respectively. For instance, when
to these standard problems in wireless networks. Once the complex-
deeplearningisadaptedforresourcemanagement,theMLprocesscan
ity of the network increases in 6G, there needs to be a centralized
usetheweightsthathavebeentrainedforotherresourcemanagement
intelligencethatcanreceivegeneralnetworkinformationandprocess
tasks as the initial weight. For example, a similar network with the
that information through an ML algorithm to produce meaningful
same number of nodes and similar behavior with a trained ML and a
knowledge.Therefore,itisanexcellentopportunitytostudyresearch
fullyoperationalresourcemanagementpolicycanprovideknowledge
worksandidentifythosewiththepotentialtoattainusefulknowledge
forothersimilarnetworks.Moreover,inRL,theQ-valueslearnedfrom intheKDNframework.
an environment can be used in a similar environment to make better
decisions during the initial stage of learning. The specifications for 6.1.1. Spectrumallocation
utilizing TL with RL can be further studied in [77]. While there are Asthenumberofdevicesincreasesinthenetwork,suchasIoT,cel-
advantages of having prior knowledge for learning a pattern, there lular,andsensors,spectrumshortageshavedrawnsignificantattention.
aresomelimitationsandnegativeimpactsontheperformance,which The increase in data traffic now forces efficient spectrum allocation
needsfurtherattentionthatexceedsthescopeofthisstudy. and management strategies to enhance scalability and improve QoS.
Most of the above ML techniques can be deployed in several net- In the following section, RL is investigated for possible knowledge
work applications for automation and optimization. ML algorithms extractionforspectrummanagementwhenusingtheKDNframework
provide information and knowledge for different tasks. In the next inthenetwork.Table3summarizesthestudiessurveyedinthissection.
section, the application of ML in KDN for wireless networks is dis- Knowledge derived from reinforcement learning: In [79], spectrum
cussed.First,ageneralintroductiontoeachapplicationwasexplored. allocationincognitiveradionetworks(CRN)ispresented,andthenon-
Second, the important characteristics of each surveyed study with dominatedsortinggeneticalgorithm-II(NSGA-II)isusedasamethod
supporting ML algorithms were investigated. Finally, a possible KDN to combine the evolutionary algorithm and RL method. As a result,
architecture that can be adapted for this specific study is presented. they proposed NSGA-RL for self-tuning and spectrum allocation in an
This study was expanded over various parts of a wireless network, efficientmanner.TheyusedtheRLalgorithmtolearnthevalueofthe
including resource management, networking, mobility management, control parameter during the training phase. Their method evaluates
and localization. Therefore, it is crucial to identify the studies within theinitialvaluesoftheQ-tableandupdatestheQ-valuesiterativelyto
thesepartsthatcanbepotentialusecasesingeneratingknowledgein obtainoptimalvalues.Basedontheiralgorithmafternetworkinitializa-
theKDNparadigm.Thesestudiesarethebuildingblocksforachieving tion,non-dimensionalsortingviatournamentselection,crossover,and
afullyknowledge-basednetworkinfuturewirelessnetworks.Table2 mutation is calculated, representing offspring population generation.
presents the selected number of surveys with different applications They use population as knowledge to find the near-optimal and self-
supportingvariouspartsofwirelessnetworks. tuning control parameter to allocate spectrum-based and increase the
overallnetworkcapacity.Thisalgorithmissuitableforthecentralized
6. Application of machine learning for knowledge defined net- architectureoftheKDN,whereamulti-objectiveoptimizationproblem
working forspectrumallocationismodeledbasedontheRLalgorithm.
In[80],theauthorsdevelopedadynamicspectrumallocationalgo-
Owingtotheexponentialgrowthofdatatraffic,wirelessnetworks rithminadistributedmannerusingadeepmulti-userRL.Theirmethod
will require advanced technical solutions in the near future. As a allocatesthesharedbandwidthintoorthogonalchannels,andusersac-
result, the traffic load among BSs, the complexity of wireless chan- cessthespectrumateachtimeslotbasedonarandom-accessprotocol.
nels, the emergence of self-driving vehicles, device-to-device (D2D), First,usersattempttotransmitpacketswithacertainprobability.Then,
13S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Table2
Theapplicationofmachinelearningmethodsondifferentareasoftelecommunication.
eachuserreceivesanacknowledgmentofwhetherthepackethasbeen andhelpcellularoperatorstoenhancetheuser’squalityofexperience
received. Subsequently, each user maps its current state to an action (QoE)andefficientlysharespectrumresources.Inthisstudy,theIOPSS
based on the spectrum access obtained by a trained deep Q network. Q-learning framework was executed in a distributed manner at every
Theiralgorithmprovesthatuserscanlearnthebestpolicybasedonthe BS.ThisframeworkissuitableforbothcentralizedanddistributedKDN
objective network utility. The proposed algorithm provides twice the architectures. If the network is seen based on every cluster, where
channelthroughputcomparedtoslotted-alohawithoptimalprobabil- all the BSs in a network are assumed to be a greedy-based BS, then
ity,whichrequiresfullknowledgeofthenumberofusers.Hence,this a distributed KDN using the proposed work will maximize each BS’s
suggeststhattheoutputoftheQ-learningalgorithmintheirstudycan resources.However,thismethodcanalsobeassumedasacentralized
beusedasknowledgeforKPinwirelessnetworks,wherethenumber algorithm for the master controller that manages all the BSs, which
of nodes is not visible by the controller, and the controller needs to eventually suggests a hybrid structure of KDN using the output data
performthebestactionandallocateanefficientchanneltousers.The resultingfromtheproposedstudy.
proposedalgorithmsuggestedadistributedadaptationoftransmission In[82],theauthorsproposedadynamicspectrumallocationstrat-
parameters, where the knowledge obtained from a network by users egy for maximizing throughput in millimeter-wave (mmWave) ultra-
canbeusedinadistributedmannerintheKDNarchitecture. dense networks. They proposed a temporal–spatial spectrum-reuse
Asdatatrafficincreasesinmobilenetworksandfixedspectrumallo- scheme to improve spectrum management. Similar to other works,
cationofoperatorsbecomesamajorproblem,inter-operatorspectrum spectrum management is formulated using a non-cooperative game,
sharinghasbeenproposedasasolution.Thissolutionbringsbenefits whichensuresNashequilibrium(NE).Usingthistechnique,secondary
but also introduces new challenges. The authors of [81] introduced a users (SUs) are adapted with a distributed Q-learning algorithm to
newparadigmcalledinter-operatorproximalspectrumsharing(IOPSS) interact with the environment and achieve NE without any global
to intelligently offload users from an overloaded BS to the neighbor- information exchange between SUs. The actions and rewards of the
ing BSs based on the spectral proximity. A Q-learning framework is Q-learningalgorithm arebasedonthe system’schannelselectionand
equipped with each BS to dynamically determine the network load channel rate, respectively. In contrast to other Q-learning methods,
and efficiently utilize its spectrum in a self-organizing manner. The where the state–action pairs will result in a Q-value, the action only
state of the system depends on the network load experienced by the definestheQ-value.Theplayer’sQ-valueisupdatedineachiteration
BSandisdefinedasadiscretizedvalue.Atthesametime,theaction based on the weighted sum of the current Q-value and the achieved
ofeachstateisdeterminedbythetupleofspectralsharingparameters reward. From their comprehensive analysis, their learning algorithm
associated with each neighboring BS. The spectral sharing parameter speeds up the convergence procedure and helps users with minimum
for a BS includes the required spectrum resources (where spectral accesslatency.Similarly,aheuristicchannelallocationpolicyfocusing
resources in this study are considered as resource blocks (RBs)) from on temporal–spatial spectrum reuse with the help of multi-armed
a neighboring BS, the probability of a user that the neighboring BS bandit (MAB) theory is presented [83]. They incorporated a three-
cansupportwiththestrongestvalueofthesignal-to-interference-plus- stagepolicytoimprovethecomputationalcostofacentralizedchannel
noise ratio (SINR), and the fraction of RBs that need to be reserved allocation policy. The algorithm uses a distributed greedy graph col-
as requested. Simulation results demonstrate that the IOPSS-based Q- oring method to determine the optimal channel access ranks of SUs
learning algorithm can intelligently offload users from congested BSs during the first two stages. In the third stage, based on the MAB
14S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
selected,whileresourceoptimizationwasperformedduringthesecond
phase. Different utilities are defined for each level, namely the spec-
trum modeling utility (SMU) and spectrum selection utility (SSU) for
levelsoneandtwo,respectively.Tomakethelearningmoreaccurate,
FCs use three different learning algorithms, including the modified
Bush and Mosteller (MBM), modified Roth–Erev (MRE), and gradient
follower(GF)learningalgorithms.Duringeachlearningprocess,each
FCchoosesonelearningstrategybasedonitsobjectivesandcapabili-
ties. Thealgorithm canself-organize theavailableresourcesandtune
the SBS parameters based on interference and QoS. The simulation
results prove the higher cell throughput and significant reduction in
inter-andintra-tierinterferences.Athoroughstudywasconductedfor
spectrum allocation, user association, and load balancing for hetero-
geneous small-cell networks (SCNs) in [86]. An echo state network
(ESN) framework is utilized with RNN [87,88] to optimize resource
allocationwithuplinkanddownlinkdecouplinginSBS-LTE-Usystems.
Theyformulatedanon-cooperativegamingsystemwheretheSBSswere
theplayerswiththegoaloffindingtheoptimalutilityfunction.Every
SBSseekstoattainoptimalspectrumallocationtoenhancetheutility
function.Theutilityfunctionmustmaximizethedownlinkanduplink
sum rates while managing the traffic load in both the licensed and
unlicensedbands.Further,basedonESN,resourcescanbescheduled,
Fig.21. AnabstractsystemmodelofD2DenabledC-RAN. and the optimal utility function can be established with minimum
knowledgeofallusers.ThealgorithmenablesBSstoautonomouslyde-
cideonaspectrumallocationstrategywiththemaximumthroughputof
theory, optimal channel allocation is obtained. The simulation results eachuser.Theirsimulationresultsshowedaperformanceimprovement
of 167% compared to the Q-learning algorithm. In [85] a distributed
suggest that the proposed policy outperforms other policies in the
self-organized spectrum allocation scheme was proposed for FCs. The
literaturebasedontemporal–spatialspectrumreuse.Thestudyin[82]
proposed method is suitable for both distributed and hybrid schemes
canassistinknowledgeextractionandmaximizethenetworkbenefits
intheKDN.Similarly,themethodin[86]canalsobeadaptedforboth
for a distributed KDN architecture. In contrast, in [83] the spectrum
distributedandhybridarchitectures,inwhichthehybridscheme,the
allocationproblemisformulatedintocentralizedanddistributedparts,
centralizedSBSsusethistechniquetoactgreedyforloadbalancingand
whichcanbestfitourhybridarchitectureinKDN.
efficientspectrumreuse.
Toimproveresourcemanagement,D2Dcommunicationwasintro-
ducedtodecreasetheloadontheBS.In[84],theauthorsproposeda
6.1.2. Powermanagement
distributedapproachforresourceallocationandcommunicationmode
Power management is a key feature of wireless networks. One of
selection for potential D2D pairs using a joint utility and strategy
the biggest concerns is that as the number of devices in the network
estimationalgorithm.TheproposedsystemmodelisshowninFig.21
increases,eachnodewilleventuallydemandahigherdatarate,which
consisting of potential D2D pairs, BS, C-RAN, and user equipment
forcesthetransmittertoincreaseitspower.However,increasingpower
(UE) that are unable to perform D2D communication. They investi-
increases the interference between the devices. Therefore, the devel-
gated D2D-enabled C-RANs to improve the spectral efficiency using
opment of a suboptimal power allocation algorithm is necessary for
RL techniques. The action of the learning algorithm consists of the
future wireless networks. Exploiting knowledge from ML algorithms
communicationmodeselectionandsubchannelallocationforeachD2D
enablesustodeploytheKDNarchitecturein5Gandbeyond.Inpower
pair. After each pair selects its action, the remote radio head (RRH)
management problems, knowledge is essential to decrease both the
associationandpowercontroloftheD2Dpairsismodeled.Then,based
interferenceandenergyconsumption.Inthefollowingsections,super-
on the reinforcement algorithm, the system obtains the instantaneous
vised and reinforcement learning algorithms are explored to examine
utility(knownasthereceivedspectralefficiency),whichisupdatedfor
how knowledge can be extracted and deployed in the KDN. Table 4
eachactioncontinuously.ThisstudyaimstoenableD2Dpairstoself-
summarizesthestudiessurveyedinthissection.
optimize their resource allocation and perform mode selection under
different practical constraints, including fronthaul capacity and inter- (i) KnowledgederivedfromSL:In[89],theauthorsinvestigatedthe
tier interference constraints. The numerical simulations demonstrated problemsofoptimizationalgorithms,whichoftenlackadequate
near-optimalperformanceandbetterspectralefficiency.Fromthepro- performanceinreal-timeprocessingandsufferfromcomplexity.
posed method, it is evident that this study best suits the distributed TheyproposedacentralizedSLalgorithmtotrainadeepneural
architectureoftheKDN,whereD2Dpairswillmaximizetheirresources network (DNN). In particular, their algorithm is compared to
usingtheproposedalgorithm. theweightedminimummeansquareerror(WMMSE)optimiza-
In heterogeneous networks, the authors of [85] proposed a multi- tion algorithm [90], which achieves 90% or higher efficiency.
objective fully distributed strategy based on RL for self-configuration The WMMSE is used in interference management and requires
and optimization in LTE small cells. The proposed algorithm uses a complexmatrixoperationsandbisectionineachcycle[90,91].
jointutilityandstrategyestimationunderQoSconstraintstominimize Further, they used a fully connected NN with channel coeffi-
thereceivedintra-andinter-tierinterferenceforfemtocells(FCs)and cientsattheinputlayer,multiplehiddenlayers,andanoutput
reduceinter-tierinterferencefromFCstoeNBs.Theiralgorithmutilizes layer. The system output is the optimal allocated power value.
RLtechniquestosimplifytheirproblemformulationcomparedtoworks Asaresult,theiralgorithmcanbeadaptedforpowerallocation
whereglobalknowledgeandcompleteCSIareunavailable.Hence,we in wireless networks and utilized as centralized knowledge to
can utilize the RL ability to gather information from the interaction obtainefficientpowervaluesandmitigateinterference.Having
betweenBSsandusers.Theyidentifiedtwosequentiallearninglevels. theknowledgeoftheDNNattheKPlayerempowersthesystem
During the first phase of learning, available spectrum resources were tooperateatitsbestandperformoptimizationsimultaneously.
15S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Table3
Knowledge-basedstrategiesforspectrummanagement.
Article Knowledgeobjective Architecture MLalgorithm Deliverable Conclusion
[79] Utilizingoptimal Centralized Q-learning Self-tuningspectrum Handleshighcomputational
valuesofQ-tablefor allocation,near-optimal complexity,however
similarCRNs solutionandimproving performanceishighly
networkcapacity dependentonthecontrol
parameters
[80] Providingageneral Distributed Deepreinforcement Betterchannelthroughput Offlinelearningandonline
real-worldsolution learning comparedtoslottedAloha real-timespectrumaccess,
forspectrumaccess andoptimalspectrum decreasingroutingoverhead
usingatrained allocation butsubjectedtotime
multi-userDQN constraintformobileusers
[81] Intelligentuser Hybrid Distributed Maximizingtheuser’sQoE Efficientlysharethespectrum
offloadingand Q-learning betweenBSstooffloadusers
self-organizing butchallengesofusermobility
spectrumallocation havenotbeenstudiedyet
[82] Self-adaptationof Distributed Distributed AchievingNE Maximizingtransmission
SUsbasedon Q-learning efficiencywhilecoordinating
trainedQ-learning interferenceandsuitablefor
algorithm 5Gcommunicationsbut
includeredundantinformation
[83] Efficientchannel Hybrid Multi-armedBandit Enhancingspectrum Thechannelallocationpolicy
reuseforSUsonce techniques utilizationwith hasfewerregretsthanother
theoptimalpolicy temporal–spatialspectrum policies,butitworkswork
islearned reuse staticnetworks
[84] Usingthebuilt-in Distributed Jointutilityand optimizingspectral D2Dpairscanself-optimize
strategyprofilefor strategyestimation efficiency theirmodeselectionand
intelligent basedlearning resourceallocation,although
communicationby itistimeconsuming
usingmode
selection(referred
toasselectingD2D
orC-RANsdata
transmission)and
resourceallocation
ofD2Dpairs
[85] Autonomously Distributedor Jointutilityand Minimizingthe Reduceswasteofmemoryand
identifyingand Hybrid strategyestimation intra/inter-tierinterference theunnecessaryinformation
optimizingspectrum basedlearning andincreasingthe
usageinfemtocells throughput
usingthelearning
strategy
[86] Self-organizing Distributedor Multi-agent Loadbalancingand Choosingtheoptimal
frameworkto Hybrid reinforcement efficientspectrum resourcesbySBSgiven
optimizeresource learningbasedon allocation minimuminformationabout
allocationinboth echostatenetworks usersandnetwork
uplinkanddownlink
LTEnetworks
(ii) Knowledge derived from reinforcement learning: Research in [92] algorithm and utilize the information to optimize power when
introduced a deep Q-learning algorithm for dynamic power al- thenetworkexperiencesabruptchanges.
locationbasedoncollectedchannelstateinformation(CSI)and Forheterogeneousnetworks,theauthorsof[95]proposedade-
QoS.Theirproposeddistributedalgorithmisbasedonthemodel centralizedsolutionforpowermanagementandcellassociation
described in [93], which does not rely on the network size, using RL techniques. They have focused on inter-cell interfer-
and it uses a robust technique for the dynamic changes of the encecoordination(ICIC)usingbothtime-domainandfrequency-
domain, where macro-cells and pico-cells autonomously learn
network.Theyconsideredasinglefrequencybandfortransmis-
to optimize their transmission power. In the time domain, the
sion with synchronized time slots. A classical power allocation
learning agent on pico-BS (PBS) intelligently self-organizes the
method is utilized in the initial stage of the network. Then,
cellrangetoeffectivelyoffloadtrafficfromthemacro-BS(MBS).
an RL agent interacts with the environment and learns by ob-
The action performed by the two agents on both BSs is range
serving the rewards by trial and error over time [59,94]. To
expansionandpoweradjustmentsoneachresourceblock,where
optimizethesystemandmitigatetheproblemswithQ-learning,
PBS performs range expansion and power adjustment by MBS.
a deep Q-network (DQN) is used to estimate the Q-function.
The future state of each agent depends on the SINR condition
Theiralgorithmshowedafastandsuboptimalpower-allocation
ofeachUEinthenetwork,whilethereceivedcostisthetarget
techniqueforvariousdynamicwirelessnetworks.Thiswillhave
value of the SINR to serve each UE to meet the total transmit
amassiveopportunityinthefutureforheterogeneousnetworks power constraint. In each iteration of learning, PBS chooses
to be implemented and used as prior knowledge and facilitate an action resulting in the smallest Q-value, and based on this,
theuserssuchthatoptimumpowerisallocatedtoalltheusers MBS chooses its action. In the frequency-domain scenario, the
quickly and efficiently. This method is more reliable than the actionofQ-learningdifferedfromthetimedomain.Itusessingle
other methods because of its response to dynamic changes in andmulti-flowcarrieraggregationinwhichasingleUEcanbe
thenetwork.Adistributedknowledgeplancanbenefitfromthis servedsimultaneouslybydifferentBSsoverdifferenttiers/layers
16S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
(with two different carrier frequencies). Therefore, using Q- a joint utility and strategy estimation algorithm is proposed to
learning will enable PBS and MBS to self-optimize system per- help the SBS reach the desired equilibrium network operating
formance using ICIC. Moreover, a fully automated multi-agent point. In each iteration, the femto-BS selects an action based
Q-learningtechniquewasdevelopedtofacilitateheterogeneous on its current strategy and receives a reward representing the
cellular networks and to model the channel and power levels datarate.TherewardofthealgorithmensuresthattheQoSof
of D2D pairs [96]. Each pair attempts to maximize the value
themacro-BSusersissatisfied.Theself-organizingalgorithmfor
obtained by the difference between the throughput and power
interferencemanagementisfullydecentralized,whichsuggests
consumptioncost,whichisachievedviathedefinedSINRcon-
adistributedKDNarchitecture.
straint. The proposed model is formulated using a stochastic
non-cooperative game, where each pair of devices becomes a
learning agent to learn the best policy from locally observed
information.Theirsimulationresultsshowedanacceptablecon- 6.1.3. Quality-of-Service
vergencerateandnear-optimalperformancewithafewlearning Interestintheapplicationofwirelessnetworksisincreasingdaily.
iterations. The study proposed in [95] suggests a distributed
Hence, the future of wireless technology requires better and more
policyforKDNtoincorporateself-healing,self-optimizing,and
reliablecommunication.ImprovingQoSwithcomplexandcolossaldata
self-configuration of the network. Similarly, in [96] users act
traffic has always been a challenging research problem. As a result,
selfishlytochoosethewirelesschannelandpowerleveltomax-
having prior knowledge to enhance the QoS based on ML algorithms
imize their throughput, which in fact represents a distributed
is crucial to ensure scalability. In this section, recent approaches for
mannerfortheknowledgeplane.However,theinformationcan
optimizing QoS based on supervised and reinforcement learning are
beusedatthecentralizedcontrollertomakeoptimaldecisions
when congestion in the network is high. Hence, both the dis- explained.Table5summarizesthestudiessurveyedinthissection.
tributedandhybridarchitecturesoftheKDNaresuitableforthis
(i) Knowledgederivedfromsupervisedlearning:In[100],anSL-based
study.
QoS assurance architecture was introduced for 5G networks.
In [97], the authors integrated two DRL techniques for power
Their algorithm uses past QoS information and learns the net-
controlbetweenprimaryusers(PUs),SUs,andwirelesssensors.
workenvironmentanddynamicchanges.TheQoSpredictionin
Their work is based on an asynchronous variant of the actor–
criticlearningalgorithm,whereanA3C-basedpowerallocation thisstudyusesadecisiontreestrategytoestimatethefutureQoS
method and distributed proximal policy optimization (DPPO)- ofthenetwork.Theproposedmodelconsistsofalayercalledthe
basedpowercontrolareutilized.Thesetwomethodsarebased historyQoSdatarepositorythatcollectsalltheinformationfor
on the actor–critic learning mechanism for optimizing power training.Theinformationcollectioncomesfromtwoparts:QoS
control policies and making spectrum sharing more accurate. data collection and QoS data preprocessing. Two methods are
The aim is to model the information interaction between users usedfordatacollection:passiveandactive,enablingintelligent
andwirelesssensorstolearnthesimultaneouspowerallocation decision-makingandquickQoSoptimizationacrossawiderange
scheme and optimize power consumption. In their algorithm, of applications. The rest of the system consists of modeling,
first,eachSUgathersinformationfromacentralizedcontroller,
training, QoS anomaly detection, and prediction. Based on the
and based on the experiences of other SUs, it performs power
output of the anomaly detection and prediction, the system
controlstrategiesandsimultaneouspowercontrolmanagement
determines the QoS policies. Consequently, using trained SL to
policies at the controller. PUs cannot obtain power allocation
improvetheQoSisbeneficial,andthenetworkcanleveragethe
policies using other PUs. They only adjust their transmission
acquired knowledge produced by the ML to make appropriate
powerbasedonapower-controlscheme.Finally,thesimulation
decisionsandpredictions.Usinganextract-transform-load(ETL)
results indicate that the proposed power control scheme per-
forms better than the DQN-based power allocation in terms of allows us to collect QoS data from heterogeneous networks
power efficiency, spectrum sharing, and network convergence. and turn them into understandable and easy to comprehend
To allow spectrum sharing, the authors of [98] proposed an structures. Therefore, it is vital to have extensive knowledge
optimization-based algorithm for power management at small aboutnetworkbehaviorandimplementanalgorithmtochange
BSs (SBS) with a Q-learning method to reduce the interference based on the collected data. However, the drawback of this
ofeachRB.Initially,powerisrandomlyallocatedbySBS,based approachistheamountofdatastoredinthesystemrepository.
ontheassumptionthattheSBSisconcernedaboutmaximizing ThealgorithmissuitableforcentralizedKDN,whereinformation
its expected data rate in the long term, Q-learning is used to regardingtheQoSisavailableforautomaticanomalymitigation
find the optimal power for SBS. The state of each SBS is a
andactionsuggestions.
binaryvaluethatindicateswhethertheQoShasbeenviolated,
(ii) Knowledgederivedfromreinforcementlearning:In[101],auniver-
while the action of the learning algorithm is the selection of
sal deep neural model (DNM) for predicting multiple-attribute
the optimal power level. The system reward is represented as
QoSispresented.Twolossfunctionsareusedtomakeaccurate
the instantaneous rate of the SBS. Simulation results show the
QoS predictions: the least absolute deviations and least square
ability of Q-learning to increase the long-term expected data
errors. During the training, gradient descent was used to de-
rateofSBSs.Thecentralizedpowercontrolmechanismin[97]
termine the optimal learning parameters. The predicted QoS
represents a centralized KDN, where the latest power control
strategies are updated. The power allocation scheme in [98] values are the knowledge extracted from this algorithm. After
reliedonlyonlocalinformationattheSBSs.Localdataarenot thetrainingprocedure,theirmethodwascomparedtothemean
sharedwithintheSBSs.Hence,thealgorithmcanbeappliedto absolute error (MAE) and root mean square error (RMSE) for
thedistributedarchitectureoftheKDN. predictionaccuracy.Theproposedtechniqueachievesahigher
In addition, a research study in [99] utilized the RL technique predictionaccuracycomparedtothetwomethods.Theirmethod
to self-organize the transmission power in femto-BS, pico-BS, canbeusedinacentralizedKDNforafastuser’sQoSprediction,
andmicro-BS.TheirgoalistomitigateinterferenceinSCNsand where DNM is deployed in the KP to process information and
increase the spectral efficiency. Here, the interaction between generateusefulknowledgeintermsofQoSprediction.
SBSandmacro-BSismodeledasanon-cooperativegame,where
17S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Table4
Knowledge-basedstrategiesforpowermanagement.
Article Knowledgeobjective Architecture MLalgorithm Deliverable Conclusion
[89] Real-timepower Centralized Supervisedlearning Powercontroland Decreasingthecomputational
allocation withDNN interferencemanagement costbutcannotbeutilizedfor
directionalantennas
[92] Adaptabletolarge Distributed DeepQ-learning Suboptimalpower Robusttounpredictable
networkswith allocationwithfaster changesofthewireless
real-worldscenarios convergencecomparedto mediumaswellas
WMMSEandFP delayed/incompleteCSI,
althoughitlacksglobal
knowledgethatmightdegrade
systemperformance
[95] Smartlyoffload Distributed Reinforcement Significantimprovementin Jointpowerallocationand
trafficand learning throughput cellassociationbyachieving
autonomous targetSINRforeachUEbut
optimizationofcell somebackhaulconstraints
rangeexpansion
(CRE)in
heterogeneous
networks
[96] Intelligentjoint Distributedor Multi-agent Reducingthepower Near-optimalandfast
selectionofpower hybrid Q-learning consumptionand convergenceforD2Dpairs,
levelandspectrum maximizingthroughput althoughitdoesnotsupport
channelbyD2D multi-hopD2D
usersinamulti-cell
network
[97] Simultaneouspower Centralized Actor–criticbased Efficientpower GuaranteesQoSbutdoesnot
allocationin learningwithDNN managementwithless involvemobility
wirelesssensor frequentupdates
networks
[98] TrainedQfunction Distributed Distributed Maximizethedatarateof Optimizationofpower
iscapableof Q-learning SBSswhilekeeping strategiesformaximizingthe
adjustingtheSBS acceptableQoS longtermdatarate
transmissionpower
[99] Self-organization Distributed Jointutilityand AchievingNEwithless Highspectralefficiencywhen
andoptimizationof strategyestimation overhead utilityfunctionisthenetwork
throughputbythe basedlearning performanceofFBSs,butthe
femtocelluser networkisstaticduringthe
equipment(FUE) learningprocess
underQoS
constraint
Table5
Knowledge-basedstrategiesforQoS.
Article Knowledgeobjective Architecture MLalgorithm Deliverable Conclusion
[100] AutomaticQoS Centralized Decisiontree reliableQoS AnewarchitectureforQoS
predictionfor predictionandreactionto
correctionand dynamicchangesofnetwork
suggestionfor5G
networks
[101] EfficientQoS Centralized deepneuralnetwork HighQoSprediction Proposedalgorithmhasa
predictionstrategy accuracy quickresponse-time,which
crucialforautonomous
systems
6.1.4. Basestationswitching Knowledge derived from reinforcement learning: The authors of
One significant difference between 5G and 4G is the network ar- [103] proposed a Q-learning-based algorithm for heterogeneous net-
chitecture and deployment of a large number of SBSs. Because of workstoreducetheoverallenergyconsumptionofSBSs.Users’infor-
mmWave signals in 5G cellular networks, BSs need to be closer to mation is utilized with a heuristic algorithm for the implementation
userstoreducethepropagationlossandimprovethechannelcapacity. information case (HAIIC) with an offline solution to reduce energy
However, deploying a large number of SBSs comes at a price and a consumption. In this work, the on/off switching of SBSs is discussed
significant increase in the total energy consumption of the wireless bygatheringcompleteandincompleteinformation,whichcorrespond
network.OneofthepromisingsolutionsisBSon/offswitching,which to the future and current information, respectively. With complete
savesapproximately36millionkWhperyear[102].Considerableeffort information, the critical sections of a cell are defined. Based on an
has been dedicated to finding the best strategy for on/off switching offline approach, the cumulative energy consumption of the SBS is
mechanismsin5Gwirelessnetworks.Amongthem,MLalgorithmshave obtained,andthebestpolicyisattained.Forincompleteinformation,
attracted attention for their self-optimization and self-management the HAIIC was used to categorize the on/off switching policy of the
abilities. The extracted knowledge from a trained ML can be used in BSs. The HAIIC uses an upper-bound threshold based on the energy
acentralizedKDNarchitecturetomanagetheentirenetworkBSon/off consumptionratio(ECR).ThelearningalgorithmdefinestheSBSon/off
switching.Table6summarizesthestudiessurveyedinthissection. switchingoperationasanaction.Thestatedependsonthenumberof
18S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
active users and SBS. Finally, the reward of the learning algorithm is (i) Knowledgederivedfromsupervisedlearning:Toconstructestima-
achievedthroughaswitchingactioninanyparticularstate.Thereward tionmethodstoidentifythepopularityofcontentincellularnet-
of the algorithm is entitled to energy consumption and transmission works,anELMneuralnetworkisusedtoimprovetheQoEand
gainconstraints.Theprocedureisiterative,andthecalculatedreward reduce the network traffic [110]. The proposed method adapts
updates the Q-value until it converges. From the simulation results, mixed-integerlinearprogrammingforcontentreplacement.The
it is concluded that the proposed HAIIC algorithm minimizes energy algorithmusesaperturbationstochasticapproximationtoselect
consumption. Similarly, studies were conducted, such as the work the physical cache size simultaneously and performs efficient
in [104], which used actor–critic learning to control the on/off BS cache deployment. In their method, the stochastic approxima-
switching.TheRLtechniquedefinestheBSswitchingoperationasthe tion reduces the number of neurons for ELM while ensuring
actionandtheamountoftrafficloadonthecontrollerasthestate.The an accurate prediction of future content popularity. The pro-
controller decides an action based on the traffic load in a stochastic posed method utilizes real-world data while making efficient
manner to minimize the overall energy usage. The authors of [103] cachedecisionscomparedtothemostpopularcachedeployment
used the coverage of the BS to switch off the SBSs in their vicinity, schemes,suchasK-nearestneighbor[123]andregression[124].
whichsuggestsacentralizedKDNarchitectureatthemaincontroller. Theproposedcachingschemein[110]considerscontentpopu-
Similarly, in [104], the overlap between the coverage areas of BSs larity,cachesize,networktopology,andlinkcapacitytoperform
is considered to turn on/off a BS, which also suggests a centralized efficientcontentcachingandcachedeployment.Thealgorithm
architectureofKDN. has a cache manager to communicate with all BSs, making it
Althoughthestudiesmentionedaboveusedon/offproceduresand suitableforcentralizedKDN.
significantlydecreasedpowerconsumption,theylacktheon/offstate The authors of [111] proposed a joint optimization of user
transitionbetweenBSs.Tothisend,theauthorsof[105]includedthe association and content placement in an unmanned aerial ve-
transition overhead in the cost function of the DRL-based framework hicle (UAV) network. The goal of the optimization algorithm
for downlink scenarios in cloud radio access networks. The state in
is to maximize the QoE of the user while minimizing the total
DRL consists of two components: the on/off state of the BS, which
transmit power of the UAVs. To predict the users’ mobility
is a binary value (0 for off, 1 for on), and users’ data rate demands.
patternsandcontentrequestdistribution,ESNisutilizedtolearn
The action is taken based on the state of the iteration, which leads
the distribution from the provided training data (user traffic
to the activation of a BS. The reward is calculated based on power
data).Morespecifically,thedataarehuman-centricinformation,
consumptionanduserdemandconstraints.Simulationresultsindicate
such as gender, users’ visited locations, and requested content.
that the proposed advanced technique can be adapted to dynamic
The information is fed as a vector to the ESN input, where
environmentsandcanprovidepowerconsumptionoptimizationwhile
theoutputoftheESNobtainsthecontentrequestprobabilities.
satisfyinguserdemands.Moreover,thestudyin[106]consideredthe
The conceptor-based ESN model enables C-RANs to separate
on/off transition state, where it uses the Q-learning method and a
user behaviors into independent patterns, which increases the
novel dual-threshold-based sleep-mode control for SBSs. The use of a
prediction accuracy of cache management and power control
dual threshold for controlling the BS sleep mode minimizes energy
systems.Asimilarstudywasconductedin[112]topredictthe
consumptionandavoidsfrequentBStransitions.Thereisanupperuser
mobilitypatternandcontentrequestdistributionofeachuserin
and a lower user threshold, which defines the action of the learning
C-RANs.Theobjectiveistominimizethedelayandtrafficinthe
algorithm.ThestateofeachSBSisthenumberofusersundercoverage.
networkwhilecachingthemostsuitablecontent.Thealgorithm
When the number of users in the cell passes the upper threshold,
firstusesanESN-basedschemetoutilizetheBBUstolearnthe
the small cell is switched on, and once the number of users becomes
user’smobilitypatternandcontentrequest.Then,asublinearap-
lessthanthelowerthreshold,thesmallcellisswitchedoff.Basedon
proachenablestheBBUstodeterminewhichcontentstocache.
the simulation, the algorithm achieves near-optimal performance by
The conducted simulation was compared with random caching
reducingtheenergyconsumptionwithaminimumBSon/offtransition
with clustering and random caching without clustering, and it
state.
showedthatthesumeffectivecapacityreachedupto27.8%and
Moreover, a BS active/sleep scheduling scheme is proposed for k-
30.7%, respectively. In [111] the entire network is connected
tierheterogeneousnetworks,guaranteeingcoverage,QoS,andthrough-
tothecloud’spoolforinformationextraction,whichrepresents
put[107].TheyusedafuzzyQ-learningmethodtoputtheBSinsleep,
knowledgefortheentirenetworkforcentralizedcachemanage-
while there was no user to serve or activate a BS once the user was
ment.Theapproachin[112]forcontentrequestpredictionand
detected in the cell. To save energy, the algorithm uses an optimal
mobility pattern recognition is used via centralized BBUs and
sensing probability strategy for user detection. An SBS is in the sleep
cloud heads, representing a novel approach for the centralized
modestatewhenthereisnoactiveflow,anditrandomlyactivatesto
architecture of KDN to predict the content of mobile users in
scan the coverage area for possible users based on the tuned output
cellularnetworks.
sensing probability action. It is observed that the proposed algorithm
can efficiently handle user population fluctuations and increase the Theauthorsof[113]usedthreedifferentmethodstominimize
energyefficiency.Allthree[105–107]proposedschemescanbeused the backhaul load by predicting the cache content from raw
in a centralized architecture of KDN to provide an energy-efficient video data. First, a 3D CNN is used for feature extraction, in
algorithmtoreduceenergyconsumption. which a single frame of the video is analyzed alternatively.
Second, the SVM algorithm is utilized for generating represen-
6.1.5. Cachemanagement tation vectors of videos, and third, a regression model predicts
AspredictedbyCisco[108],wirelessnetworks,especiallycellular the video popularity content. After obtaining the popularity of
networks,willproduceabout30.6exabytesofdatatrafficeachmonth. videos, the optimal segment of each video is cached by the
This is due to the proliferation of smart devices and the appear- BS to minimize the backhaul traffic. The proposed algorithm
ance of high-tech applications, such as ubiquitous social networking, predicts the popularity of a new video without any statistical
augmentedreality,andhigh-definitionlivestreaming.Facedwithun- information. Here, the BS is connected to the core network,
precedented data traffic, intelligent learning-based caching strategies where the core network is connected centrally to the content
have been introduced to alleviate backhaul traffic and shorten la- server,whichrepresentsacentralizedcachestrategy.
tency [109]. In this section, we investigate ML algorithms to assist (ii) Knowledge derived from reinforcement learning: To mitigate the
in creating knowledge in the KDN paradigm for cache management. challenges of content caching under spatio-temporal traffic de-
Table7summarizesthestudiessurveyedinthissection. mands,theauthorsof[114]introducedadecentralizedcaching
19S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Table6
Knowledge-basedstrategiesforBSswitching.
Article Knowledgeobjective Architecture MLalgorithm Deliverable Conclusion
[103] Offlinetrained Centralized Q-learning Reducingthecumulative Optimalsmallcellswitch
solutiontominimize energyconsumption policybutstartupenergycost
energyconsumption andusermobilityarenot
inheterogeneous considered
networks
[104] Thetraineddatais Centralized Actorcriticbased improvingtheenergy RobustBSswitchingsolution
utilizedatthe learning efficiency buteliminatedinter-cell
controllertochoose interference
theactiveBSbased
onthetrafficload
inRANs
[105] Dynamicresource Centralized Deepreinforcement Minimizingpower Adaptabletodynamic
allocationincloud learning consumption environmentswhilesatisfying
RANs userdemands
[106] Usingthetrained Centralized Q-learning Minimizingnetworkenergy Effectivemulti-objective
datafor consumptionwhile energyoptimizationbetween
energy-efficientand avoidingfrequentmode BSswitchingandQoS,nouser
QoS-awareinSBSs transitioninBSswitching mobilityisconsidered
[107] Self-organizingthe Centralized fuzzyQ-learning Improvingenergy AthoroughBSswitching
activeorsleep consumptionwhile basedonuseractivity
modeofSBSin maintainingnetwork fluctuations,QoS,channel
heterogeneous capacityandcoveragearea propagation,andinterference
networks
updateschemeamongdifferentsmallcellsbasedonjointutility using a DRL agent. The DRL agent optimizes content delivery
andstrategyestimation.TheSBSscanoptimizethetime-varying and makes dynamic decision making for user selection. The
cachingprobabilitydistributionusingthereceivedinstantaneous simulationresultsindicatethattheproposedcontentplacement
utilityupdate.Theproposedalgorithmiscapableofminimizing andcontentdeliveryapproachesimprovethecachehitratioand
the service delay when serving user requests at the SBS. Sim- reducedeliverydelayandenergyconsumption.Thismethodis
ilarly, Wei et al. focused on distributed caching design at BSs inherentlydistributed,wherenodesfindtheirrequestingcontent
to reduce the traffic load via D2D communications [115]. BSs from nearby users. However, this information can be used in
cancooperateandexchangeinformationregardingtheirlocally a centralized manner to monitor the content exchanged and
missing content from other BSs through the backhaul channel minimizethenetworktrafficontheBS.
tomaketheschememorecost-efficient.AQ-learningalgorithm Owing to the time-varying nature of the wireless channel, the
is utilized to improve the system transmission cost and enable authorsof[117]proposedadeepreinforcementapproachtoop-
D2Ddevicestooffloadtrafficusingcacheutilization.Theaction timizethecache-enabledinterferencealignment.Theyadapteda
ofQ-learningdependsontheadjustmentsofthecachecontents finite-stateMarkovchannel(FSMC)andusedadeepQ-network
takeninaspecificstateforobservation.Theconvergenceofthe todevelopacachingupdatescheme.First,acentralizedsched-
proposedcachereplacementstrategyistestedbythesequential uler collects CSI and cache status information from the users.
stagegamemodel,meaningthatthedecision-makingprocessof Then, a deep Q-network feeds the optimal action for the cur-
eachBSoncacheplacementisacooperativegame(everystate rent instant and stores the agent’s experience of each time
can be considered as a different stage). The simulation results instancetooptimizetheQ-networkparameteraccordingly.Their
have shown superior performance compared to conventional method maximizes the Q-learning reward function based on
strategies,includingtheleastrecentlyused(LRU)strategy[125], existing knowledge and attempts new actions to acquire new
least frequently used (LFU) strategy [126] and randomized re- knowledge. The proposed algorithm significantly improves the
placement strategy [127]. In [114], each SBS optimizes the network performance compared to other studies, in which an
cachepolicyviaadecentralizedcachestrategy,whichrepresents invariantchannelisassumed.Thisisapromisingtechniquetobe
a distributed architecture of the KP for future optimization via usedatKPinacentralizedmanner,whereacontrollercollects
KDN. In [115] the traffic is offloaded from the cellular chan- the CSI from the users and sends information to the deep Q-
nel to the WiFi channel using D2D communication between network to obtain the optimal policy for users. The output of
users,whichprovidesadistributedarchitectureforusersinthe the learning algorithm is the knowledge information used in
networktoexchangedatatraffic. responsetowirelessnetworkswithsimilarbehavior.
Cache-enabled D2D communication technology is expected to Theauthorsof[118]utilizedtheDRLalgorithmwiththeWolper-
lower the requested content and congestion at the BS by en- tinger [128] architecture for content caching at the BS. The
ablingdevicestorequestcontentfromnearbyusers.Theauthors objective of the algorithm is to maximize the long-term cache
of [116] focused on joint content delivery policy and cache hitratewithnoinformationaboutthecontentpopularitydistri-
content placement. Cache content placement determines the bution.TheinputoftheDRLsystemistherequestedfrequency
amountoftrafficunloadedfromtheBStotheD2D.Thisstudy of files and the current file request, and the action of the
uses RNN methods, specifically ESN and long short-term mem- systemiswhethertocachetherequestedcontentattheBS.The
ory(LSTM),topredicttheusers’mobilitypatternsandcontent proposedtechniqueiscomparedwithdifferenttraditionalcache
popularity.Therefore,thealgorithmrealizeswheretocacheand update schemes, namely LRU and LFU [129]. The simulation
which content to cache. Once the user’s local cache content results prove that the algorithm outperforms both schemes in
cannot satisfy the content request of the user, the user will terms of short-term and long-term cache hit rates. In [119],
establish a D2D link with one of the neighboring users. The the authors proposed a DRL approach to enable dynamic or-
process of selecting the most appropriate user was performed chestration of caching resources, networking, and computing
20S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Table7
Knowledge-basedstrategiesforcachemanagement.
Article Knowledgeobjective Architecture MLalgorithm Deliverable Conclusion
[110] Adaptivecaching Centralized Extremelearning Reducesthenetwork Theproposedscheme
schemeforcellular machine trafficandincreasesthe outperformsindustrystandard
networks users’QoE cachingschemes
[111] Optimal Centralized Echostatenetworks Maximizesusers’QoEand Theproposedalgorithm
cache-enabled minimizesthetotal locatestheUAVsandpredicts
methodforUAVs transmissionpower thecontenttocacheatUAV
[112] Proactivecache Centralized Echostatenetworks Maximizesthesum Theproposedmethodalso
approachin effectivecapacity decreasesthedelayandtraffic
cloud-basedradio inthenetwork
accessnetworks
[113] Applying Centralized 3DCNN,support Improvesthebackhaul Theproposedschemeis
intelligence-based vectormachineand load content-awareand
content-awarein regressionmodel cost-effective
cellularnetworks
[114] Optimizationand Distributed Jointutilityand Minimizestheservice Theproposedschemeshows
continuousupdate strategyestimation delay 15%and40%gaincompared
ofcachingpolicies tootherbaselines
indecentralized
mannerinsmallcell
networks
[115] Dynamic Distributed Q-learning Minimizesthetransmission Thealgorithmiscapableof
improvementof cost D2Doffloadingandcache
cacheefficiencyin replacement
cellularnetworks
[116] Intelligentjoint Distributedor Deepreinforcement Improvesthecachehit Theproposedstrategiesand
contentplacement hybrid learningand ratio approachescanefficiently
andcontentdelivery recurrentneural reducetheenergy
usingD2D network consumptionanddelivery
communication delay
[117] Intelligentand Centralized Deepreinforcement Improvingenergy Savingthelimitedbackhaul
realistic learning consumptionandthe capacityusingcache-enabled
cache-enabledand network’ssumrate opportunisticinterference
interference alignment
alignmentfornext
generationwireless
networks
[118] Contentcatching Centralized Deepreinforcement Maximizesbothlong-term Reducingthecomputational
withasingleBS learning andshort-termcachehit complexity,butitonly
scenarios rate incorporatesoneBS
[119] Intelligentjoint Centralized Deepreinforcement Improvesthetrafficcontrol Jointoptimizationofresources
optimizationof learning andnetworkefficiency andcachecontent
networking,
computingand
cachingresourcesin
thenextgeneration
vehicularnetworks
[120] Knowledgetransfer Centralized Transferlearning Increasingtheusers’QoE Optimalcachestrategyat
fromD2D andimprovingbackhaul smallcellsforestimating
interactionsto capacity contentpopularity,trafficload
improvecontent andbackhaulcapacity
popularitymatrixin
thetargetdomain
[121] Sharingprior Centralized Transferlearning Maximizescache-hitratio Improvesthepredictiontask
knowledgefrom andcachingperformance
D2Dcommunication
[122] Efficientcaching Centralized Transferlearning Reducesthetrainingtime Theproposedschemecan
mechanismfor efficientlyestimatethe
heterogeneous popularityprofile
networks
resourcesinvehicularnetworks.TheDRLagentassignsvehicles contentattheBSlocalstorage.Thismethodsuitsthecentralized
to BSs and decides whether to cache the requested content by architectureoftheKDNtoserveusersdirectlywithaminimum
thevehicleattheBS.Theproposedalgorithmjointlyoptimizes delay. A more sophisticated strategy was adopted in [119] to
the problems associated with resource allocation and caching. perform caching, computing, and networking in a systematic,
Simulation results with various system parameters show that centralized manner using the SDN controller, which is a close
the DRL system performs much better than existing methods, research study to initiate knowledge to accomplish different
suchasedgecaching,mobileedgecomputing(MEC)offloading, networkingtasks.
andvirtualization.Basedontherequestedcontentin[118]the (iii) Knowledge derived from transfer learning: In [120], contextual
DRL agent acts as a controller to decide whether to store the information from D2D interaction, including users’ social ties
21S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
andcontentviewinghistory,isobservedtoexecuteaTLateach equilibrium that approximates the desired proper mixed Nash equi-
SBSinthenetwork.Theirmethodimprovesbackhauloffloading librium (PMNE). In [134], the authors proposed adaptive cell range
basedonthepopularityofthecontent.Thisinformationcomes extension(CRE)andbackhaulmanagementbasedonRLtechniquesto
from source domain sharing and accessing D2D data between set the CRE offset values autonomously. The CRE offset value affects
users in a social community. The information is later used as both cell selection and handover, where this information is available
prior knowledge for a content popularity matrix for estimation to all concerned cells on the access and backhaul interface. In the
in the target domain. Moreover, they utilize the traffic load proposed algorithm, the state value of each small cell is obtained via
and backhaul capacity as feedback to the system for further backhaulcapacityandwhetheritisviolated,andtheactionisthecell
improvements. From the simulation results, it is clear that the expansionorCREbiasofacellconsideringwhetherbackhaulcapacity
proposed TL cache procedure enables wireless systems to have is available or not. To maximize the total backhaul capacity, a cost
priorknowledgeinsteadofstartingfromscratchandalsodeals function is defined for each small cell with different constraints to
with data sparsity. Generally, TL acts as a knowledge plane satisfythecapacity.Moreover,thecostfunctionisoptimizedusingQ-
and provides essential information to networks with similar learningviaaniterativeapproach.Simulationresultsdemonstratethe
behavior. Using caching optimization using TL is a significant improvement of network backhaul throughput in macrocells and the
step toward KDN, and one of the significant breakthroughs in QoE of users. Xu et al. [135] proposed a distributed load balancing
this method is the maximization of QoE. Similar work was scheme based on a Q-learning algorithm to improve the backhaul re-
conducted in [121] to extract knowledge from the interaction sourceutilizationinheterogeneousnetworks.Thebackhaulutilization
between users by accessing, sharing, and recommending files. is quantified to different levels that represent the state of the system,
Instead of learning from scratch, the information obtained via and each BS determines the bias value as an action. Then, based on
D2D communication among users is used for caching content theacquiredrewardobtainedfromtheweightdifferencebetweenthe
at the network edge. The proposed TL approach increases the outageprobabilityandthebackhaulcapacity,thebiasvalueisupdated.
cache-hit ratio and outperforms classical collaborative filtering Therefore, Q-learning optimizes the bias value selection strategy to
(CF)methods[130].Bothstudiesprovidecentralizedknowledge balancesystem-centricanduser-centricperformance.Theresultsfrom
forthenetworktoreducebackhaultrafficandimprovecontent thenumericalanalysisshowthatthisalgorithmiscapableofefficient
management. utilizationofbackhaulresources,whichguaranteesloadbalancingand
In heterogeneous networks, SBSs are assumed to have high improvement in QoS for each user. Solving backhaul constraints in
storage capabilities to cache popular files, such that the user futurewirelessnetworksisanimportantfactorforcachemanagement
can capture the file in a faster and more efficient manner. In andloadbalancing.Themajorityoftheresearchworks,andthethree
particular,SBSsmustdistinguishthepopularityoffilesandesti- backhaul management studies investigated here [133–135] can serve
matetheuserdemandforthatfilewithinaspecifictimeinterval. ascentralizedknowledgeforKDNarchitecture.
Theauthorsof[122]proposedaTL-basedapproachtoincrease
theperformanceofestimatingapopularityprofile.Thecentral- 6.2. Networking
ized approach uses prior knowledge to compute and estimate
the popularity of a file based on requests during a predefined With the exponential growth of users and data traffic in the net-
observation period. The estimation was then used to optimize work, networking in wireless communication systems requires more
the catching probability. The proposed approach reduced the advancedsolutions.Inparticular,challengesincludingtheimbalanced
convergencetimeofthetrainingphase.Inthisstudy,centralized distributionoftrafficloadsamongBSsandwirelesschanneldynamics
knowledge is generated based on the popularity profile of the needtobeaddressed.Furthermore,emergingvehicularnetworksand
cachecontent. self-driving vehicles introduce new difficulties that are not addressed
in traditional networking algorithms. To overcome these issues, the
6.1.6. Backhaulmanagement knowledgeacquiredbyMLalgorithmscanassistnetworksinbuilding
Content caching at SBSs requires backhaul management, and be- intelligence and automation. Therefore, new ML studies for routing,
causeoftheheterogeneityofbackhaul,bothwiredandwirelessback- clustering,dataaggregation,anduserassociationswereinvestigated.
haul must work together to handle the massive traffic. Wired links
usefibercables,andwirelessconnectionsarenowdeployingmmWave
6.2.1. Routing
frequencies.Owingtotheheterogeneityofbackhaullinks,themanage-
Userdemandsforhigh-resolutiondatawithenormoussizeshaveled
mentofbackhaulhasattractedsignificantattention.Differentsolutions
tonewRANtechnologies,includingcognitiveradionetworks,C-RANs,
have been proposed to reduce the complexity of backhaul [131,132].
and ultra-dense networks (UDNs). To facilitate effective networking,
However, new studies have concentratedonML for reliable backhaul
routing strategies and policies play an important role. Traditionally,
management.Inthefollowingsection,MLstudiesthatcanbedeployed
networkupgradesrelyonhardwaresolutions,forexample,byimprov-
intheKDNareinvestigated.Table8summarizesthestudiessurveyed
ing the core size or increasing the router size to enhance network
inthissection.
performance. On the other hand, the software development aspect of
Knowledge derived from reinforcement learning: The deployment
trafficmanagementforroutingpolicieshasconsistentlyfailedbecause
oflow-powerandshort-rangeheterogeneousSBSsandtheexponential
ofthevaryingnetworkenvironments.Recently,MLhasmadeamajor
increase in wireless traffic will cause congestion in backhaul for BSs
technologicalbreakthroughwithefficientroutingprotocolstoenhance
to communicate with each other. The authors of [133] designed a
processing packets and throughput performance [136]. Accordingly,
distributed backhaul management model from a game-theoretic per-
we provide a detailed summary of the novel ML techniques-based
spective.TheyutilizedtheRLtechniquetosolvethegamingproblem
routing for improving the knowledge layer of the KDN to create self-
using joint utility and strategy estimation. Each SBS is responsible
configuration and self-optimization. Table 9 summarizes the studies
for predicting files to download without compromising the required
surveyedinthissection.
transmissionrate.Inthisstudy,differentSCNswithseveralcoexisting
backhaulsystemsareconnectedusingwiredlinks,mmWaves,andsub- (i) Knowledge derived from supervised learning: In [137], an SL al-
6 GHz frequency bands that can only support a few files per time gorithm based on a meta-layer was proposed to solve dynamic
slot.Thisworkdeliversabalancebetweendownloadingfilesandpro- real-time routing problems. In this study, a centralized SDN
videsanequalchanceforSBSstoaccessbackhaul.Theself-organizing controller collects node information via the OF protocol. This
nature of the RL algorithm allows SBSs to reach a Boltzmann–Gibbs information is fed to multiple ML modules in the meta-layer,
22S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Table8
Knowledge-basedstrategiesforbackhualmanagement.
Article Knowledgeobjective Architecture MLalgorithm Deliverable Conclusion
[133] EnablingSBSsto Centralized Jointutilityand Minimizingthetraffic Theproposedsolution
autonomously strategyestimation congestioninthebackhaul convergestopropermixed
manageand basedlearning Nashequilibrium(PMNE)(an
optimizethetraffic approximateversionofNE)
in5Gnetworks
[134] Running Centralized Q-learning Backhaulmanagementand Theproposedapproach
self-optimization optimizedcellrange improvesQoEandmitigates
mechanismonsmall extension thebackhaultrafficconflictin
cellsfor macrocell
backhaul-awarecell
rangeextension
[135] Intelligentload Centralized Q-learning Minimizingtheprobability Theproposedscheme
balancingusing oftheuser’soutageand improvestheaverage
backhaulresources increasingthebackhaul throughput
resourceutilization
which consist of heuristic algorithms. After the training pro- MetricMap achieves up to 300% improvement in data delivery
cess, the algorithm can identify the path by satisfying system with no effect on other performance matrices. As indicated in
QoS. Once the controller receives new routing requests, the thestudy,thetrainingphaseismadeatabackendserver,which
trained ML instantly provides heuristic-like results. The system suggests a centralized unit that collects all the information,
performance is compared to the classical max–min ant system trainsamachine,andtheninstructsthenodes.Thismeansthat
(MMAS) [154] which has been proven to be an appropriate acentralizedknowledgeplaneiscreatedinthisstudytoguide
approachforexaminingtheperformanceofroutingframeworks. thenodes.ThereasonforacentralizedKDNisthattheauthors
MMAS is an upgraded version of the ant colony optimization introduce a two-stage route prediction where the first stage
methodtakenfromantrouting[155].Theproposedstudy[137] updates the learning strategy, and the second stage identifies
canbeadaptedtothecentralizedarchitectureoftheKDNforthis the route. The learning strategy requires global information to
particular study. The reason is that the routing framework uti- convergetooptimumperformance.Therefore,acentralizedKDN
lizestheSDNfunctionalitytogatherglobalinformationandthen architecture can provide better information than a distributed
predict a route. Therefore, the proposed protocol is inherently architecture.Moreover,thefirststageofthelearningalgorithm
centralized and suitable for the centralized architecture of O- is an excellent example of deploying a machine learning in
RANnetworks.Theproposedtechniqueenablestheknowledge the knowledge plane. The controller uses the second stage to
plan in the KDN to identify routes that maximize the network prescriberoutingdecisionsforthenetworklayer.
QoS. Sharma et al. [140] proposed a routing protocol for efficient
An autonomous vehicle or self-driving car can communicate routinginopportunisticnetworkscalledMLProph,whichusesa
withothervehicles,roadsideunits,andinfrastructure.Thisca- decisiontreeandNNalgorithmstocomputethenode’ssuccess-
pability is known as vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to- fuldeliveryprobability.Thealgorithmusespastnetworkrouting
infrastructure (V2I) communication to exchange essential in- data to compute the probability of whether the data will be
formation, such as speed, location, environmental conditions, deliveredtothedestinationbytherelaynodes.Theprobability
etc., to nearby vehicles and the controller. Authors of [138] valuehelpstodecideonthenext-hopselection.TheMLmethod
proposed a delay-bounded routing framework for vehicular ad trains itself based on different network characteristics, such as
hoc networks (VANETs). They focused on delivering messages nodedensity,buffercapacity,hopcount,nodeenergy,mobility
with user-defined delay parameters and minimum usage of the rate,andnumberofsuccessfuldeliveries.Here,theNNistrained
radiospectrum.Thedelay-boundedroutingprotocoluseslinear todeterminewhethertheforwardedmessagehasbeendelivered;
regression to predict the traveling distance and available time it can have two outputs p=1 for successful deliveries and p=0
forforwardingamessage.Theiralgorithmhastwoschemes,the otherwise.TheNNistrainediterativelybysettinginitialvalues,
greedyandcentralizedschemes,whicharebothbasedonlinear andsubsequently,itprovidesoptimalpredictionsforsuccessful
regression. The greedy strategy predicts the available time by andunsuccessfuldeliveries.Thesimulationresultsindicatethat
using current sampling data, and the centralized scheme uses the proposed algorithm performs much better than previous
global statistical information to choose the optimal path for works in terms of overhead ratio, average latency, and packet
routing. The simulation results illustrate that the radio usage deliveryratio.TheyalsocomparedthetwoMLmodelsandfound
is greatly reduced. Moreover, the functionality of using both that the NN performs better than the decision tree in terms
greedy and centralized-based techniques establishes a connec- of overhead, delivery probabilities, and packet loss. As much
tionforthehybridarchitectureofKDNtoenabletheinstallation as the algorithm looks more distributed, it needs to be fitted
ofroutingprotocolsinVANETs. to a centralized KDN owing to the next-hop selection strategy.
In [139], the authors combined two SL classifiers; decision The proposed protocol uses the successful data delivery of the
tree learner and rule learner, for routing optimization in a nodes to make routing decisions. In distributed frameworks,
wireless sensor network. They proposed a MetricMap based on nodes might not be able to monitor the whole network and
MintRoute,whichcollectstheroutingprotocoltoobtainthelink buildroutingtablesbecausetheinformationtheycancollectis
quality. MetricMap uses two components, the first component limited.Hence,theproposedprotocolismoresuitabletobeused
updates the features for the learning strategy when a packet inacentralizedframework.Moreover,thisstrategydependson
arrives. The second component controls the link classification variousattributes,suchasthedistancefromthesourcenodeto
with input from the features, and the output values indicate thedestination,currenthopcount,mobilityrate,andenergy,all
the link quality. For their performance measurements, they ofwhichareavailableatacentralizedcontroller.
considered data latency, data delivery rate, and fairness index. To improve the traditional routing strategies and increase the
Fromtheevaluationofthe30sensornodesinthenetwork,the performance of the wireless backbone, the authors of [141]
23S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Table9
Knowledge-basedstrategiesforrouting.
Article Knowledgeobjective Architecture MLalgorithm Deliverable Conclusion
[137] Real-timeroute Centralized Deepneural Improvesnetwork Simpleframeworkand
discoverybythe network performancebyefficient computationallyefficient,but
traineddataset trafficengineering itlackssomenetworkfeatures
includingnodemobility,
backhaultraffic,etc.
[138] Routingstrategycan Hybrid Linearregression Efficientspectrumusage Introducingdelay-bound
beusedforsimilar andhighpacketdelivery routingprotocolwithaccurate
VANETs ratio routepredictionwithhigh
efficiency
[139] Optimizedroute Centralized Decisiontreeand Significantimprovementin Efficientsensor
selectioninwireless rulelearner datadeliveryratio communicationviauserlink
sensornetworks quality
[140] Enablingefficient Centralized Decisiontreeand Decreasingaveragelatency, Highlyefficientrouteselection
routeselection neuralnetworks improvingoverheadand basedonvariousnetwork
packetdeliveryratio parameters
[141] Real-timeupdating Centralized Supervisedlearning Minimizetheaverage Intelligenttrafficcontrol
androuting anddeepCNN delayandimprovespacket
judgmentsin lossratio
heterogeneous
networks
[142] Self-driving Distributed Superviseddeep Bettersignalingoverhead, Capableoflearningcomplex
networksby neuralnetworks delay,andthroughput patternsandfunctionsto
learningtraffic comparedtoOSPF predicttheleastcostpath
controlmechanism
inheterogeneous
networks
[143] Efficientand Centralized Principlecomponent Lowerpacketlossratio Providesa
intelligentroute analysisandneural andacceptablethroughput dimension-reductionvector
decisionsinwireless network andE2Edelay matrixtoreducethealgorithm
mobilenetworks responsetimebutitmustbe
basedonKDN verifiedoverlargernetworks
architecture
[144] Trainedalgorithm Centralized K-meanclustering Lessdroppedpacketsand Simple,efficientrouting
canselectnexthop networkoverhead protocolbutneeds
withaleasttotal improvementinaverage
averagehopcount messagelatencyandshould
andsuccessful involveenergyconsumptionas
deliveryprobability anodefeature
inwirelessnetworks
[145] Optimalroute Centralized Unsupervised Bettertransmissiondelay Theproposedschemeisrobust
selectionand learning-based comparedtoexisting tovaryingmobilityrates
predictioncapability algorithm VANETroutingprotocols
usingglobal
informationfor
VANETs
[146] Smartrouting Centralized Deepreinforcement Mitigatingthenetwork SimultaneousQoEsatisfaction
decisionin learning congestionandload andcrowdmanagement
IoT-basedsmart balancing
cities
[147] Finalizedupdated Distributed Q-learning Extendingthenetwork Acceptablecommunication
routetablecanbe lifetime andcomputationaloverhead,
usedastherouting itcanbeextendedwithmore
policyinwireless nodecharacteristics,suchas
sensornetworks mobilityandtraffic
[148] Identifyingstable Distributed Q-learning Minimizingthe Boostingnetworkscalability
routesincognitive interferencebetweenSUs andfunctionality
radionetworks andPUsandlessfrequent
routediscovery
[149] Routeselectionfor Hybrid Reinforcement ImprovestheQoS Selectingthebestpossible
multi-hopcognitive learning routeintermsofthroughput
radionetworks andpacketdeliveryratio
[150] Efficientroute Distributed Reinforcement Minimizingthe Stableprotocolwhenthe
selectionindense learning interference networksizeincreasesbut
cognitiveradioad mightbedegradedinhigh
hocnetworks mobilityscenarios
[151] Intelligent Distributed Q-learning Energyefficient, Reliable,stableandextended
QoS-awareroute QoS-awareandmobility lifetimenetwork
selection tolerance
(continuedonnextpage)
24S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Table9(continued).
Article Knowledgeobjective Architecture MLalgorithm Deliverable Conclusion
[152] Intelligenttraffic Centralizedand Deepreinforcement Minimizingtheoverhead Theproposedparadigm
routingcontrolwith hybrid learning combinesdistributedand
KDNapproachfor centralizedintelligenceto
nextgenerationof achievehighestperformance
wirelessnetworks
[153] Automatic Centralized, Deepreinforcement Trafficengineering Nearoptimalsolutionafter
adaptationbasedon distributed, leaning onesingletrainingstep
thetraffic orhybrid
conditionsviaKDN
paradigm
proposedanintelligentroutingschemeusingadeepCNN.Their used toreducethe dimension of thevectormatrix by applying
method learns from the previous experience based on conges- it to the original adjacency matrix of the network topology.
tion,andusesthisinformationtotrainatwo-phaseprocedure, Based on the normalization, they designed a queue-utilization
namelycoldstartperiodandintelligentrunningperiod.Thecold routingalgorithmforroutingprediction.Moreover,routerswere
start period is the initialization of the training set, where the continuouslyupdatedbasedonneighbors’informationtoselect
algorithmonlydefinesaroutewithaminimumhoppath.After therouterswithmoreresources.Inthisvein,theyexploredthe
this period, the algorithm switches to the intelligent running current SDN architecture and represented an ML algorithm to
period,whereitperformsreal-timeupdatingandroutingjudg- predict routes. Nodes can also use the proposed algorithm to
ments.Moreimportantly,aCNNisconstructedforeachrouting reduce the unnecessary information in the routing table and
decision,whichtakesthecollectedinformationbasedontraffic decrease the contention on the nodes in a distributed manner.
patterns from routers, including traffic generation rate, to pre- However, this framework represents a centralized KDN, where
dictwhethertheselectedroutingstrategycancausecongestion thecontrollercollectstheinformationfromthedataplaneand
in the network. This process is periodically updated until it is thenusesMLtechniquestoobtainknowledgetoidentifyaneffi-
predictedthatthechosenroutewillcausenocongestion.Simu- cientroute.Overall,therepresentationofSDNwithknowledge
lationresultsprovethattheproposedalgorithmperformsmuch suggestsacentralizedKDN.
betterintermsofE2Edelayandpacketlossratiocomparedto Owingtothefixednetworkarchitectureofsomeroutingproto-
conventional routing strategies, where there is no intelligence. colsandthemassivevolumeofdatatrafficexchangedbetween
The proposed method is a real-time intelligent network traffic devices,theauthorsof[144]introducedacontext-awarerouting
control method that can be adopted in a centralized KDN. A protocol named KROp. This protocol uses several network fea-
centralizedKDNcancollecttrafficcongestioninformationfrom turestomakeroutingdecisionsbasedonthenetworkconditions.
thenetworkandtunethedeepCNNtoconvergetooptimumper- KROpusestheK-meanclusteringalgorithmandexploitsnetwork
formancewithinthetimeframethreshold.Itisnotrecommended featurestoselectthebestnexthop.Thisalgorithmisbasedon
to use the distributed knowledge plane due to the algorithm’s the knowledge acquired from the node’s behavior to identify a
real-timeupdates,whichrequirethemaximumamountofdata cluster of the best forwarders. The numerical results show su-
from a large number of nodes to make appropriate routing periorperformanceinKROpintermsofdroppedpackets,over-
decisions. head,andaveragehopcountcomparedtootherroutingstrate-
In[142],asupervisedDNNwasproposedforroutingoptimiza- gies,suchashistory-basedpredictionrouting(HBPR)[156],and
tion in heterogeneous networks to predict the path from the probabilistic routing protocol using the history of encounters
sourcetothedestinationnode.Eachrouterinthenetworkusesa and transitivity (PRoPHET) [157]. The proposed protocol uses
DNNtopredictthenexthop;theDNNtakestrafficpatternsasin- theentirenetworkinformationtomakeroutingdecisions.This
puts,andbasedontheseinputs,itgeneratesthedesiredoutput. means a centralized unit has the advantage of collecting more
Theoutputofthedeeplearningstructuresignificantlyimproved usefulinformationcomparedtodistributed.Therefore,thistech-
thenetworktrafficmanagement.Therearethreephasestoob- nique is suitable for a centralized KDN to make the next-hop
tain a fully functional ML. The first phase is the initial phase, selectiondecision.
where the traditional routing protocols, such as OSPF, provide Tang et al. [145] proposed a centralized routing scheme with
thenetworkroute,andthenetworkstartstooperate.Atthesame mobility prediction (CRS-MP) for VANETs. Their method uti-
time, the second phase is the training phase to train the deep lizes an SDN controller with an ANN to gather information
learning system from the collected information based on the and predict the user’s arrival rate. Based on the arrival rate of
traditional operating system. Finally, the running phase is the each vehicle, RSUs or BSs can model statistical traffic patterns
stageinwhichthemachineisfullytrainedandcanprovidereal- andestimatetrafficmobility.Intelligencewasalsousedinthis
timeroutingstrategies.Thismethodhasbeenproventohavea studybyintegratingtheCRS-MPmodelattheRSU/BStopredict
higherthroughputandloweroverheadcomparedtoOSPF.The the mobility patterns of vehicles and find vehicle connections.
proposedstudysuggestsagreedy-baseddistributedarchitecture The ANN takes an input according to the number of arrival
overaknowledge-basednetworktoincreasethethroughput. vehicles at different time instances, and based on the initial
(ii) Knowledge derived from unsupervised learning: In [143], the au- randomweights,itpredictsthevehiclearrivalrates.Thearrival
thorsfocusedonloadbalanceroutingbasedonPCAandNNfor rate results in the arrival rate function, which is later used to
dimensionreductionandpredictionofthenetworkloadstatus. make routing decisions and evaluate the transmission rate and
To obtain intelligence from the network, they combined SDN average delay. The numerical results of the CRS-MP scheme
withMLanddataanalytics.Theuseofthesealgorithmshasled outperform other vehicular routing protocols, such as V2I and
toefficientandintelligentroutingdecisions.Thisarticleaimsto V2V communication, in terms of overall vehicular service de-
addresstheshortcomingsassociatedwiththenextgenerationof lay.Furthermore,theproposedalgorithmisindependentofthe
wireless mobile networks, such as video streaming and online mobilityrate,makingitmorerobusttohighmobilityrates.The
gaming,tomitigatethedelaycausedbytraffic.Theyproposed proposedroutingprotocolutilizesmulti-hoproutinginvehicular
a routing strategy based on an ML scheme, where PCA was systemsusinganSDNcontrollerthatsolvestheoverloadonthe
25S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
BS. Hence, in the near future, centralized routing protocols for node, and the decision to select the next hop is the action.
mobiledevicescanusetheknowledgeplanetodecidewhether Finally, the throughput resulting from the chosen hop is the
the BS or other devices must route the packet. Centralized reward of the system. In this study, the knowledge is derived
VANETprotocolshavebetterperformancecomparedtothede- fromeachstateandactionpair,whichprovidesanappropriate
centralizedtopologies.IncentralizedVANETprotocols,vehicles action for the next instant. The proposed cluster-based routing
aresupportedbytheBSandroad-sideunits(RSUs).Ontheother isrecognizedasadistributedmethodforroutingapacketina
handinpurelydistributedsystems,vehiclesmustrelayanyvital CRN. Because the Q-values are estimated locally by the nodes,
informationacrossthenetworkusingmulti-hopcommunication. thehighestvaluesareusedtobuildtheroutingtable.Thismeans
Therefore,thereisariskoflinkfailureinhighlymobileenviron- the routing mechanism is constructed in a distributed manner
ments,whichmighthavecatastrophicconsequences.Generally, andismoresuitablefordistributedKDNarchitecture.
VANET protocols are supported by a centralized controller to In[149],theauthorsstudiedthreerouteselectionschemesina
collectdataandinformvehicles.Theproposedprotocolin[145] realtestbedenvironmenttoimprovetheperformanceofmulti-
uses a centralized controller to collect data and process the CRnetworks.Oneoftheschemesisbasedonspectrumleasing,
data through ML algorithms. Consequently, centralized KDN and the other two are based on RL. Spectrum leasing is a new
architectureisusuallymoresuitableforVANETprotocols. termusedforcommunicationbetweenunlicensedandlicensed
(iii) Knowledgederivedfromreinforcementlearning:Withthemassive users in CR networks. The two RL algorithms are based on
growth of IoT devices connected to the edge network, the de- Q-learning to predict the next-hop neighbor. Similar to other
signofroutingstrategiesiscomplicated.Inparticular,insmart studies [148] the next hop is selected based on the highest Q-
cities, routing is significantly more difficult owing to the dis- value.Thestateactionisthedestinationnodeandtheselected
tribution of the crowd and network congestion. The authors next-hop node for the source node to transmit the data. The
of [146] designed a DRL algorithm for smart routing decisions reward is the channel-state information. The proposed routing
for load balancing and mitigating network congestion when scheme was compared with the highest-channel (HC) protocol
massivecrowdsaremovingaroundthecityfordailyactivities. in a multihop network and has shown better performance. In
TheyadaptedaDRLagenttodirectlyusetheNNandgenerate the proposed study, we can adapt a hybrid KDN because both
Q-values. First, the network state information is collected by centralized and distributed models are utilized. The proposed
theSDNcontrollerontopofthenetwork.Then,theDRLagent protocol uses the channel data information to select the next
makesanaction(routingdecisions)basedonthecurrentstate, best hop based on the output of the Q-learning. The channel
and finally, the agent receives a reward. The objective of the informationcanbeaccessedbyboththeuserandtheBS,which
rewardfunctionistomaximizethesuccessfulserviceaccessrate, meanstheprotocol
minimizethedatatransmissiondelay,andbalancethenetwork In [150], the RL technique was applied to CR networks to
load. The algorithm performance was better than that of the obtain the influences of various network characteristics on the
OSPF and enhanced-OSPF (EOSPF). Fig. 1 in this article repre- network functionality, while a routing scheme called cognitive
sentsthenetworkarchitectureoftheproposedalgorithm,which radioQ-routing(CRQ-routing)runsinthenetwork.CRQ-routing
shows a solid connection to the KDN centralized architecture, isapopularapproachforminimizinginterferencebetweenunli-
where all the information is collected at the controller and is censedandlicensedusers.Thealgorithminvestigatedtheeffects
processedbyMLinKP.Theknowledge/rewardislaterusedas ofQ-learning-basedroutingstrategiesonthenetworkcharacter-
anactionforthefollowingroutingstrategy. istics,includingthenetworksize.Theoutcomeoftheirresearch
In[147],thestudytacklestheenergy-awareroutinginwireless shows that network size has a slight impact on the packet
sensornetworks(WSNs)totransmitdatapacketsusingefficient loss rate and end-to-end latency of SUs. Additionally, CRQ-
paths within the shortest time such that the lifetime of the routing proved that it has better network performance than
networkincreases.Specifically,theyusedQ-routingalgorithms other routing algorithms when the network size increases. Fi-
and extended them to propagate information faster with lower nally, they concluded that under different situations, such as
energy consumption [158]. The algorithm uses Q-learning to changingnodepositionanddifferentroutinglengths,Q-learning
save the energy levels of the nodes in matrices after a sensor requires additional time to learn what degrades the network
sends a feedback message. When the sensor receives the feed- functionality. Concurrently, to manage the network overheads
backmessagesfromneighboringnodes,itmodifiestheQ-values inhighlymobilityscenarios,theauthorsof[151]proposedthe
in the achieved routing table. Once a node has a packet to mobility,residualenergy,andlinkquality-awaremultipath(MR-
transmit,itselectsthenextnodefromtheroutingtablewiththe LAM) for routing decisions. To do this, they used a Q-learning
bestQ-valueinagreedymannertorelaythepackettothedes- algorithmtoselecttheoptimalroutewithenergy-efficientnodes.
tination. Their technique has proven optimal routing decisions The proposed routing scheme aims to maintain a reliable and
forlow-energynodes.Thegreedy-basedapproachallowsnodes stablenetworkduringaparticulartimeframe.Theyhavesuccess-
toindividuallyselectthebestroute,whichsuggestsadistributed fullyimprovedseveralmetricsincludingenergycost,end-to-end
KDN. latency, convergence time, and packet loss ratio, when com-
Recently, CRN has attracted considerable attention owing to pared with other routing techniques, including the multipath
its importance in future wireless communication systems. This optimizedlinkstaterouting(MP-OLSR)protocol[159]andthe
technology overcomes the scarcity of the channel spectrum by extension version of MP-OLSR known as MP-OLSRv2 [160].
allowing secondary users or unlicensed users to benefit from Both the proposed protocols in [150,151] act as a distributed
underutilized licensed channels. However, the dynamic nature network, where each node decides on the next hop. Therefore,
ofCRNsmakesroutingacomplicatedtask.Theauthorsof[148] both studies are suitable for the distributed architecture of the
proposed a clustering mechanism or cluster-based routing to KDN.
boost network scalability and functionality. Once the cluster Theauthorsof[152]addedintelligencetothenetworktomiti-
headsareidentifiedinthenetwork,eachclusterheadestimates gatethecomplexityofnetworktopologies.Theyintegratedboth
the Q-value of each neighboring node. The routing table is centralized and distributed network functionality to guarantee
constructed based on the Q-values, and the largest Q-value is highQoS.TheirhybridapproachusesAIroutersfordistributed
the next chosen node for the next hop. During the learning intelligence and a network mind for centralized intelligence.
procedure, the state of the network represents the destination AI routers are responsible for hop-by-hop IP routing to ease
26S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
networkoverhead.Thenetworkmindactsasaglobalcontroller utilizesPCAtoreducethedimension,andthenusesthelibrary
for connection-oriented tunneling-based routing protocols, in- of support vector machine (LIBSVM) and least square support
cluding segment routing and multiprotocol labeled switching. vector machine (LS-SVM) with fuzzy c-means (FCM) and fuzzy
A DRL-based routing strategy is deployed in the network mind K-means(FKM)tobuildtheuser’sprofile.Ifacallpatterndoes
for tunneling-based routing to ensure QoS. The state of the RL not match any standard pattern, it is classified as a fraudulent
algorithm is represented by the network traffic characteristic call.Acomparativestudywasconductedusingdifferentmethods
information and device information, and the action is the for- of SVM and fuzzy clustering, as specified above. This shows
warding path. The reward it acquires is the effectiveness of an that using LIBSVM and LS-SVM leads to better approximation
action with respect to the delay requirements and optimiza- and accuracy. The proposed algorithm can be utilized in a
tiontargets.TheirproposedRLmethodconvergestotheglobal centralizedBStodifferentiatebetweenordinaryandfraudulent
minimum, and the routing strategy shows better performance calls.Accordingly,knowledgecanbederivedfromthisstudyto
comparedtootherroutingstrategiesincongestedareas.Thepro- approximatethegenuinenessofcallsinanyBS.
posedschemehasacentralizedarchitecturewithanintelligent AmongthechallengesassociatedwithIoT,twochallengespose
control plane. In our proposed framework, this plane controls threats to the overall network connectivity, including battery
and installs the rules in the network. Stampa et al. proposed a lifeandtheabilityofedgedevicestocommunicateoveralong
DRLalgorithmforoptimizingroutinginacentralizedknowledge distance. One promising technology among low-power wide-
plane [153]. The actor–critic learning method is used, where area networks (LPWANs) is LoRa, which operates based on
the state of the learning algorithm is calculated by the traffic spread-spectrummodulationtechniques.In[163]MLalgorithms
matrix (which is defined by the bandwidth request between were adapted to edge devices to mitigate two challenges: life
pairs of source and destination), and the action is the path expectancyandtheabilitytocommunicateoverlongdistances.
taken to transmit data (obtained using link weights). Finally, To achieve this, LoRa is used for low-power transmission, and
the reward of the algorithm is based on the average network KNN is used for the activity classification process. They have
delay.Theirmethodprovidesoperationaladvantagescompared accomplished an amazing low energy expenditure of 5.1 mJ
totraditionaloptimizationalgorithmsforroutingstrategies.This in power consumption for activity classification, resulting in a
algorithmcanbeusedinbothdistributedandcentralizedKDN
batterylifeof331days.Asimilartechniquecanbedeployedto
architectures,suggestingahybridstructure.
IoTdistributededgedevicestoincreasethedevicelifetimeina
distributedmanner.
6.2.2. Clustering
Caching popular content at SBS for intelligence gathering in
In wireless networks, nodes/sensors/users have always been clus-
ultra-denseheterogeneousnetworkseffectivelydecreasesredun-
teredtodescribetheirdistinctivefeaturesordifferentiatebasedontheir
dant data transmission and E2E delay. However, dealing with
mobilityrate,coordinates,etc.Clusteringdifferentnodesfordifferent
different data content is challenging and time-consuming. The
purposesimprovestheoverallperformanceofthenetwork.Itisevident
authors of [164] used a clustering-based TDMA transmission
from the introduction of ML techniques that clustering problems are
scheme for content placement and user association. They used
naturally solved using K-mean algorithms. However, other cluster-
an offline training procedure using DNN to predict the user
ing methods have been proposed within supervised and unsupervised
association for each cluster, where the input to the NN is the
learning techniques. Clustering is one of the primary and essential
user channel gain and user demand. As the number of clusters
applicationsofKDNforvariouspurposes,suchastrafficclassification
increases exponentially as the number of users served by the
and data storage. Table 10 summarizes the studies surveyed in this
SBSincreases,theuserclusterinformationandtimedurationof
section.
serving each cluster are optimized using the DNN. As a result,
theuserassociationtoeachclustercanbequicklyidentified,and
(i) Knowledgederivedfromsupervisedlearning:Oneoftheproblems
thetimerequiredtoobtaintheoptimaluserclusterinformation
inMLisclassimbalance,wheretheclassdistributionsarehighly
is reduced. This method enables us to achieve efficient load
separated. This means that the total number of minority or
scaresclasses(alsoknownaspositiveones)isfarlessthanthe balancinganduserclusteringinacentralizedKDN.
majorityclass(representedasnegative)foratwo-classscenario. (ii) Knowledge derived from unsupervised learning: As the number of
When we apply a traditional classifier in these scenarios, they connected devices in IoT for applications, such as smart cities,
arelikelytopredicteverythingasamajorityornegativeclass. smarthomes,farms,andfactories,reachesmorethan31billion,
In [161], the authors used logistic regression for imbalanced providing secure communication and access control becomes a
problemstoimprovetheperformanceofthelearningprocedure. priority.In[165],theauthorsproposedamechanismbasedon
Theproposedmethodiscalledlogisticregressionforimbalanced unsupervised clustering techniques to enable reasonable access
learning based on clustering (LRILC). First, K-mean clustering controlthroughoutthecommunicationhistoryofIoTnetworks.
was applied to the dataset to partition the majority class into Their method is called INSTRUCT and has two separate algo-
small clusters. Logistic regression is then used to overcome rithms for different types of traffic, one for TCP traffic and
the class-imbalance problem. The experimental results show a the other for UDP traffic. The proposed algorithm uses past
higher accuracy in clustering the dataset compared to state-of- communicationdatatoallowaccesstoIoTdevicesbyinstalling
the-artclassificationmethods.Theproposedmethodcanbeused new rules on the switches involved using the clustering tech-
in a centralized KDN to solve imbalanced problems with large nique. K-mean clustering was applied to distinguish between
datasets. valid and invalid traffic captured by the switches. INSTRUCT
In [162], fraud calls are identified by investigating the user’s achieves 100% classification accuracy for TCP traffic and 95%
behavior. Their method uses the application of SVM alongside forUDPbasedontheircomparisonwithsignature-basedmanual
fuzzyclusteringtoidentifyfraudulentphonesubscribers.Fuzzy analysis. This algorithm is suitable for a centralized KDN to
clustering takes unlabeled input data and clusters the data ac- provideaccesscontroltoIoTdevices.
cording to their similarities. Furthermore, after a trained data Accordingto[166],theauthorsusedtheK-meanalgorithmfor
algorithm obtains input data, it generates a value between 0 clusteringSBSsbasedonlocationandtrafficload.Theproposed
and 1. If the output value is closer to 1, it shows a higher scheme has a dynamic cluster-based on/off switching mecha-
degree of similarity. Their algorithm takes large datasets and nism for SBS. The clustering-based technique allows SBSs to
27S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
coordinatetheirtransmissionswhilereducingenergyconsump- (i) Knowledge derived from supervised learning: One of the most
tion and traffic load. This study formulated the problem as promising technologies in 5G is the appearance of mmWaves
a noncooperative game between clusters, where clusters seek to improve cellular capacity and increase overall performance.
to minimize the cost function to reduce energy consumption. The mmWave systems bring different challenges to future net-
Based on the information regarding the location of SBSs and works,includingtheinterconnectivityofseveralterminalswith
the capability of handling users and data traffic, the cluster multipleBSs,andestimationoftheuser’sCSI.Therefore,useras-
determines their transmission power and on/off situation. The sociationinmmWavenetworksiscrucialfornetworkdurability
simulation results show improved overall performance when andperformance.Theauthorsof[170]developedanML-based
using the cluster-based coordination method in small-cell net- user association for mmWave networks. They formulated the
works. The algorithm attempts to reduce the overhead on a mmWaveuserassociationproblemasamulti-labelclassification
centralized controller by allowing the SBS to decide based on problem,wheretheyadaptedfeatureextractionfromtopological
their locally acquired information. Hence, this method can be informationandgeographicallocationinformation.Specifically,
fittedtothedistributedarchitectureoftheKDN. users and BSs are categorized into samples and classes, where
Asthedemandforubiquitousaccesstowirelessdataincreases, each sample in the network can be classified into multiple
Tabrizietal.[167]proposedaclusteringandspectrumassign- classes.Initially,eachuserinthenetworkcanbeassociatedwith
mentandresourceallocation(CaSRA)toclusternodesinhotspot multiple BSs, creating a multi-label classification problem. To
densely populated areas. The K-mean clustering algorithm was avoidhighdimensionality,multi-labelclassificationmethodsare
adaptedtomaximizespectrumutilizationandincreasenetwork transferred into a series of single-label classification problems
performance. In their algorithm, a mobile device can act as a withlowerdimensionality.Finally,afterthetrainingprocedure
hotspotorslave.Oncethemobileuserisconnectedtothecellu- and based on the information and features, the algorithm al-
larnetwork,itservesasahotspotandprovidesbroadbandaccess locates samples to only one class. The research aims to make
tonearbydevicesknownasslaves.Theproblemformulationis the user association without utilizing CSI, and the simulation
first to identify mobile devices that act as hotspots and then results indicate high performance even with few training sam-
to obtain the users associated with each hotspot. To solve this ples.Graphicalmodelrepresentationisutilizedtosolvetheuser
problem, a modified version of K-mean clustering is used to association problem, suggesting a centralized KDN structure,
cluster users based on their location and organize each cluster althoughitcanalsobeusedasadistributedarchitecture.
basedontheirmaximumandminimumnumberofusers.Then, Some of the applications of 5G are providing massive connec-
the user with the minimum distance to both the BS and the tivity to vehicular users, including self-driving cars and UAVs.
center of the cluster is selected as the hotspot in that cluster.
UAVs experience significant interference from different BSs on
Further,usingagraphcoloringapproach,powerandspectrum
thegroundwiththeambiguityofwhichBStheusermustcon-
areallocatedtoeachclusterandfromtheclustertohotspotand
nectto.Tomitigateinterferenceandmaximizetheperformance
slaves.CaSRAincreasesthetotalnumberofsupportedusersina
ofwirelesslinks,Galkinetal.proposedanSL-basedassociation
networkwithlowercomplexity.ThecentralizedCaSRAscheme
schemetoassociateUAVswiththemostappropriateBS[171].
uses the BS to cluster the nodes into groups based on their
AnNNistrainedbasedonenvironmentalinformationtoidentify
distance,makingthealgorithmsuitableforacentralizedKDN.
the most suitable BS. UAVs’ distances to BSs, received signal
In [168], they proposed a new multicarrier waveform clas-
strength (RSS) from the BSs, and the location from which the
sification for 5G communication systems. This study utilizes
interferencecomesfromarefedtotheNN.TheroleoftheNN
PCA and CNN on signal amplitude to mitigate noisy channels
is to intelligently identify which BS provides the best channel
and obtain a high classification accuracy. Their algorithm can
quality. RF chains are utilized in their method with two sep-
detect and cluster three multicarrier waveforms: universal fil-
arate antennas: a directional antenna and an omnidirectional
tered multicarrier (UFMC), filterbank-based multicarrier-offset
antenna.Anomni-antennaisusedtomeasuretheRSSfromthe
quadratureamplitudemodulation(FBMC-OQAM),andorthogo-
nearby BSs, while a directional antenna is associated with the
nalfrequency-divisionmultiplexing-quadratureamplitudemod-
appropriate BS. The objective of this study was to maximize
ulation(OFDM-QAM).Theirmethodworkseveninadensechan-
datatransmissionandchannelcapacity.Theperformanceofthe
nelenvironment,wherethetransmissionanddetectionofthese
proposed NN algorithm is compared with the strongest-signal
three signals were not possible before. Moreover, compared to
andclosest-neighborassociationschemes,wherethesimulation
othermethods,suchasCNNusingin-phaseandquadrature(I/Q)
results demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method.
modulation,ithasbetterperformanceandlesscomplexity.This
Furthermore, the proposed NN can increase the probability of
techniquecanbeusedinadistributedmannertoclassifysignals
UAV coverage compared to non-NN BS association schemes.
at5GBSs.Hence,theschemeprovidesadistributedknowledge
UAVusersintelligentlydecidetheBStheymustassociatewithin
ofsignals.
theproposedstudy,henceadistributeduserassociationscheme.
(ii) Knowledgederivedfromreinforcementlearning:Cellrangeexpan-
6.2.3. Userassociation sion is a technique to increase the coverage area of BSs to
Currentwirelesscommunicationnetworksrelyontheexistenceofa either support other users or to cover the blind spots, which
cellulararchitecture.CellularcommunicationrequiresBSsforusersto increasesthecoveragearea,networkthroughput,andcell-edge
request,receive,anduploadinformation.EveryBSinthenetworkhas throughput. Expanding the coverage area can be achieved by
a coverage area that supports a specific geographic area with limited adding a bias value to the user equipment (EU). Selecting an
users.ToincreasethecapacityofBSsinthecellularnetwork,smallcells optimal bias value depends on various factors, including the
were introduced to enable service providers to offload users from an radioresourceratiobetweentheMBSsandpico-BSs.Adynamic
overloadedBStosub-BSs,namelymacroBSs,picoBSs,andfemtoBSs. methodispresentedtodeterminethebiasvalueofeachUEby
Therefore, more cellular networks are shifting toward heterogeneous using Q-learning algorithms [172]. Here, all the UEs learn the
networks (HetNets), enabling flexibility and low-cost deployment of biasvalueindependentlywiththeaidofQ-learningtodecrease
newinfrastructure.Toassociateuserswithanappropriatecell,theKDN theoutageofUEs.TheproposedQ-learningalgorithmisamulti-
requiresreliablemethods.Hence,somepracticalML-basedtechniques agent learning system that allows every user to determine the
have been investigated, including studies on SL and RL. Table 11 biasvalue.Thestateofthesystemisthereceivedsignalpower
summarizesthestudiessurveyedinthissection. fromboththeMBSandpico-BS.Theagent’sactionistochoose
28S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Table10
Knowledge-basedstrategiesforclustering.
Article Knowledgeobjective Architecture MLalgorithm Deliverable Conclusion
[161] Intelligentclustering Centralized Logisticregression Trafficclassificationand Extensivecomparisonamong
basedontrained balancingload variousclassificationmethods
supervisedlearning
dataset
[162] Automaticdetection Centralized Supportvector Detectingthefraud Theproposedalgorithm
anddropoffraud machineandfuzzy communicationactivities performsbettercomparedto
activities clustering normalSVM
[163] Efficientlowpower Distributed K-nearestneighbor Extendingthebatterylife Theproposedschemecan
clusteringsolution reducethetransmission
forIoTdevices payloadandloweringthe
transmissionpower
[164] Intelligentclustering Centralized Superviseddeep Minimizesnetworksum Theproposedalgorithmis
mechanismfor neuralnetwork energyconsumptionand timeefficientandhasa90%
ultra-dense reducesthetransmission accuracyofuserclustering
heterogeneous delay
networks
[169] Smartclusteringfor Centralized K-meanclustering Lowconvergencetime Machinetypecommunication
randomaccess deviceassociationwith
networks conflict-freeresource
allocation
[166] Dynamicswitching Distributed K-meanclustering Increasestheenergy Clusteringwirelesssmallcell
on/offSBSs efficiencyofSBSs networksbasedonlocation
andtrafficload,buttheydid
notconsiderthefrequent
modetransition
[167] Intelligentnode Centralized K-meanclustering Efficientoffloadtrafficand Theproposedalgorithms
clusteringindensely reusespectrum jointlyclusterthenodesand
populatedwireless assignsspectrumandphysical
areas resources
[168] Automatic Distributed Principlecomponent Achievelowcomplexity Classifyingthreewaveforms
multicarrier analysisandCNN andhighaccuracy includingOFDM-QAM,
waveforms FBMC-OQAM,andUFMC,but
classificationin shouldbefurthertestedin
futurecellular realchannelenvironments
networks withtheexistenceofother
noises
a bias value, and the reward of the system is determined by Althoughinformation,suchaschannelquality,backhaulcapac-
the BS when calculating the number of outages. The proposed ity, and SINR are important attributes of user association, the
algorithm increases the throughput and decreases the number user’sQoEhasthesameorhigherpriority.Pervezetal.[174]in-
of disconnected UEs. This algorithm is a greedy-based cell ex- troduceda distributeduser-centricbackhaul-awareuser associ-
pansion by every UE, which can be used in a distributed KDN ationschemeviaafuzzyQ-learningalgorithmtoautonomously
architecture. enableeachBS/celltouseQoEandbackhaulconstraintstomax-
In vehicular networks, continuous connectivity is key to net- imizethethroughputofthenetwork.FuzzyQ-learningattempts
work intelligence and automation. However, user association to learn the optimal bias value (which is the action of the RL
also plays an essential role in vehicular networks by providing algorithm)bythefuzzyrulesinaniterativemannerbyinteract-
ingwiththeenvironment.Specifically,usersreceiveabiasvalue
load balancing between SBSs and MBSs. The authors of [173]
from different cells, guiding them to associate with the most
proposed an online RL approach (ORLA) for network load bal-
suitable cell. At the same time, each bias value represents an
ancing in VANETs. Their learning algorithm is divided into
attributethatsatisfiesthenetworkperformancemetrics,includ-
two main phases: initial RL procedure and history-based RL
inglatencyandthroughput.Theproposedalgorithmachievesan
procedure. In the initial phase, the user and BS association
optimalperformancefasterthanQ-learning-basedmethodsand,
problem is formulated as a multi-armed bandit problem. The
more importantly, improves the user’s performance. Because
vehicle association decision for each BS is the agent’s action,
userswillhavedifferentrequirementsinthe5Gsystem,eachis
and the reward is the network load balance. In vehicular net-
associated with different cells based on their needs. Therefore,
works, thereare regularitiesinthe spatial–temporaldimension
theabovetechniqueisbestsuitedfordistributeduserassociation
due to urban traffic flows. In the history-based RL phase, by
schemesintheKDNarchitecture.
considering the dynamic changes of the environment and the
Owing to changes in network characteristics and the increase
spatial–temporal regularities, the association patterns obtained indeviceswithdifferentrequirements,researchershaveturned
in the initial phase enable simultaneous load balancing of BSs. toHetNets.Eventhoughitprovidesseveralbenefits,itpresents
The history-based RL generates an association matrix for each challenges, such as interference between SBSs, power control,
BS based on the similarities between historical patterns and and user association problems. The authors of [175] used a
the current environment. The proposed algorithm is compared multi-agent deep Q-learning network (DQN) to solve some of
withthedistributeddualdecompositionoptimizationandmax- theseproblems.Theiralgorithmconsistsofconvexoptimization
SINR scheme, wherein ORLA outperformed load balancing in and fractional programming, and uses DQN to jointly optimize
multiplecells.Thealgorithmprovidesacentralizedarchitecture user association and power management in OFDMA systems.
forfutureKDN-basednetworks. In the Q-learning algorithm, the agent (or UE) must select the
29S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Table11
Knowledge-basedstrategiesforuserassociation.
Article Knowledgeobjective Architecture MLalgorithm Deliverable Conclusion
[170] Trainedsampleis Centralized Supervisedlearning Accurateuserassociation Theproposedapproachshows
usedforuser goodperformanceevenwith
associationofthe fewtrainingsamplesand
mmWavesystems withoutCSI,butitconsumes
significanttimeintraining
process
[171] IntelligentBSs Distributed Supervisedlearning Maximizeschannelquality Theproposedpolicyallows
selectionbyUAV withneuralnetwork oftheUAV-BSlink UAVstoselectthesuitableBS
usersin5G basedonBStransmitpower,
networks distanceandthelocationof
theBS,canbeextendedwith
varyingmobilityrates
[172] Efficientuser Distributed Q-learning Improvingthesystem Optimizesusercellassociation
associationin throughputandreducing (PBSsorMBSs)through
heterogeneous thenumberofUEs’outages learningthecellrange
networksafterUE expansion
learningprocedure
[173] Onlinetraining Centralized Reinforcement Efficientloadbalancingin Adaptingtheuserassociation
approachand learning thenetwork policyvialearningthe
near-optimal spatial–temporaldimension
associationin regularities
dynamicvehicular
environment
[174] Autonomouscell Distributed FuzzyQ-learning Improvingtheconvergence Theproposedschemeis
associationin time memory-baseduser-centric
ultra-densesmall backhaul-awarebutmayhave
cellnetworksby animpactonuser’smemory
enabling usage
user-devicestostore
learnedvalues
[175] Intelligentadaptive Distributed Multi-agentdeep Maximizesenergy Jointoptimizationofuser
decisionmakingto Q-learningnetwork efficiencywhilejointly associationandpower
maximizeUEs’QoS associatedusers management
inheterogeneous
networks
[176] Near-optimal Distributed Deepreinforcement Maximizingusers’QoE Efficientuserassociationand
solutiontoimprove learning resourceallocation
QoEinMEC-enabled
livevideostreaming
systems
[177] Smartuser Hybrid Deepreinforcement Achievingoptimaluser Theproposedalgorithmuses
associationin learning associationpolicywithout bothcentralizedand
symbioticradio fullreal-timechannel distributedDRLapproachesto
networks(SRNs) information makeadecisionforIoT
devices,wherecentralized
convergeswithfewdataset
anddistributedisscalable
appropriate BS to create communication links and determine function.Then,theyproposedapricingfunctionbasedonMDP
the transmission power. The transmission power of the user for the update function, which was solved by DDPG. Here, the
is the action of the agent throughout the learning procedure. MDPissolvedusingaDRL,wherethesupply–demandinspires
The reward function is the sum energy efficiency of all the theagent’sactionastheoutputpriceofeachvideofromtheBS.
UEs. The objective of the learning algorithm is to maximize Then,basedonthepricesforeachvideofromdifferentBSs,the
the expected accumulated reward under QoS constraints. The UE is associated with a BS whose data rate is maximized. The
convergenceofmulti-agentDQNwasanalyzedinthesimulation rewardfunctionisdefinedasthesumofeachUE’sQoE,andthe
results, and it proved to be superior to traditional RL-based goalistomaximizeit.Simulationresultsshowthattheproposed
techniques. Moreover, the algorithm maximizes the long-term method achieves significant improvements in QoE, particularly
overallnetworkperformanceanddemonstratesefficientenergy incongestednetworkswithlowresources.Thismethodcanbe
consumption.Thedistributedmethodaboveshowsasolidcon- usedinadistributedknowledgeplaneforuserstoassociatewith
nection to the distributed KDN architecture. Chou et al. used aBSautonomously.
DRLtojointlysolveuserassociationandresourcemanagement Symbioticradionetworks(SRNs)havebeenintroducedtoenable
problemsinmobileedgecomputing(MEC)toimprovetheQoE the coexistence of various networks and utilize resources glob-
foronlinevideostreamingin5Gnetworks[176].Theproblem ally and provide connectivity across multiple networks [178–
isformulatedbasedontheMarkovdecisionprocess(MDP)and 180].Theauthorsof[177]focusedonthesymbiosisbetweenIoT
analyzed by a deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) algo- andcellularnetworksandtheuserassociationproblemsinSRN.
rithmbasedonthesupplydemandinterpretationoftheLagrange TheyusedtheTDMAforcellularcommunicationbetweenusers
dualproblems.First,theyusedthetraditionaloptimizationLa- and BSs. Then, each IoT device is associated with one user to
grangianapproach,wherethesourceoftheperformancelossin exchangeinformation.Thedynamicchangesintheenvironment
thisalgorithmwasidentifiedastheLagrangianmultiplierupdate make the collection of real-time channel information difficult.
30S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
To overcome this problem, two DRL algorithms were utilized of users and their activities can help generate intelligence to increase
to guarantee optimal user association. One of the algorithms network performance. Recently, there have been many advancements
is centralized, which makes decisions for IoT devices based in mobility prediction and handover management in the field of ML.
on globally available information. At the same time, the other In the following sections, some ML techniques for the two essential
is distributed and makes decisions based on locally available componentsofmobilitymanagementarepresented.
information. The DRL algorithm can have two states based on
the proposed DRL algorithm. The first state is the action space 6.3.1. Mobilityprediction
in a centralized DRL-based user association, which is a matrix Movementisaninherentnatureofmobiledevices,andpredicting
of cellular users with the associated IoT device. The second thenextlocationofthesedevicesiscalledmobilityprediction.Knowing
state is a distributed DRL-based user association scheme with thenextlocationoftheusercanimprovethenetworkperformance,es-
one IoT device. The immediate reward in both schemes is the peciallyinresourcemanagement,D2D,andV2Vcommunication[187].
sumrateofallIoTdevices.Theproposedschemeshowsoptimal In this section, some promising methods using ML algorithms are
user association with high scalability, even when IoT devices presented. These methods provide a huge advantage in the KDN ar-
increase in the network. This algorithm is suitable for hybrid chitectureforpredictingusermobilitypatternsinthenextgeneration
KDNarchitecturesbecauseittakesadvantageofbothcentralized ofcellularnetworks.Table13summarizesthestudiessurveyedinthis
anddistributedalgorithms. section.
6.2.4. Trafficanddataaggregation (i) Knowledgederivedfromsupervisedlearning:Learningandknowing
Asnetworksareincreasingincomplexityandbecomemoredifficult the next location of mobile equipment enables mobile appli-
tomanage,embeddingintelligenceintodeviceswilleaseoptimization, cations and a coherent handover process. Location prediction
recommendation, organization, and management. Most studies in the techniques use the historical trajectory information of mobile
networking area are distributed in nature, which makes it difficult to userstoguessanindividual’snextposition.Manystudieshave
includeML-basedalgorithmsforcontrollingthedevices.KDNfunction- introduced location prediction methods with acceptable accu-
alityprovidesanopportunitytobringintelligenceandknowledgetothe racies [188–190]. However, some of them perform erratically
network.TheKDNcancollectglobalinformationtoimprovenetwork when a user’s activities change in a new area, while others
performance.Trafficclassificationisacrucialactivityinnetworkman- encounter the ‘‘cold start’’ problem when the user’s trajectory
agement, and massive growth in Internet users has brought network information is sparse. The authors of [183] involved the user’s
traffic classification into attention. Table 12 summarizes the studies activity patterns and historical data and proposed an SL-based
surveyedinthissection. locationpredictionmethod.Theirtechniqueevaluatesthenext
activityofthemobileuserbymodelingindividualactivitypat-
(i) Knowledge derived from supervised learning: Raikar et al. inte- terns rather than directly predicting the next location of the
grated SDN architecture with SL techniques, specifically SVM,
mobileuser.Then,itpredictsthenextlocationoftheuserbased
Naïve Bayas (NB), and the nearest centroid is used to classify
ontheobtainednextactivity.Usingreal-lifeGPStrajectorydata,
the network data traffic [181]. First, in the learning phase of
the simulation results show a smooth upgrade and robust per-
theiralgorithm,thetrainingdataarefedtothesystemtomap
formance based on the proposed prediction procedure. Having
the network traffic into defined classes. Later, real-time data
knowledge of the user’s activity and location in a centralized
werecapturedandmappedbasedonthetrainedSLfornetwork
KDNarchitectureimprovesthenetworkperformance,especially
trafficclassification.Intheirmethod,theSDNcontrollerutilizes
when a controller needs to decide on resource allocation and
three different SL algorithms to classify the data into HTTP,
clusterheadselection.
mail,andstreaming.Theirproposedsolutionwasabletoobtain
(ii) Knowledgederivedfromunsupervisedlearning:Owingtothedra-
highaccuracyinallthreelearningalgorithmswiththehighest
matic increase in users across networks, configuration and op-
accuracy for NB, followed by SVM and the nearest centroid.
timization have become more complicated. More users push
Their algorithm provides centralized data classification, which
the network to split into small cells and SBSs. More frequent
offersanopportunitytoaddintelligencetonetworkdevices.
handovers occur once there are more SBS in the network, and
(ii) Knowledge derived from transfer learning: To avoid training data
becauseofthecomplexityoftheindoorenvironment,thistask
from scratch, researchers in [182] method to address multi-
ismoredelicateinanindoorscenario.Self-organizingnetworks
classtrafficclassificationproblems,andtheyutilizedMaxentas
(SONs) are the key to the next generation of mobile networks
the base classifier in their approach. A new classification task
forself-healing,self-optimization,andself-organization.Sinclair
in TrAdaBoost was used to extract labeled data from several
et al. proposed a modified self-organizing map (SOM) method
network traffic sources. Next, the Maxent model is used to
to make indoor location predictions of users while a handover
classify and convey traffic knowledge from the source domain
request occurs [184]. Their method determines whether the
to the target domain. The proposed scheme was trained and
indoor user should be connected to another BS or prohibit the
transferred as prior knowledge for different environments to
handover based on their location information. SON utilizes an
reveal itsperformance. They tested theirmethod with twotra-
unsupervisedNNthatallowsthelearningalgorithmtogenerate
ditional ML algorithms based on Maxnet, known as NoTL and
a low-dimensional output space from high-dimensional input
NoTL advance, where TrAdaBoost achieves better performance
data. The input data depend on the mobile terminal approach,
compared to the other two methods. Their learning algorithm
whereas in this scheme, the angle-of-arrival (AoA) of the user
canachievehighaccuracyinclassifyingnetworkdatatrafficand
and the reference signal received power (RSRP) are fed to the
provideapromisingsolutionforcentralizedKDNarchitecture.
NN. Based on this information, the SOM is capable of estimat-
ing the user’s actual physical location. Accordingly, based on
6.3. Mobilitymanagement the pre-determined zones, which correspond to prohibited and
permitted areas, a handover decision is made. The simulation
Another critical aspect of service delivery in wireless networks is results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm reduces the
mobilitymanagement.Mobilitymanagementhelpstodevelopusermo- total number of handovers by 70% while allowing the nec-
bilityandhandoverpredictions.Infuturewirelessnetworks,mobility essary handovers to proceed. The proposed algorithm has an
managementiscrucialfornetworkautomation.Knowingthelocation automatic system that uses monitoring, analyzing, planning,
31S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Table12
Knowledge-basedstrategiesfortrafficanddataaggregation.
Article Knowledgeobjective Architecture MLalgorithm Deliverable Conclusion
[181] Fullyautomated Centralized Supervisedlearning Morethan90%accuracy Providessecuritymonitoring,
managementin methods indatatrafficclassification faultdetectionandtraffic
SDN-basednetworks engineering
[182] Realknowledge Centralized Transferlearning Achievinghigh Incontrasttootherstudies
transformationfrom classificationaccuracy trainingdataandtestdata
onedomaintothe havedifferentdistributions
targetdomainfor
efficienttraffic
classification
Table13
Knowledge-basedstrategiesformobilityprediction.
Article Knowledgeobjective Architecture MLalgorithm Deliverable Conclusion
[183] Collecteduser Centralized Supervisedlearning Robustperformanceand Predictstheusers’next
activitycanbeused smoothpredictionupgrade locationbymodelingusers’
topredictboth activitypatternsfromGPS
locationandthe real-lifetrajectorydata
individual’sactivity
simultaneously
[184] Self-organizing Centralized Unsupervised 70%reductionin Handovermanagementbased
networksfor learning unnecessaryhandovers ontheuserindoorlocation
handover
managementinLTE
femtocellBS
networks
[185] AllowingBSsinLTE Centralized Unsupervised Clusteringresultwithan Classifiestheusers’
heterogeneous shapelets averageaccuracyof95% trajectoriesandoptimizes
networksto handoverparameters
automaticallyand
autonomously
discovertheRF
conditionsintheir
celledge
[186] Smartmobility Centralized Deepreinforcement Offloadingtrafficand Optimizestheservice
predictionfor learning reducinglatencyinthe provisionproblemsinmobile
efficientservice system edgecomputing
migrationinthe
mobileservice
provisionproblems
andexecutionphasestoperformacentralizedknowledge-based the glimpse mobility model outperforms the perfect mobility
concept. Moreover, to allow BSs to autonomously discover the modelandchoosesthelowestlatencyservicerequest.Therefore,
RFconditionsatthecelledgeandtheirimpactonthehandover it is essential to have a similar model at the edge network to
parameters,unsupervised-shapeletsanddataminingtechniques allowthecontrollertoselectthebeststrategywiththeleastla-
wereproposedtorecognizepatternsintheRSRPmeasurement tency.Additionally,mobileserviceproviderscandeterminethe
reportsfromusers[185].Theirmethodmakespositionestima- expectedlatencyexperiencedbyuserstoreceivedatapacketsin
tion once a handover is triggered. Based on the positioning, futurecellularnetworks.Thelow-latencyML-basedalgorithmin
theBSdiscoversnewpatternswhilethenetworkcharacteristics thisworksuggestsacentralizedknowledgeplanetopredictthe
changeandcalculatesthenumberofclustersinthenetwork.The seriesoflocationsandtimingoftheusers.
simulationresultsillustratethatevenwithoutpriorknowledge,
the algorithm provides 95% accuracy in clustering the nodes 6.3.2. Handovermanagement
andpredictingtheuser’slocation.Theproposedalgorithmuses Recently, the deployment of SBS has contributed to increasing
clusterheadstoidentifyuser’smovementsandtrajectories.This networkperformancetoprovideacceptableQoE.However,deploying
method is suitable for a centralized KDN for user-trajectory SBSs means that users willhave more frequent handovers, which can
prediction. negatively impact users’ QoE [191]. In the upcoming section, some
(iii) Knowledgederivedfromreinforcementlearning:In[186],amobil- of the studies on handover management based on ML techniques are
ity prediction model based on DRL at the edge of the network presented to assist future KDN networks. Table 14 summarizes the
wasproposedformobileusers.TheydesignedaDRLframework studiessurveyedinthissection.
to offload traffic by training a DQN for mobility prediction.
Their method comprises a glimpse mobility prediction model (i) Knowledgederivedfromsupervisedlearning:Handoverinthecon-
that gathers users’ mobility patterns and trains them in the text of wireless communication means passing the control of a
DRL. The algorithm first assumes that the controller can select UE from its serving eNB to the next nearest eNB without any
the best edge server and apply the DRL. Then, the controller interruption.Withtoday’scontinuousconnectivityofuserswith
predictstheusers’futurelocationsbasedonhistoricaldataand a high demand for data rate and low latency, handover man-
past user mobility using the DRL agent. The authors used the agement is becoming more complex. Additionally, to provide
actual human trajectory and user latency to obtain the perfor- seamless connectivity to users, a handover is required. How-
mance of their algorithm. The experimental results show that ever, challenges such as security and QoS are expected. Many
32S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Table14
Knowledge-basedstrategiesforhandovermanagement.
Article Knowledgeobjective Architecture MLalgorithm Deliverable Conclusion
[192] Smarthandover Centralized Supervisedlearning Improvesusers’QoE Thehandoveralgorithm
management withneuralnetwork providesbetterQoEby
solutionforLTE choosingtheappropriatecell
networks
[193] Intelligent Centralized Supervisedlearning Reducesthesignaling Theproposedprediction-based
preparationdecision withdeepneural overheadwhileimproving conditionalhandover
forbetterhandover network thesuccessrate demonstrates98.8%and
in5GmmWave aboveaccuracyofprediction
networks
[194] Constructsa Centralized Supervisedlearning 90%trafficforecasting Theproposedmodelutilizes
centralized withrecurrent accuracy anartificialintelligenceinto
knowledge-based neuralnetwork themobilenetworkfor
serverforfuture adaptivehandover
wirelessnetworks optimization
[195] Efficienthandover Centralized Supervisedlearning Accuratepredictionof Theproposedalgorithm
managementto withrecurrent handovertriggerdecision initiatesearlyhandover
supportintelligent neuralnetwork registrationtomitigate
vehicularnetworks communicationdisruption
[196] Dynamicmobility Centralized FuzzyQ-learning Reducestheunnecessary Optimizationofhandover
managementin handoverswhilekeeping parametersfordifferentUE
smallcell5G anacceptablecalldropped speedstomaximizenetwork
networks ratio efficiency
[197] Smartuser-centered Centralized Q-learning Increasesnetworkcapacity Theproposedschemeobserves
handoverdecision withlessnumberof thehistoricaldataand
makingforan overhead predictsthefutureuser
open-access association,butthemodel
femtocellnetworks onlydeploysoneMBS
[198] Adaptiveuser Centralized FuzzyQ-learning Fewernumberof Adaptingthelearning
selectionandcell handoverswith algorithmfromthepastand
associationin opportunisticchannel futureexperiences
open-access capacity
femtocellnetworks
[199] Optimalhandover Centralized Deepreinforcement Reducesthehandoverand SLusesthetraditional
managementin learningand ensuresthesystem handoverparametersto
large-scalewireless supervisedlearning throughput initializeRL,thenRLisused
mobilenetworks toobtaintheoptimal
includingIoT controllerforeachUE
[200] Robusttuningof Centralized FuzzyQ-learning Trafficengineering Self-organizingmechanismfor
handover jointoptimizationofload
parametersandload balancingandhandover
balancinginLTE management
networks
[201] Intelligenthandover Centralized Q-learning Minimizesthehandover Theproposedalgorithm
managementfor failurerateandhandover selectsthemostefficienteNB
LTE-advance ping-pongeffect usingreferencesignalreceived
networks power,referencesignal
receivedquality,andother
criteria
[202] Simultaneous Centralized Reinforcement Maximizesthenetwork AcentralizedRLagentuses
monitoringofsignal learning throughput theradiomeasurementreports
strengthand fromtheUEsforhandover
optimalhandover optimization
controlin5G
networks
[203] Optimal Centralized Q-learning Maximizesthethroughput Theproposedschemefinds
decision-makingfor theoptimalpolicybasedon
predictinghandover thepedestrianinformation
inmmWave includingthelocationand
networks velocity
[204] Intelligenthandover Centralized Doubledeep ImprovestheQoS Theproposedframework
learningin reinforcement providestheoptimalBS
mmWavenetworks learning selectionpolicy
[205] Self-tuningof Centralized Deepreinforcement Maximizesthethroughput Themulti-agentalgorithm
handover learning andreducingthehandover traindecentralizedpoliciesfor
parametersand frequency eachUEtoachievebetter
powerallocationin performance
heterogeneous
networks
33S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
studies have used ML techniques for self-organizing networks AP by considering the vehicle flow projection. The handover
to improve network performance. Ali et al. presented an SL- trigger was divided into three parts: data processing, learning
based handover management scheme to improve the QoE for phase,andpredictionphase.TheyusedanofflineMLtechnique
LTEusers[192].Theyutilizedhistoricaldatatolearnhowthe to model a long short-term memory (LSTM) network (which
QoEofuserschangedwhenthehandoverdecisionwasmade.In is an RNN used for time-series sequence prediction [206]) to
particular,eNBgathersmeasurementparametersfromtheusers, predict theRSSI of the AP.Based on theacquiredRSSI values,
includingtheuser’sradiolinkconditionofthecurrenteNB,the thesystemdecideswhethertotriggerahandover.Thisdecision
user’s neighboring eNBs, and the user QoE resulting from past shows if the handover must occur before its actual execution,
experiences once handover was made. This information is fed which initiates an early handover registration process to avoid
tothetwo-levelNNmodel,wherethefirstleveldeterminesthe any disconnection of the signal while switching between APs.
QoE in terms of complete download or incomplete download, Theproposedschemeoutperformedtherelatedmodelsinterms
andthesecondlevelistrainedtoapproximatethefiledownload of prediction accuracy. The proposed method is suitable for
time. Based on the handover algorithm, the current serving future self-driving vehicles to avoid collisions and can receive
eNB triggers the handover to the next eNB with uninterrupted information at any instance of time. As a result, a centralized
service to the user. Their algorithm assigns data for users to KPisneededtocollectalltheinformationandpreparetotake
download and measures the amount of information lost due to handoveractionswhennecessary.
handover. The simulation results show that almost 96% of the (ii) Knowledge derived from reinforcement learning: The authors of
data were downloaded even when handover occurred. BSs can [196] proposed a fuzzy Q-learning algorithm for two-tier net-
usetheproposedmethodtocreateacentralizedKPandperform worksthatincludemacrocellsandsmallcells.Theirmethoduses
handovermanagementwithalowdatalossratio. thecalldroprateandsignalingoverheadcausedbythehandover
OwingtothevulnerabilityofmmWavesin5G,whichcancause toformulatethesystemstateintheQ-learningprocess.TheQ-
sudden changes in the received signal strength, handover can learning action is based on the possible values of the trained
oftenbemisleadingandleadtobaddecisionmaking.Oneofthe handover margins. The proposed algorithm aims to obtain a
contributionsof5Gnetworksistheconditionalhandover(CHO). trade-offbetweenuserexperiencedisruptionbycalldroppedra-
ToenhancetheperformanceofCHO,Leeetal.proposedanovel tioandsignalingoverhead.Simulationresultsillustratethatthe
prediction-based CHO (PCHO) scheme based on a DNN [193]. frameworkreducesthenumberofhandoverswhilemaintaining
Their method uses the former blockage information to predict an acceptable call drop ratio. In [197] the authors adapted RL
the best gNB. Here, the signaling patterns from the BSs are techniques to find the best user association in a nonstationary
collected and used in the algorithm. In this study, the authors femtocellnetwork.Theyproposedaframeworkinwhichspecific
focused on the preparation phase of handover because they cells explore past cells’ behavior and use Q-learning to predict
claimthatthepreparationphaseisthemostvulnerableperiodin thefuturestate.Thesimulationresultsshowgrowthincapacity
handover.Thepreparationphaseoccurswhenthesignalquality and decrease in unnecessary handovers. Moreover, the authors
experiencedbytheUEsislow,andtheinterferencefromother of [198] presented a user association technique to avoid han-
BSs is severe. In fact, it is most likely that the UE experiences dover for situations with high expectations of communication
plenty of handover message delivery failures in the prepara- disruption,suchasdenseenvironments.Thisalgorithmissimilar
tionphase.Therefore,toachieveaccuratehandovers,aDNNis to the work above, where the learning algorithm predicts the
trained offline via a training dataset, allowing the current gNB state of the network based on past experiences. They used a
tomakeareal-timedecisiononthepreparationperiodtopredict fuzzyinferencesystem(FIS)tofacilitateQ-learningparameters
the next gNB. PCHO outperforms most of the CHO schemes in during the training process. In this manner, their algorithm
termsofthepreparationsuccessrateandpredictionaccuracyof achieves better performance when the environment changes
thenewBSforhandover.Theproposedalgorithmalsodecreases dynamically. All the proposed algorithms can provide knowl-
thesignalingoverheadcomparedtothecurrentstudiesonCHO- edge for a centralized KDN to overcome handover problems in
based mechanisms. The recommended scheme is suitable for small-cellnetworks.
centralizedBStomanagehandovers.In[194],anRNNwasused In[199],atwo-layerframeworkforhandovercontrolinlarge-
tooptimizethehandoverin5Gnetworks.Inthiswork,mobile scalewirelessnetworkswasintroduced.Intheproposedframe-
usersincreasethetransmissionofusefulinformationonwireless work,acentralizedcontrollerclustersUEsbasedonthemobility
channels and reduce service information. This is because each patternsandutilizesanasynchronousmultiuserDRLschemeto
device is equipped with an NN that helps to process sensitive controlthehandover.DRLusestheactor–criticlearningmethod
data locally. The result of the NN is always sent back to the to achieve an optimal policy for handover in each cluster. The
knowledge-basedserverforfurtherprocessingorstorage.Their algorithm uses online and offline methods, wherein the online
technique reduces the amount of service traffic transmitted by method UEs keep processing and fetching the weight parame-
usersthroughthecommunicationchannelandself-organizesthe ters periodically, while in the offline method, UEs behave as
handovers in heterogeneous networks. The proposed method static controllers. Consequently, there are two different con-
is simple, reduces system complexity, and provides sufficient trollers in the network: one managing the mobile devices and
knowledgeforacentralizedKP. theothermanagingthecontroller(maincentralizedcontroller).
Intelligent vehicular networks (IVNs) have attracted many re- Theirworkispromisingforfuturewire-lessnetworksasitacts
searchers because of their real-time road safety services and efficiently with the dynamic structure of the network and can
otheressentialapplicationsforvehicles.However,thedevelop- trainfastevenwithnewlyarrivingUEs.Therefore,adaptingsuch
mentofefficientandrobustwirelesscommunicationinvehicular asystemattheKPisessentialtoaddressscalabilityissuesand
systems is still challenging for content delivery. This is mainly controlhandoversmorerobustly.
because of the high mobility rate of vehicles that disrupt con- As a result of the growing complexity of the network, there
nectivity. The authors of [195] proposed a two-tier ML-based hasbeensubstantialresearchinterestinSON.3GPPhasdefined
schemeforintelligenthandovermanagementinanIVN.Inthe someoftheprinciplesandconceptsforautomatingthenetwork
first tier, an RNN model is used to predict the receiving signal configurationandmanagementforimprovingthenetwork[207,
strengthofAPstomakeahandovertriggerdecision.Astochastic 208].Inthiscontext,industryandacademiahavedefinedload
Markov model is utilized in the second tier to select the next balancing and handover optimization as the most important
34S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
parametersforself-organizingmechanismsinRANs.Theauthors everyiterationbasedonthealgorithmobservation.Thenumer-
of[200]proposedafuzzylogicandRLtechniquetojointlyim- icalresultsdemonstratethesuperiorityoftheQ-learning-based
provethehandoverandloadbalancingforLTEusers.Thefuzzy handover policy prediction compared to the existing heuristic
logictunesthehandoverparametersatthecelladjacencylevel. handoverdecision-makingintermsofachievinghigherthrough-
TheQ-learningalgorithmwasusedtooptimizethefuzzysystem put.Consequently,theproposedalgorithmforsolvinghandover
to improve the network performance by forcing the scheme problemsinmmWavesystemscanbeusedinacentralizedKDN
to select the most appropriate handover action. The RL action architecture.
choosestheBSwhilehandoveroccurs,andtherewardfunction For5Gtechnology,Molleletal.proposedanovelofflinescheme
isbasedonjointlymaximizingthehandovermanagementpolicy based on the double-DRL or DDRL algorithm to minimize the
andloadbalancingfunction.Theproposedalgorithmprovesthat frequency of switching between BSs [204]. Their algorithm in-
the network performance increases as both entities (handover telligentlymakeshandoverdecisionsbymaximizingtheuser-BS
and network load) run together to optimize the performance connectiondurationinacentralizedarchitecture.Toobtainthe
comparedtoschemeswhereoneentityisrunningonSON.3GPP optimalBS,atrajectory-awarehandoveroptimizationschemeis
introducedLTE-A/LTE-advancedtoimprovenetworkcoverage, introduced.ThismethodusesthereceivedSNRvaluesfromdif-
capacity,anddatarate,whichprovidedlowlatencyandahigh
ferentBSsatanytime,andthenthisinformationisusedtomap
datarate.Theauthorsof[201]utilizedtheAHP-TOPSISmethod
theuser’sexactlocation.Inthisway,theyalsoconsideredobsta-
with Q-learning algorithms to make intelligent handover man-
cles between users and BSs, including trees, building vehicles,
agement.TheproposedmethodselectstheoptimaleNBwithin
and people (using wireless insite software (WI)). Specifically,
anappropriatetriggertime.TochoosethemostsuitableeNBfor
the offline learning framework simulates the environment and
handover,thealgorithmusesRSRP,thereferencesignalreceived
collects the data. Then, the DDRL agent trains and develops a
quality (RSRQ), uplink signal-to-interference plus noise ratio,
model accordingly. The action in this learning problem is the
location, moving direction of the UE, and current load on the
selection of BSs. The reward is a function of minimizing the
eNB. Based on the running application on the network, such
number of handovers and maximizing the average throughput
as speed-sensitive or delay-sensitive, AHP-TOPSIS is associated
ofthenetwork.Thesimulationresultsshowrobustperformance
withUEs.Accordingtotheobtainedranks,UEsareallocatedto
whileoutperformingexistingML-basedconventionalschemes.
a new eNB, where Q-learning evaluates the optimal triggering
Guo et al. studied handover management and power control
point for handover. The proposed algorithm is evaluated by
problems in a two-tier heterogeneous network consisting of
numerical and simulation results, proving that their technique
mmWave and SBSs [205]. Specifically, they modeled the han-
minimizes the handover failure rate and handover Ping-Pong
dover management and power controller problems as a fully
effectcomparedtothefuzzymultiple-criteriacellselection(FM-
cooperativemulti-agentRL(MARL)algorithmviatheproximal
CCS) scheme and other prior methods. Both algorithms can be
policyoptimization(PPO)technique.Theyintroducedacentral-
deployedinacentralizedKDNforfuturecellularnetworks.
izedtrainingprocedure,whichcollectsglobalinformationfrom
Handoverismorechallengingin5Gandbeyondnetworksowing
UEsfortrainingpurposes,withadecentralizedexecutionpolicy
to the high attenuation rate of mmWave signals. Non-line-of-
sentto eachUEafterthe trainingphase.Inparticular,theaim
sight (NLOS) signals caused by random obstacles, rain, etc.,
createalimitedcoveragerangeinmmWavenetworks.Overcom- is to utilize DRL for handovers optimization to maximize the
ingthischallengerequiresdeployingseveralsmallcells,which overallnetworkthroughputandreducethehandoverfrequency.
will cause frequent switching of user connections between the TheactionoftheUEinvolvestheBSselectionandpowertuning.
BSs.Theauthorsof[202]usedacentralizedRL-basedalgorithm The reward of the training process is a function of throughput
forhandoveroptimizationin5Gcellularnetworks.Theirmethod and handover penalty. The proposed algorithm formulated a
chooses an appropriate BS based on radio measurements ob- decentralizedpolicybasedonmulti-agentPPO(MAPPO),which
tainedfromtheuser.Handovermanagementisformulatedasa increasesthethroughputandreducesthehandoverfrequency.
sub-class of RL contextual multi-arm bandit (CMAB) problems.
The BS collects the RSRP reports from the UE and forwards
6.4. Localization
themtoacentralizedCMABwherethehandoverdecisiontakes
place, which is the action of the learning agent. The agent’s
Many applications depend on high localization precision to pro-
reward is a function of the link beam of the RSRP, which
vide the best service quality. Localization is divided into two main
is proportional to the network throughput, and the aim is to
categories:indoorandoutdoor.Aglobalpositioningsystem(GPS)has
maximize the throughput. The proposed mechanism performs
beenwidelyusedforoutdoorlocalization.However,indoorpositioning
optimally in many simulated environments, demonstrating su-
with GPS is not applicable because of the complexity of the indoor
periority compared to the results obtained with state-of-the-art
algorithms. Similarly, the authors of [203] used RL techniques environment. Signal attenuation is very high in indoor environments
to predict the optimal handover decision-making action based owingtocondensedmaterialsandobstacles.Therefore,indoorposition-
on the information acquired by pedestrian movements. They ingmethods,such astimeofarrival(TOA), timedifference ofarrival
utilized the location and mobility rate of pedestrians to learn (TDOA), received signal strength (RSS), etc., are used for location
theoptimalhandoverpolicytomaximizethethroughputofthe approximation in closed areas. However, more recently, researchers
network. Their network consists of a single station, mmWave havestartedadaptingMLalgorithmstoincreasetheaccuracyofindoor
APs, an access controller, and a human tracking module. The localization in wireless networks. This section presents an overview
human tracking module uses an RGB camera to collect the ofMLtechniquesdeployedinindoorlocalization.Mostmobiledevice
position and velocity of the users. Based on the collected data, activitiesoccurindoors,whichmeansitisessentialforthe6Gcellular
theaccesscontrollerperformsaQ-learningalgorithmandmakes networktohaveanear-exactlocationoftheuserbeforeprovidingany
ahandoverdecision.Theactionofthelearningalgorithmineach services.KDNcanlearnfromthehistoricaldataofauserandpredict
iterationinvolveschoosingoneofthedeployedAPs.Thereward the user’s location. Hence, more reliable services can be offered by
functionperformsthedatarateofthecommunicationlinkonce KDN-basednetworks.Table15summarizesthestudiessurveyedinthis
a handover is made. The aim is to maximize the reward in section.
35S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Table15
Knowledge-basedstrategiesforindoorlocalization.
Article Knowledgeobjective Architecture MLalgorithm Deliverable Conclusion
[209] Adaptivetuningto Distributed K-nearestneighbor Achieveslocationerroras Theproposedalgorithmuses
maximizeindoor lowat1.7m RSS-level-basedfeaturescaling
localization modeltoimprovethe
accuracyofindoorlocalization
[210] Efficientnear Distributed Supportvector Significantimprovementin Thetrainedofflinescheme
real-time machine convergencetimeand candecreasetheonline
localizationsystem predictionaccuracy learningerrorby0.8m
fornavigationand
monitoringin
mobiledevices
[211] Robustandefficient Hybrid Relevancevector Reducesthecomputational Theproposedalgorithmusesa
wirelesslocalization machine complexitywhileachieving classifiertoidentifyNLOS
method acceptablelocalization signals
accuracy
[212] Optimalindoor Distributed Supportvector Significantperformance Theproposedalgorithm
localizationfor machine improvementinvarious estimatetheindoor
UWBnetworks practicalscenarios localizationrangingerrorto
improvetherangingerror
mitigation
[213] OptimalK-nearest Distributed K-nearestneighbor Maximizestheaccuracy Adaptiveindoorpositioning
neighborpositioning withoptimalnumberof system
algorithmforWLAN referencepoints
[214] Introducinganovel Distributed Neuralnetwork Reducesthecalculation ByonlyusingoneLTEeNB,
signalfingerprint time thealgorithmmeasuresthe
forgeographical locationwithamaximum
localizationinLTE errormarginof6meters
networks
[215] Thetrained3D Distributed Deepautoencoder High-performance3D Theproposedmethodextracts
modelisusedfor network localizationinlargeindoor RSSmeasurementstoincrease
accurateindoor spaces theindoorpositioning
localization accuracy
[216] Onlinereal-time Distributed Kernelprincipal achieving2mpositioning Thealgorithmusesspatial
positioningfor componentanalysis errorwhilereducingthe divisiontechniquebasedon
mobiledevices (KPCA) sizeoftheradiomap RandomForesttechniqueto
basedontheoffline increasetheaccuracyof
traineddata localization
[217] Blindindoor Distributed Principalcomponent Accuratetrajectory Abilitytodistinguishfloorsin
localizationusing analysis estimation abuildingandtrajectory
minimum learning
informationabout
thesurrounding
[218] High-performance Distributed Autoencoder Achieveshighaccuracy Theproposedscheme
localizationsystem withoututilizingradio outperformsmaximum
withsmart pathlossmodel likelihoodestimation,
adaptation fingerprintingmethodsand
mechanism generalizedregressionNN
[219] Suboptimalsolution Distributed Deeplearning Achieveshighpositioning ThealgorithmutilizesCSI
forindoor accuracy phaseinformationfor
location-based fingerprintingandoutperforms
services threebenchmarkschemes
basedonRSSorCSI
[220] Optimallocalization Distributed Deepautoencoder Maximizesthelocalization Thealgorithmensures
algorithmfor network accuracy acceptableerrorrangingby
mobiledevices usingCSIandestimatedAoAs
(i) Knowledgederivedfromsupervisedlearning:In[209],theauthors beusedasknowledgetoestimatetheuserlocationinanindoor
presentedafeature-scaling-basedKNN(FS-KNN)toimprovethe environment with acceptable accuracy. The RSS information is
localization accuracy. The algorithm depends on the measured gatheredbyAPsacrossthenetwork,whichisthenprocessedby
RSSreportedbytheMS,whichaccountsfortheactualrelation- MSsinadistributedmannerforlocationestimation.
ship between the signal differences and geometrical distances. A real-time, precise, and reliable localization system can de-
Toobtaintheparametersoftheweightfunction,iterativetrain- termine the acceptable position of any portable device with
ing was established to tune the parameters. After training the opportunities for tracking objects/people, navigation systems,
model,thealgorithmfindstheoptimalvaluescorrespondingto monitoring devices, and other location-based services. Interest
the actual distance between a newly received RSS vector and in ambientintelligence, which enablespeople or systemsto be
eachfingerprint.Then,theuserlocationwithanaverageerror awareoftheuser’spresence,isincreasing[221–223].Themain
as low as 1.70 m is determined by solving a weight mean of issue in ambient intelligence is determining the position of the
locationsbasedonKnearestreferencepoints.Thisalgorithmhas userwithhighaccuracy.Asaresult,thereareongoinginvesti-
twophases,whichtrainthesystemintheofflinephaseanduseit gationsbasedonindoorlocalizationtoproposenewalgorithms
foronlinelocationestimation.Theofflinetrainedalgorithmcan to improve the accuracy of indoor positioning systems. The
36S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
authorsof[210]proposedanonlineindependentsupportvector k=2,outperformsothersettingsforstaticlocalization.Thepro-
machine (OISVM) for indoor localization that avoids training posedalgorithmwasverifiedinvariousscenarios,suchasoffice
fromscratch.TheirmodelusestheRSSofWiFisignalstomake rooms,staticpositioning,straightcorridors,anddynamictrack-
online predictions and facilitate mobile devices. The proposed ingsituations.Anotherpromisingmethodthathelpslocalization
model includes two phases: offline and online. The algorithms is the adaptation of the NN. The authors of [214] developed
learnthroughpre-collectedRSSwithreferencepoint(RP)labels a unique mapping between the characteristics of radio chan-
appendedtothecorrespondingRSSduringtheofflinephase.The nels and geographic locations. A feature extraction algorithm
offline phase also incorporates kernel parameter selection and is used to select the channel parameters with non-redundant
datasamplingtodealwiththeimbalanceddispersionofthedata informationthatisformulatedasafingerprintvector.Thechan-
samples.Intheonlinephase,newRSSsamplesarecollectedby nel parameters were taken from the LTE downlink signals. A
a centralized local AP for online learning and to estimate the feedforward NN is utilized to input the fingerprint data and
location. Compared to traditional SVM methods, their method outputtheUElocations.TheNNistrainedandusedbytheUEto
can balance the accuracy of localization and model size. From estimatetheirlocationinthenetwork.Theproposedalgorithm
the simulation results, the location estimation error decreased wasinvestigatedforbothindoorandoutdoorenvironments,and
by 0.8 m, while the training phase time and period were re- experimental results demonstrate that by using only one LTE
ducedconsiderablycomparedtothetraditionaltechniques.The eNB,thistechniquereachesamedianerrordistanceof6mand
proposedtechniquecanbeusedviaadistributedarchitectureof 75 m in indoor and outdoor environments, respectively. Both
KDN. studiesproposedabovearesuitableforadistributedarchitecture
Duetothecomplexityoftheindoorenvironmentandtheexis- ofKDN[213,214],whereUEusestheinformationcomingfrom
theBStocalibratetheirlocation.Bothalgorithmsprovideafast
tenceofvariousobstacles,high-accuracylocalizationprediction
and accurate location-based technique, which is promising for
is rarely achievable. This is due to the NLOS radio blockage
thefuturearchitectureoftheKDN.
and insufficient information from the nodes. To this end, it is
(ii) Knowledge derived from unsupervised learning: To increase the
helpfultoidentifyandcategorizetheNLOSsignals.Nguyenetal.
positioning accuracy, the authors of [215] introduced a novel
developed a robust relevance vector machine (RVM) for ultra-
denoisingautoencoderviaBluetoothlowenergy(BLE)-basedin-
wideband (UWB) signals using time-of-arrival (TOA) [211].
doorlocalization(DABIL)method.Inthisstudy,theautoencoder
They introduced a hybrid two-step iterative (TSI)-based lo-
extracts useful fingerprint patterns hidden in the RSS indicator
calization algorithm. In particular, they utilized cooperative
measurementsandconstructsafingerprintdatabasetoshowthe
localization, meaning that both centralized and distributed ap-
reference locations in 3-D space. The fingerprint patterns were
proachesforpositioningcontributedtoestimatingthelocation.
built offline using raw RSSI values from different beacon sta-
Incentralizedlocalization,acentralprocessorgathersthenode’s
tions.RSSImeasurementsofallthenearbyBLEbeaconstations
information and builds a map. This map is later sent to nodes,
were collected and used in the training phase and further de-
and the nodes perform location estimation in a distributed
noisingautoencoderforfingerprintconstruction.Aftertraining,
manner. Additionally, they designed a classifier and regressor
theautoencoderisusedasatrainedfingerprinttoestimatethe
to mitigate the limitations of SVM. The RVM classifier can
probabilityofthetargetbeinglocatedinareferencelocation.Fi-
classify the line-of-sight (LOS) and NLOS signals received from
nally,theKNNalgorithmwasusedtoestimatethelocationofthe
theunknownnodepositions.Atthesametime,anRVMregressor
target. Field experiments demonstrate that 3- D fingerprinting
was adapted to predict the ranging error of the input data.
cansignificantlyincreasethelocalizationaccuracy.Additionally,
First, the RVM regressor is trained using a feature vector as
theirmethodperformsbetterintermsofhorizontalandvertical
input data, which consists of maximum amplitude, received
accuracythandeeplearning-basedalgorithmsandconventional
energy,meanexcessdelay,andsoon.ThebenefitsoftheRVM
fingerprinting methods. Their algorithm can be utilized in a
classifier include the use of a smaller number of relevance
distributedKPtoperformlocation-basedestimation.Toreduce
vectors than the support vectors in the SVM and mitigating
the computational complexity, another fingerprinting-based lo-
the range estimation error. This method proved to reduce the
calization system was introduced in [216]. They proposed a
communication overhead and computational complexity while
dimensionreductionmethodthatusesmaximumlikelihoodesti-
providing high localization accuracy. In contrast to this work,
mationandutilizeskernelprincipalcomponentanalysis(KPCA)
theauthorsof[212]presentedanovelapproachtomitigatethe
forfeatureextraction.Toreducethestoragespace,KPCAdivides
ranging error by directly mitigating the bias occurring in both the fingerprinting radio map into sub-regions. The proposed
LOSandNLOS.Therefore,explicitsignalidentificationbetween indoorlocalizationcanreducethesizeoftheradiomapby74%
LOSandNLOSisnotnecessary.Specifically,anSVM-basedtwo- while achieving a 2 m positioning error. The algorithm is first
classnon-parametricregressorsmethodisusedtolearnandmap connectedtoWiFitouploadtheRSSinformationusingdevices
the features extracted from the received signal to the ranging for centralized processing. Then, the information is sent back
errors. The simulation results demonstrate that the proposed to the devices to make the location estimation in a distributed
regressors greatly improve the performance in various envi- manner.Furthermore,PCAiscombinedwithlineardiscriminant
ronmental scenarios compared to conventional methods. Both analysis(LDA)toextractlower-dimensionalfeaturesfromWiFi
studiespresentedaboveuseUWBanchornodestoestimatethe RSSsignalsin[217].Thealgorithmprovidesfloorclassification,
location of objects, where UWB nodes collect the surrounding landmark detection, and trajectory of users. The experimental
information and process it in a distributed manner to compute results from different levels of office floors show that the posi-
thelocation. tioningaccuracyisimproved.Todealwiththeunpredictability
In addition to SVM and RVM, some researchers have used the of wireless channels, Dai et al. employed a multi-layer neural
KNNtoachieveacceptableindoorlocalization.Forinstance,Xu network (MLNN) for RSS-based indoor localization problems
et al. [213] proposed an optimal KNN positioning algorithm withoutconsideringpathlossorcomparingtheradiomap[218].
based on theoretical accuracy criteria (TAC) in WLAN indoor The MLNN includes three main layers/sections: transforming
environments.Inthismethod,theoptimalnumberofnearestRPs data, denoising, and locating sections. In the transforming sec-
thatcanlocatetheuseristheoreticallyanalyzed.TheKNN-based tion, the RSS of an unknown node is taken as an input and
localization algorithm demonstrated that even with k=1 and mapstothecorrespondinghiddenlayerthroughadeterministic
37S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
mapping function. In the denoising section, all the nodes’ RSS MDP problems are ML techniques that require taking action in the
errors are improved by using a multi-layer denoising archi- currentsystemstatebasedonthefeedbackrewardresultingfromthe
tecture. Finally, from the location section, the corresponding previous action. Moreover, all the above ML problems may involve
squaregridlabelsweredetectedtoestimatethelocation.They feature extraction, which means that one or more inputs affect the
havea two-stagetrainingprocedure,wherethe firststageuses output value. Feature extraction for any problem is performed manu-
an UL algorithm for pre-training each layer and a fine-tuning allyoralgorithmically.Consequently,foranywirelesscommunication
stagetominimizetheerroroftheentirenetwork.Theproposed problem in the above categories, KDN can use an ML technique as a
algorithm shows higher location accuracy than the maximum possible solution and derive knowledge from them. For instance, to
likelihood estimation (MLE), generalized regression neural net- solvecachingproblemsinwirelessnetworks,onesolutionistoacquire
work(GRNN),andfingerprintingmethods.Theproposedworks thecontentrequestprobabilitiesfromusersinthenetwork.Thisprob-
in[217,218]suggestadistributedKDNarchitecture. lemcanadopthistoricaldataandassociatethemodelwithregression
Indoor fingerprinting localization systems that use RSS-based problems. It takes the user profile as an input and then predicts the
WiFi measurements are easy to implement and have low hard- user’s content request probabilities as the output. On the other hand,
warerequirements.However,RSS-basedmethodshavetwomain the same problem can be solved by MDP, where, in every state, the
problems. First, the RSS values are highly random and can agent can predict the associated cache content request. Furthermore,
changeaccordingtopathloss,shadowing,etc.Second,theRSS in user association problems, clustering algorithms are used, and for
formationistheaverageofalltheobtainedreceivedsignalam- interactiveenvironmentalproblems,suchasmobilitymanagementand
plitudes.Totacklethisproblem,theauthorsof[219]proposeda resource management, the MDP model is more suitable. Therefore, it
noveldeep-learning-basedindoorfingerprintingsystemviaCSI. is important to consider the advantages and disadvantages of each
TheCSIamplituderesponsesarefedtotheinputoftheDNNwith techniquebeforeapplyingthem.
agreedybehaviortoreducethecomplexityofthetrainingphase.
TheweightsintheDNNarestoredasfingerprintstoaidthelo- 7.2. ImplementationcomplexityofMLinKDN
calizationprocedureintheonlinephase.Theonlineprocessuses
probabilisticdatafusionbasedontheradialbasisfunction(RBF) In this subsection, we examine the implementation complexity of
to estimate the user locations. Their algorithm was examined ML algorithms in KDN problems. Generally, four factors need to be
in varying propagation environments and showed promising considered while computing the complexity of an ML algorithm: (1)
resultswithhighaccuracy.Thesamegroupofauthorsof[220] mathematicaloperations,(2)dataset,(3)datastorage,and(4)software
consideredthecalibratedCSIdataofthe5-GHzOFDMchannel and hardware requirements. Mathematical operations vary from one
informationforindoorfingerprinting.Similartoothermethods, problem statement to another and are usually based on the features
theiralgorithmconsistsoftwophases:onlineandoffline.Inthe of the ML algorithm that affect the complexity of the mathematical
offline phase, a deep autoencoder network is utilized for each operation. Dataset complexity lies within the collection and use of
user position to rebuild the CSI phase information, where the appropriate data. Hence, collecting the necessary information from
weightsarestoredasthefingerprint.Intheonlinephase,once different wireless communication tasks has its own difficulties. For
a new user location needs to be obtained, the algorithm uses instance, in SL problems, data should be presented before finding a
a probabilistic method that uses a weighted average of all the solution. In contrast, the data will be collected in RL as the agent
reference locations in the fingerprint to estimate the position. interactswiththeenvironment.Next,thecomplexitythatoccurswhen
Theproposedalgorithmwasvalidatedwithexperimentalresults, thecollecteddataorprocesseddataaretoolargetobestoredasknowl-
which indicated that the proposed method was superior to the edge in KP. Accordingly, software and hardware complexity arises
traditionalCSIandRSS-basedmethods.Proposedstudiesabove from simulating the right software and using the correct number of
establishlocalizationinmobiledevicesinadistributedmanner. processorsorGPUstoprocesstheknowledge,respectively.
7. Terms and conditions associated with machine learning algo- 7.3. Timeconsumption
rithmsforgeneratingknowledge
One of the critical aspects of KDN is the response time. The ML
Inthissection,thetermsandconditionsassociatedwithKDNprob- algorithm tends to spend some time on training to provide near-
lemsaregeneralizedforresearcherstoconsiderbeforeusingknowledge optimal answers. Hence, it is essential to investigate the two-timing
in the network. These conditions are categorized to identify the type mechanismsthatmostMLtechniqueshave,includingtrainingtimeand
ofproblemKDNisrequiredtosolve:implementationcomplexity,time responsetime.Thetrainingtimeistheamountoftimerequiredforeach
consumption,trainingdata,andthedifferencesbetweenMLtechniques ML algorithm to be fully trained. The response time is when an ML
inthesameKDNproblem.Aftercheckingeachconditionandmeeting algorithmneedstomakeapredictionafterbeingtrained.Bothtimings
therequirements,afinaldecisioncanbemadeonwhethertoadaptthe areimportantfordifferentapplicationsinKDNnetworks[224].
KDNalgorithmandwhichMLalgorithmismorecost-efficient. The training time is most important for supervised and unsuper-
vised learning, but it also has significance in RL for making accurate
7.1. IdentifyingsuitableMLalgorithm decisions.Therearetwodifferentwaysoftraining:onlineandoffline.
Dependingontheapplicationrequirements,trainingmayoccurinone
The first and most crucial step is to discover the type of ML algo- of the above processes. For example, highly dependent applications
rithmthatismostsuitableforanyparticularwirelesscommunication will perform online training, such as handover optimization, tuning,
problem.Themajorityofwirelesscommunicationproblemsaresolved andhealinginSONs.ApplicationsincorporatingNNsrequiretimefor
within a few different ML algorithms, categorized as regression prob- adaptationtomakeaccuratepredictions,includingmobilityprediction
lems,classificationproblems,clusteringproblems,andMDPproblems. and clustering problems [225]. Specifically, for applications with NN
In regression problems, the ML algorithm is required to predict a systems,thetrainingtimeisusuallylonger[226].Hence,theenviron-
continuousvalueoutputgivenaninput.Inclassificationproblems,the mentmaychangebythetimethetrainingalgorithmlearnsapolicyor
MLalgorithmneedstopredictadiscretevalueoutput,usuallyanswered mapping rule. In addition, training an RL model in complex wireless
by a yes or no, and zero or one to essentially identify the class to communication environments can be time-consuming and ineffective
which the input belongs. The clustering problems are ML techniques, because the set of agents and environmental dynamics are different
where the data are grouped based on their type or value. Finally, after the learning algorithm is completely trained. Therefore, such
38S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
changesinthecharacteristicsofthecommunicationenvironmentmay reducethetrafficcausedbyvideostreaming.In[110],thedatasetused
affecttheperformanceoftheMLalgorithm.However,thetrainingtime fortrainingwasacquiredusingtheYouTubeApplicationProgramming
inNN-basedapproachescanbereducedusingGPUs,andusingTLhelps Interface with 12500 YouTube videos. The dataset used to train the
todecreasethetrainingtimeandacceleratethelearningprocedure,as RNNin[111,112]wasobtainedfromYouku[232](avideohostingser-
illustratedin[227,228]. vicebasedinBeijing,China)forcontent(video)requestpredictionand
The response time of the trained learning algorithm is more im- trafficmanagement.Moreover,in[113],thedatasetisacombination
portantthanthetrainingtime.Mostapplicationsinwirelessnetworks oftwodatasets,namelyYUPENN[233]andUFC101[233].
require a quick response, on a timescale of milliseconds, such as In networking scenarios, specifically in routing problems, the col-
decision making in resource management. Let us consider two differ- lected dataset is usually obtained from a simulator. For instance,
ent approaches of ML applied to these wireless network applications, in [137], the authors implemented a neural network using the Om-
namelyNN-basedapproachesandalternativeapproaches.Thetimecost net++ simulator for traffic engineering. In this study, the SDN con-
canbediscussedasfollows: troller collects traffic flow reports from the nodes in the networks
and separates different features to feed the SL algorithm. In [142],
(1) NN-based approaches: In some applications, we can achieve an
the authors investigated DNN-based routing to solve dynamic routing
acceptable response time without GPU usage. For example, as
problems.Thetrainingdatasetcollectstrafficpatternsandpathsthata
shown in Table 1 in [89], on average, it is possible to achieve
packet will undertake to reach the destination in the proposed study.
0.0149msforpowercontroldecisionmakinginanetworkwith
The routing paths were obtained using the traditional OSPF strategy
30 users. Therefore, making resource management decisions
fromasoftwaresimulator.Inotherstudies,suchasin[141],thedataset
withinanacceptabletimeframeisfeasibleforpowerallocation
wasgeneratedinreal-timethroughonlinefashionwithroutersinthe
problems using a trained DNN [89,229,230]. However, as the
networkforintelligentrouteselection.
network size increased, both the response time and training
InML-basedlocalizationtechniques,threemainstrategiesareused
time exponentially increased. One solution proposed by [231]
tocollecttherequireddatasetandobtainthepositionoftheobjectinan
istouseGPU-basedparallelcomputingtoenableNNstopredict
indoorenvironment:RSS,CSI,andToA.Researchstudiesin[209,210,
withinatolerablerange(milliseconds).Furthermore,thereisa
215,217,218]usedRSSinformationasadataset,andstudiesin[219,
deep Q network in the DRL, and the deep Q network depends
220] used CSI data. The generated dataset was obtained using a cell
ontheoutputofQ-valuesfromtheNN.Hence,theresponsetime
phoneorUWBdevicefromrealpracticalmeasurements.Forexample,
mostlydependsontheNNprocesstime.However,onepromising
the authors of [219] utilized the IWL 5300 NIC to mobile devices to
solution that KDN naturally provides is using the pre-trained
read CSI data, while in [209], a client program was used in mobile
dataasknowledge,sotheresponsetimecanbenear-optimaland
devicestomeasuretheRSSlevels.
suitableforfuturewirelessnetworkapplications.
In RL, the learning algorithm continuously updates itself through
(2) Alternative approaches: In resource allocation problems, in both
interactionwiththeenvironment.Intheseproblems,thelearningagent
RL-based Q-learning and joint utility and strategy estimation-
takesactioninaparticularstate.Then,itreceivesarewardfromtheen-
based approaches, the aim is to find a policy or strategy that
vironment,wheretheenvironmentiscreatedasavirtualenvironment
suitesthedynamicnatureoftheenvironment.InRL-basedmeth-
by specific software, such as NS3, Matlab. For example, in spectrum
ods,afterthelearningalgorithmconverges,thepolicyorstrat-
management, researchers in [84] optimized the spectrum usage from
egyfromthetrainedalgorithmbecomesfixed.InQ-learning,the
rewardfeedbackforeachD2Dpair.Inpowermanagement,theauthors
strategyisrepresentedbyasetofQ-values,whereeachsetcor-
of [105] used the reward as the difference between the maximum
respondstoasystemstateandanassociatedaction.Therefore,a
totalpowerconsumptionandthecurrenttotalpowerconsumptionto
well-trainedRLalgorithmcanrespondinmilliseconds.Addition-
perform BS switching on/off to minimize the overall network power
ally,thejointutilityandstrategyestimation-basedlearninggoal
consumption.
is to choose a probability value that indicates an action. Here,
theagentonlyneedstogeneratearandomnumberbetween0–1
7.5. SuggestionsforchoosingMLalgorithmsinKDNframework
toselecttheappropriateaction.Consequently,awell-trainedal-
gorithmcanacceleratethedecision-makingprocessandachieve
Aspreviouslydiscussed,MLproblemsaregenerallycategorizedinto
amillisecondresponse.
regression,classification,clustering,anddecision-makingproblems.In
comparison,thedifferencesbetweeneachliewithinthesolutionsthey
7.4. Suitabledatasetavailabilityfortrainingandgeneratingknowledge provideforKDNproblems.However,foreachproblem,therecouldbe
differentMLsolutions.Therefore,itisimportanttorealizeandcompare
Different training data are collected or generated for supervised, MLalgorithms,specificallythosethatcansolvethesameproblem.This
unsupervised,andreinforcementlearning,dependingonthecharacter- subsection provides a guideline for readers to first understand why
isticsoftheproblem.Forinstance,inspectrumallocationproblems,the recent studies have used ML algorithms (in the context of wireless
authorsof[82,83]usednon-cooperativegamemethodswherethedata networks)andprovideguidanceforselectingasuitableMLalgorithm.
weretrainedbasedonthecollectedinformationfromtheprimaryand
secondaryusers.In[86]thesamenon-cooperativespectrumallocation (1) Techniques for deploy regression or classification: For these two
is modeled with the difference where the data is collected using an techniques,SVM,KNN,andNNaremostlyused[111,112,140,
RNNmodelateachBS;here,BSscontinuouslyinteractwitheachother 193,194].SVMisthemostrobustpredictionmethodforbinary
to collect training data. Other authors of [84] used joint utility and classification with low complexity [113]. At the same time,
strategyestimation-basedlearningtocollectD2Dinformationandgen- KNNisamulticlassclassifier,mostlyknownforitssimplicityof
eratetrainingdata.Inpowerallocation,whentheSLmethodisused, implementation. In problems where the dataset is not linearly
suchasin[89,229,230],theauthorsaimtoadaptaneuralnetworkto separable, KNN is a better classifier than SVM. In the KNN
approximatepowerallocationinacomplexenvironment,includingthe approach, only the distance metric and K parameter must be
geneticandWMMSEalgorithms.Usingthesealgorithmsenablesthese selected,whereasinSVM,theregularizationandkernelparam-
studiestogeneratetrainingdataunderdifferentnetworkscenariosthat eters must be chosen carefully. Although these two algorithms
canlaterbeusedinKPsasknowledge.Obtainingappropriaterawdata aresimplecomparedtoneuralnetworks,NNismorerobustin
isimportantforresearchersonthesametopics.Forexample,incache feature extraction and improves overall network performance.
problems,theauthorsuseddifferentdatasetsforcachemanagementto For instance, a DNN can handle large datasets and achieve
39S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
high accuracy, although the learning procedure can be time- 122] requires complete information about the traffic load and con-
consuming owing to the optimization of various parameters. tent popularity of users before execution of cache content, which is
However, with sufficient training datasets and powerful GPUs, challenging to acquire precise information in advance. Therefore, we
DNNs are more recommended than other learning machines. suggest prior knowledge for decision-making. Moreover, using a TL
Furthermore,otherneuralnetworks,suchasCNNandRNN,can algorithm,thepastexperienceincachecontentcanbeutilizedbyBSs
reducethetrainingtimeandsystemoverhead.Bothalgorithms to guide cache management even without knowing any information
have their own advantages for solving different problems. For about the current traffic information. In data aggregation problems,
instance,CNNissuitableforlearningspatialfeatures,including supervised learning approaches can differentiate between data com-
munication after a thorough training procedure. On the other hand,
thechannelgainmatrix,whileRNNisgoodatprocessingtime
havingknowledgeaboutthenetworkandtheinformationthatisbeing
seriesproblemsforfeatureextraction.
transmitted or received can help improve network performance and
(2) Techniquesfordeployclustering:MLmodelsappliedtoclustering
add intelligence [182]. Furthermore, in BS sleep-mode control prob-
mainly include K-mean clustering. However, there are other
lems, complete information of the network environment is required
supervised and NN studies deployed to clustering problems. K-
in advance, which is difficult to obtain. The authors of [228] used
meanclusteringisoneofthemostpopularandsimplestmethods
TLtoadaptpastinformationaboutBSswitchingtoguidethecurrent
forclusteringdata.Generally,theK-meanisusedtodifferentiate
decisionmakingforBSswitchingevenwithouttheknowledgeoftraffic
between groups with similar data points and patterns. Neural
loads in the network. In handover management, one solution is to
networksarealsousedtoorganizetheinputdata.Forinstance,
use a fuzzy logic controller with a set of predefined rules, and each
givenasetofimages,theNNcanorganizeandprovideimages
state of the system determines a specific action. However, the setting
withsimilarcontent.Thisprocessdoesnotprovideclusters,but ofeachactionmainlyreliesontheknowledgeandinformationabout
it creates meaningful representations of the dataset, which can thenetworkenvironment,whichmightbeunknownforthenewstate
be used for clustering. The main difference between these two of the communication system. Overall, the main reason for adapting
algorithms is the complexity of implementation. Moreover, in ML algorithms is to acquire knowledge from any particular system
K-meanclustering,thenumberofclustercentroids(Kvalue)is for optimization, self-organization, and self-healing. The majority of
essential; however, in NN, the design of the hidden layers and the papers surveyed in this study can be used as a prior processing
otherfactorsmustbeconsidered. technique to build a knowledge plane and provide intelligence for
(3) Techniquestodeploydecisionmaking:ML-baseddecision-making networks.
algorithms are Q-learning, joint utility and strategy estima-
tion, actor–critic, and DRL. These algorithms are applied to 8.2. Self-organizingnetworks
dynamicenvironmentstolearnpatternsanddecideaccordingly.
Q-learningisanoff-policyRLthatseekstotakethebestactionin Self-organizing networks (SONs) provide self-optimization, coordi-
anyparticularstate.Anactor–criticlearningstrategyishelpful nation, self-organization, and correction for the next generation of
wirelessnetworks[240].Inparticular,mostresearchersnowconsider
innon-Markovenvironments,wherethealgorithmcanlearnan
ML techniques as an official approach to achieve self-organization in
explicitstochasticpolicy.ComparedwiththeQ-learningvalue-
thenetwork,provingthatKDNwillbepartoffuturewirelessnetworks.
basedlearningalgorithm,policyknowledgetransferiseasierin
3GPP has already started developing protocols and technologies to
actor–criticlearningbecausepolicyandvaluefunctionsareup-
automate network configurations [241]. In this context, RL is the
datedindependently.Jointutilityandstrategyestimation-based
most recognizable approach for correcting itself based on the envi-
learningaremoresuitableformulti-agentscenarios,providinga
ronment and experience. In particular, in load balancing, handover
stablesystemwhenoneagentdivergesfromitsmixedstrategy.
management,routing,etc.Insummary,SONcanbeappliedusingthe
TheagentinDRLiscapableoflearningfromahigh-dimensional
following studies [81,85,86,95,99,106,107,114,133–135,184,192,196,
inputstate,whichistheadvantageofDRLoverQ-learningand
200,205,242,243]. SON is an evolution of self-driving networks and
actor–critic learning [234–237]. Another advantage of DRL is
KDN, and most applications in wireless networks require intelligence
its ability to make good action decisions even in unfamiliar totune,correct,anddecideonbehalfofhumanoperators.
situations [238]. Moreover, both Q-learning and actor–critic
learning require a storage repository for each state and action 8.3. Achievingreliableandhighperformancecomparedtotraditionalopti-
procedure.Therefore,theyarenotsuitableformultidimensional mizationalgorithms
datasets.Furthermore,trainingaDRLhasahighcomputational
complexity. Traditionaloptimizationalgorithmscanonlyworkfordeterministic
networks,whichhavecertaincharacteristics.Thesealgorithmsarenot
8. Motivationsforapplyingknowledge-definednetworking practical in current real-life network scenarios, as the network traffic
changeseveryday.Incontrast,MListhecapabilityofmachinestolearn
After summarizing the terms and conditions associated with ML howtorespondtoanyspecificsituation.Hence,theyaremorereliable
thantraditionalalgorithmsowingtotheirflexibilityandadaptationto
algorithms, we need to investigate the motivations for applying the
new environments. In [80], DRL was utilized for spectrum allocation
appropriateMLalgorithmtoKDN-basednetworks.Itisessentialtoex-
andwasabletoprovidetwicethechannelthroughputwhencompared
aminethereasonsandmotivationsforadaptingKDN-basedapproaches
to slotted-aloha with optimal probability. In [89], an SL algorithm
to wireless networks. The subsections below provide the reasons for
was developed to train a DNN for power management, and it was
applying ML and knowledge to the network based on the literature
shown to be superior to a state-of-the-art interference management
surveyedthroughoutthisstudy.
algorithm. In cache management, the authors of [115] used the RL
algorithm for content caching at the BS and compared it with two
8.1. Lackofnetworkknowledgeandintelligence
traditionalcacheupdateschemes,namelyLRUandLFU,whereitshows
a better long-term cache hit rate. Moreover, in [173], the RL-based
Althoughthereexistcentralizedalgorithmsandtechniquesforopti- algorithm for user association performs much better than traditional
mizationthatcanachievetheobjectivesofvariousperformancecrite- dual-decomposition-basedapproaches.Overall,MLtechniqueshavethe
ria, the lack of global network knowledge and intelligence has been potential to provide superior performance to traditional optimization
recognized by researchers [11,239]. For instance, the baseline tech- algorithms.Othersurveyedworksforthismotivationareasfollows[92,
nique to achieve load balancing and backhaul management in [120– 109,115,121,169,173,219,230].
40S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
8.4. Learningpatternsandpredictingthefuture 9. Challengesandopenissues
There have been several studies on the applications of ML and its
By utilizing neural networks, hidden patterns in a system can be
potentialadvantagesforimprovingtheoverallnetworkperformancein
learnedandusedtoestimatefuturevaluesorpredictthefuture,which
wireless networks. However, few studies have focused on facilitating
is an advantage in KDN-based networks. In this context, the authors
the ML-generated output data as knowledge, which can be used in
used this NN functionality to improve system performance. In [92],
similar applications and scenarios to create intelligence. Therefore,
a multi-agent DRL technique was used to observe the spatial features there remain many challenges and open issues that require attention
basedonthecollectedCSIandQoStomakeawiserpowerallocation from various sources across academia and industry to develop the
decisionwhenthenetworkexperiencesdynamicchanges.Moreover,in concept of KDN standard criteria in future wireless networks. In this
traditionalindoorlocalization,thesystem’sperformancecanbeeasily section,weidentifythechallengesanddiscussfutureopportunities.
affected,resultingininaccuratepositioningowingtothecomplexityof
theenvironment.Asaresult,manyresearchersarenowmotivatedto 9.1. Howtheknowledgelayerwillbearchitecturallycreated
useNNstoincreasethepositioningaccuracybylearningandupdating
user patterns [214,219]. Consequently, the motivation of surveyed SeveralstudieshaveintroducedtheKDNarchitecture,forinstance,
works utilizing NN can be observed in [12,86,89,92,97,111–113,116, the authors of [28] restated the concept of KP in the context of SDN
architecture in addition to the three planes of the SDN paradigm.
117,141,164,168,193–195].
Fig.1inthispapershowsthattheKPislocatedontopofthecontrol
andmanagementplanes.TheintegrationofKPgeneratesabehavioral
8.5. Abilitytohandlecomplexproblemsandprovidelow-complexitysolu- model and reasoning process for decision-making. This architecture
tions enables the KP to fully view and control the network via the control
andmanagementplanes.Otherresearchstudiesin[12–14,29]havea
similararchitectureofKDN.In[14],thesameKPisutilizedontopofall
One of the important reasons and motivations for using ML al-
thelayers,butitusesacross-layermanagementandmonitoringplane
gorithms is their ability to handle complex problems and datasets.
withMLalgorithmstomanagetherestoftheplanes.Thispaper[14]
The authors of [86] trained a multi-agent RL-based with ESN for utilizesML-basedalgorithmsinbothseparateorchestrationlayersand
efficient spectrum allocation and load balancing in LTE-U networks. embedded in the management plane. Therefore, there are different
Otherresearchersin[168]usedCNNtoachievealow-complexityand orchestrations of the KDN concept, and a thorough investigation is
high-accuracy clustering algorithm to classify three different types of required to identify the most suitable one in terms of flexibility and
waveforms in wireless communication systems. Moreover, the ability performance.
to handle high-complexity problems is the main reason why authors
useRL.Forexample,fortheon/offsleepmodecontrolofsmallcells, 9.2. Centralized,distributed,orhybridKP
theauthorsof[103]useddistributedQ-learningtodecideonthesleep
mode of each BS, which led to a low-complexity sleep-mode control Therearethreeavailableoptionsforlocatingtheknowledgeplane
algorithm.Overall,themotivationforprovidingalow-complexityso- in wireless networks: centralized, distributed, and hybrid. Identifying
which KDN architecture is suitable for a problem is critical in imple-
lutionfortheKDNparadigmcanbeseenintheliterature[12,79,118,
menting KDN in a real wireless network. In a centralized approach,
152,167,194,211,216,219].
devices only report the information to a centralized controller via
protocols such as OF, P4, and network management. The controller
8.6. Avoidingwrongdecisions processes this information using an ML technique to generate the
knowledge.Thecontrollerusestwoapproachestoconveyknowledge:
direct and indirect approaches. In the direct approach, it uses the
Some traditional and heuristic approaches for optimization and
previously processed information (stored knowledge, not the typical
estimation based on a fixed set of rules are often unable to avoid networkinformation)andimmediatelysendsbackthenewstrategies,
faulty and unsatisfactory results that have occurred previously. This whileintheindirectapproach,theMLalgorithmobtainsthenewrules
means that these approaches are unable to learn from their mistakes and then sends it to the devices. In the distributed approach, devices
andcorrecttheirdecisions.SuchproblemscanbeseeninOSPF-based actbythemselvesbasedonthepreviouslyprocessedinformationorby
routing strategies, as stated in [141], where OSPF routing will result communicating with each other to acquire the information required
insomecongestionincertainsituationsatsomerouterseventhoughit to create the knowledge. To obtain knowledge, specific ML-based al-
may know the congested router. Hence, in these situations, the OSPF gorithms are used for particular applications to optimize or predict.
repeatsthesameaction(wrongdecision),leadingtocongestionagain. The obtained knowledge can be shared with other devices for better
In handover strategies based on RSSI values, a similar problem can network decision-making. This knowledge can be exchanged between
devices using D2D routing protocols. For instance, one particular ML
accrue, as shown in [244]. Moreover, other similar problems can be
can predict the best next-hop by utilizing cross-layer information be-
observedintheliteratureforuserassociationbasedonmax-SINR[173]
tween application and data layers. This prediction can be shared via
and in the BS on/off sleep mode control strategy [106]. To prevent
multi-hop D2D communication with neighboring nodes to the rest of
wrongdecision-makingintraditionalalgorithms,RLanddeeplearning
the network. Therefore, in multi-hop D2D networks, nodes will have
are adapted to learn through historical and new data to prevent any
prior knowledge about the best candidate nodes to relay their traffic
previously incorrect decisions. For instance, deep learning in routing
to maximize overall network performance. The distributed KP might
strategiesenablesthealgorithmtoavoidmistakes,suchascongestion
causeQoSandlatencyproblemsforpacketdeliveryattheinitialstage
inthenetworkunderdifferenttrafficpatterns.RLcanalsobeutilized
ofthenetwork.However,oncenodesgatherenoughinformationabout
inotherapproachestoovercomethesametypeofproblem[245,246]. the other nodes, they can make near real-time decision-making that
In summary, decision making with poor performance outcomes can maximizes the QoS. In the hybrid approach, both the controller and
be avoided using ML strategies in the KDN framework, which can be devices act intelligently together based on the information collected.
further observed in the surveyed literature of [63,89,95,98,114,115, This information is used to acquire knowledge and inject a new rule
118,133,134,141,150,247–251] basedontheMLoutput.
41S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
9.3. Knowledgevalidation,uncertaintyandcompromises the current ML-based algorithms is evaluated based on the level of
improvementincommunicationperformance.However,toadaptKDN
ML and intelligence have been envisioned by many researchers and intelligence across 6G networks, it is far from sufficient to only
as the most important feature in 6G, as ML algorithms have been considerthedegreeofimprovementwithoutconsideringcomputation
extensivelyusedincomplexscenarios.Therefore,itisevidentthatthe andstoragecosts.Therefore,inadditiontoevaluatingtheperformance
KDN architecture can be used to address the challenges of 6G. One of ML technologies, the required storage and computation overhead
of the main challenges faced by all technologies is the validation of mustbeconsideredwhiledesigningthestandards.Moreover,torealize
knowledge.If6Gtargetsanautomaticallyconfiguredcellularnetwork, full intelligence in KDN networks, the compatibility of developed ML
there must be a mechanism to verify the confidence and certainty of algorithms with other network functions is another emerging topic.
knowledge. As a result, a certainty mechanism must be deployed to Further, the intelligence and ML algorithms must be adaptive to any
acknowledgethelevelofcertainty,whetherknowledgeispracticalor changesinthetopologytoenableautomaticadjustmentin6Gnetworks
compromised. The output of the ML algorithm must be checked by [254].
theexpectedresultstoevaluatethedegreeofuncertainty.Athreshold
barrier can be used to validate the usefulness of knowledge. If the 9.6. Standardbaselinedatasetforexperiments
knowledgeisauthorizedtodeployinthenetwork,theMLoutputhas
beensuccessful,butifthecomparedstrategyhasrevealedunauthorized In wireless communication problems, one of the fundamental as-
knowledge, then the ML’s output cannot pass the threshold value. In pects of an effective ML-based algorithm is the representation of a
thiscase,anewMLtechniquemustcomputethenewknowledgeand dataset.Thetrainingprocedureisthestepinwhichtheeffectivenessof
gothroughthesameprocedure,whichcausesadelaythataffectsthe theMLalgorithmisdetermined.Inthisstep,thedatasetprovidedtothe
systemperformance.Intheworst-casescenario,iftheknowledgeisre- MLalgorithmhasadirectimpactontheusefulnessofML.Inwireless
jectedagain,thenanextremecasemustbeconsidered.Tomitigatethe networks, terabytes of information can be collected; however, if the
worst-casescenario,anyproposedalgorithmmustundergovariousex- machinecannotmakesenseoftherecordeddata,theMLapproachis
perimentalanalysesinarealtestbedtofindthepossibleMLsubstitutes useless. Therefore, data-related issues are one of the main problems
inanygivenscenario.Therefore,MLalgorithmsmustbetestedinthe that some ML-based projects cannot be accomplished [255]. In the
sameenvironmentwithsimilarcharacteristicstoprovideinsightsinto context of ML research projects, some concluded that no relevant
differentMLtechniques.Consequently,thosewithsimilarperformance dataset was available. Therefore, the process is either highly time-
willbeselectedtobeeachother’sreplacementtomitigatetheworst- consuming or challenging to analyze. In self-driving vehicles, SL has
casescenario.Moreover,relatedregulationsandstandardizationmust shown promising results in the future of the vehicle industry [256].
beestablishedtoguaranteethe6Gservicerequirements. However, the performance of these algorithms relies on the size of
the dataset to provide a reliable answer. Moreover, in this type of
9.4. Lapse,orloss,orpriorityofknowledge problem,theresponsetimeofthealgorithmisveryimportant,which
makesthealgorithmmorecomplicated.Thistypeofissueoccursacross
There are two approaches to ML: reactive and proactive. In the differentwirelesscommunicationproblems.Hence,creatingastandard
reactive approach, the learning agent must address an issue that has dataset and platform for researchers is very important for generating
already been defined. However, in a proactive manner, the learning a reliable and effective solution for 6G and beyond. This will enable
agent must simultaneously adapt to possible future problems. Cur- researchers interested in one topic area to work on the same dataset
rent network functions are mainly designed using reactive network withthesameplatforms.Moreover,MLisusedtoextractfeaturesand
protocols with human intervention for maintenance and upgrading. learntherulesfromlargedatasetsautomatically,introducinganother
To enable intelligence and deploy KDN in future wireless networks, challengethatneedstobeaddressedbyhowmuchmanualintervention
proactive learning ability is necessary [252]. In proactive learning, and repeated work need to be reduced to have a fully functional ML
knowledge must be prioritized such that important metrics of the algorithm. Therefore, it is crucial for future wireless communication
network, including channel allocation, traffic clustering, traffic pre- systemstohaveareliabledatasetandplatformforresearcherstowork
diction,computingoffloading,radioresourcescheduling,andnetwork onML-basedwirelessnetworkproblemswithcertainty.
configuration,havearankingofknowledgeprioritization.Thus,once
thenetworkisfullycongestedwithheterogeneousnodes,theKPmust 10. Conclusion
prioritizewhichtaskshavethemostpressingmatterandwhichonesare
crucialforthenetworkfunctionality.Anotherreasonforprioritization One of the crucial aspects in 6G wireless networks is intelligence,
could be the lack of storage for knowledge, where it can cause lapse andmanyresearchstudiesarenowfocusingonexploringhowknowl-
or, in a worst-case scenario, loss of knowledge. A lapse of knowledge edge and intelligence can be integrated into wireless networks. This
is referred to as incomplete knowledge throughout prioritization, ML survey paperinvestigatedthe conceptof knowledge-defined network-
training, or technical issues. Moreover, loss of knowledge can accrue ing,whichaimstocombineSDNandML/AItocreateaprogrammable
duetomemoryshortagesandtechnicalissues.Inbothcases,knowledge and knowledge-aware networking architecture. We first introduced
is useless and has a negative impact on the network performance. emergingtechnologiestofacilitateKDN,specificallytheSDNparadigm,
Therefore,asystematicmonitoringmanagementmodulemustobserve network telemetry, and ML algorithms. We then investigated most of
the KP plane. Specifically, to ensure that each network application is thewidespreadapplicationsofwirelessnetworks.Thereviewedstudies
prioritizedforknowledgeextraction,thestoragecapacityissufficient, in network applications were based on the most recent ML-based
andtheknowledgeisstableandinformative. approached to create automated applications in KDN-based wireless
networks.TheapplicationswerecategorizedintotheMAClayer,Net-
9.5. EffectivenessofanMLalgorithminKDN work layer, and Application layer. Resource management problems
were distributed within the MAC layer and classified as spectrum
Although ML studies have been a point of discussion over the allocation, power management, QoS, BS switching, cache, and back-
last few years [253], current research in the wireless communication haul management. Networking and mobility management problems
area is still unripe. This is the main reason why ML has not been were investigated in the network layer. Networking problems were
practically applied to existing wireless networks. To evolve ML-based described as routing strategies, clustering, user/BS association, traffic
algorithmstomeettherequirementsoffuture6Gsystems,itisessen- classification,anddataaggregation.Mobilitypredictionandhandover
tial to standardize AI-embedded communication. The performance of management were considered in mobility management. Then, from
42S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
the Application layer perspective, various indoor localization tech- [21] Ning Z, Wang X, Rodrigues JJ, Xia F. Joint computation offloading, power
niques are presented. Moreover, appropriate ML-based studies were allocation,andchannelassignmentfor5G-enabledtrafficmanagementsystems.
thoroughlyexploredforeachsurveyedapplication,andthemostsuit- IEEETransIndInf2019;15(5):3058–67.
[22] Rana DS, Dhondiyal SA, Chamoli SK. Software defined networking (SDN)
able KDN architecture was suggested. We achieved a comprehensive
challenges,issuesandsolution.IntJComputSciEng2019;7(1):884–9.
reviewofdifferentpartsofwirelessnetworksandprovidedinsightsinto [23] RowshanradS,NamvaraslS,AbdiV,HajizadehM,KeshtgaryM.Asurveyon
howdifferentalgorithmsperform,enablingfutureresearcherstoadapt SDN,thefutureofnetworking.JAdvComputSciTechnol2014;3(2):232–48.
themostappropriateML-basedstudywiththesuitablearchitectureof [24] HaqueIT,Abu-GhazalehN.Wirelesssoftwaredefinednetworking:Asurveyand
KDN.Further,theconditionsassociatedwithML-basedstrategiesinthe taxonomy.IEEECommunSurvTutor2016;18(4):2713–37.
[25] Kim C, Sivaraman A, Katta N, Bas A, Dixit A, Wobker LJ. In-band network
context of KDN were provided, followed by the motivation to apply
telemetryviaprogrammabledataplanes.In:ACMSIGCOMM,Vol.15.2015.
KDN. Finally, we outlined several unsolved problems and challenges [26] Sun Y, Peng M, Zhou Y, Huang Y, Mao S. Application of machine learning
withintheKDNparadigm. in wireless networks: Key techniques and open issues. 2018, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.08707.
Declarationofcompetinginterest [27] MaoH,AlizadehM,MenacheI,KandulaS.Resourcemanagementwithdeep
reinforcement learning. In: Proceedings of the 15th ACM workshop on hot
topicsinnetworks.ACM;2016,p.50–6.
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan- [28] Hyun J, Hong JW-K. Knowledge-defined networking using in-band network
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to telemetry. In: 2017 19th Asia-Pacific network operations and management
influencetheworkreportedinthispaper. symposium.IEEE;2017,p.54–7.
[29] Duque-Torres A, Amezquita-Suárez F, Caicedo Rendon OM, Ordóñez A,
Campo WY. An approach based on knowledge-defined networking for iden-
References
tifyingheavy-hitterflowsindatacenternetworks.ApplSci2019;9(22):4808.
[30] Benson T, Akella A, Maltz DA. Unraveling the complexity of network
[1] Shafin R, Liu L, Chandrasekhar V, Chen H, Reed J, Zhang JC. Artificial management.In:NSDI.2009,p.335–48.
intelligence-enabled cellular networks: A critical path to beyond-5G and 6G. [31] Kobo HI, Abu-Mahfouz AM, Hancke GP. A survey on software-defined
IEEEWirelCommun2020;27(2):212–7. wireless sensor networks: Challenges and design requirements. IEEE Access
[2] Jiang W, Han B, Habibi MA, Schotten HD. The road towards 6G: A 2017;5:1872–99.
comprehensivesurvey.IEEEOpenJCommunSoc2021;2:334–66. [32] Galán-JiménezJ,Gazo-CerveroA.Overlaynetworks:overview,applicationsand
[3] ClarkDD,PartridgeC,RammingJC,WroclawskiJT.Aknowledgeplaneforthe challenges.IJCSNS2010;10(12):40.
internet.In:Proceedingsofthe2003conferenceonapplications,technologies, [33] Tarkoma S. Overlay networks: Toward information networking. Auerbach
architectures,andprotocolsforcomputercommunications.ACM;2003,p.3–10. Publications;2010.
[4] Mestres A, Rodriguez-Natal A, Carner J, Barlet-Ros P, Alarcón E, Solé M, [34] Kreutz D, Ramos F, Verissimo P, Rothenberg CE, Azodolmolky S, Uhlig S.
et al. Knowledge-defined networking. ACM SIGCOMM Comput Commun Rev Software-defined networking: A comprehensive survey. 2014, arXiv preprint
2017;47(3):2–10. arXiv:1406.0440.
[5] Bosshart P, Daly D, Gibb G, Izzard M, McKeown N, Rexford J, et al. P4: [35] McKeownN,AndersonT,BalakrishnanH,ParulkarG,PetersonL,RexfordJ,et
Programmingprotocol-independentpacketprocessors.ACMSIGCOMMComput al.Openflow:enablinginnovationincampusnetworks.ACMSIGCOMMComput
CommunRev2014;44(3):87–95. CommunRev2008;38(2):69–74.
[6] HuF,HaoQ,BaoK.Asurveyonsoftware-definednetworkandopenflow:From
[36] GoranssonP,BlackC,CulverT.Softwaredefinednetworks:Acomprehensive
concepttoimplementation.IEEECommunSurvTutor2014;16(4):2181–206.
approach.MorganKaufmann;2016.
[7] NiknamS,RoyA,DhillonHS,SinghS,BanerjiR,ReedJH,etal.Intelligent
[37] Lara A, Kolasani A, Ramamurthy B. Network innovation using openflow: A
o-ran for beyond 5g and 6g wireless networks. 2020, arXiv preprint arXiv:
survey.IEEECommunSurvTutor2013;16(1):493–512.
2005.08374.
[38] Tourrilhes J, Sharma P, Banerjee S, Pettit J. Sdn and openflow evolution: A
[8] PanC,ElkashlanM,WangJ,YuanJ,HanzoL.User-centricC-RANarchitecture
standardsperspective.Computer2014;47(11):22–9.
forultra-dense5Gnetworks:Challengesandmethodologies.IEEECommunMag
[39] Patterson L. SDN: The readiness of open source frameworks for production
2018;56(6):14–20.
networking[PhDThesis],2018.
[9] Kazemifard N, Shah-Mansouri V. Minimum delay function placement and
[40] NickM,JenR.ClarifyingthedifferencesbetweenP4andOpenFlow.2016,[On-
resource allocation for open RAN (O-RAN) 5G networks. Comput Netw
line]. Available: https://p4.org/p4/clarifying-the-differences-between-p4-and-
2021;188:107809.
openflow.html.
[10] BalasubramanianB,DanielsES,HiltunenM,JanaR,JoshiK,SivarajR,etal.
[41] Stubbe H. P4 compiler & interpreter: A survey. In: Proc. future internet (FI)
RIC: A RAN intelligent controller platform for AI-enabled cellular networks.
innov.internettechnol.mobilecommun.,Vol.47.2017,p.1–72.
IEEEInternetComput2021;25(2):7–17.
[42] Well MBH, Optimizations B. P4 data plane programming for server-based
[11] Kato N, Mao B, Tang F, Kawamoto Y, Liu J. Ten challenges in ad-
networkingapplications.
vancing machine learning technologies toward 6G. IEEE Wirel Commun
[43] SignorelloS,StateR,FrançoisJ,FestorO.Ndn.p4:Programminginformation-
2020;27(3):96–103.
centric data-planes. In: 2016 IEEE netsoft conference and workshops. IEEE;
[12] PhamTAQ,Hadjadj-AoulY,OuttagartsA.Deepreinforcementlearningbased
2016,p.384–9.
QoS-aware routing in knowledge-defined networking. In: International con-
ference on heterogeneous networking for quality, reliability, security and [44] AntoninB.Behavioralmodel(bmv2).2016,[Online].Available:https://github.
robustness.Springer;2018,p.14–26. com/p4lang/behavioral-model.
[13] Lu W, Liang L, Kong B, Li B, Zhu Z. AI-assisted knowledge-defined network [45] Laki S, Horpácsi D, Vörös P, Kitlei R, Leskó D, Tejfel M. High speed packet
orchestration for energy-efficient data center networks. IEEE Commun Mag forwarding compiled from protocol independent data plane specifications. In:
2020;58(1):86–92. Proceedingsofthe2016ACMSIGCOMMconference.ACM;2016,p.629–30.
[14] CareglioD,SpadaroS,CabellosA,LazaroJ,PerellóJ,BarletP,etal.ALLIANCE [46] ShahbazM,ChoiS,PfaffB,KimC,FeamsterN,McKeownN,RexfordJ.Pisces:
project: Architecting a knowledge-defined 5G-enabled network infrastructure. Aprogrammable,protocol-independentsoftwareswitch.In:Proceedingsofthe
In:201820thInternationalconferenceontransparentopticalnetworks.IEEE; 2016ACMSIGCOMMconference.ACM;2016,p.525–38.
2018,p.1–6. [47] KheradmandA,RosuG.P4K:AformalsemanticsofP4andapplications.2018,
[15] HyunJ,VanTuN,HongJW-K.Towardsknowledge-definednetworkingusing arXivpreprintarXiv:1804.01468.
in-bandnetworktelemetry.In:NOMS2018-2018IEEE/IFIPnetworkoperations [48] SultanaN,ChilamkurtiN,PengW,AlhadadR.SurveyonSDNbasednetwork
andmanagementsymposium.IEEE;2018,p.1–7. intrusion detection system using machine learning approaches. Peer-To-Peer
[16] LiuG,JiangD.5G:Visionandrequirementsformobilecommunicationsystem NetwAppl2019;12(2):493–501.
towardsyear2020.ChinJEng2016;2016(2016):8. [49] MichalskiR,CarbonellJ,MitchellT.Machinelearning:Anartificialintelligence
[17] BhallaMR,BhallaAV.Generationsofmobilewirelesstechnology:Asurvey.Int approach,springerscience&businessmedia.2013.
JComputAppl2010;5(4):26–32. [50] KotsiantisSB,ZaharakisI,PintelasP.Supervisedmachinelearning:Areviewof
[18] MarshallC.By2019,80%oftheworld’sinternettrafficwillbevideo.Tubular classificationtechniques.EmergArtifIntellApplComputEng2007;160(1):3–24.
Insights2015;3:2017,RetrievedonJanuary. [51] CriminisiA,ShottonJ,KonukogluE,etal.Decisionforests:Aunifiedframe-
[19] Cass S. The age of the zettabyte cisco: the future of internet traffic is video work for classification, regression, density estimation, manifold learning and
[Dataflow].IEEESpectr2014;51(3):68. semi-supervisedlearning.2012.
[20] AbrolA,JhaRK,JainS,KumarP.Jointpowerallocationandrelayselection [52] MolnarC.Interpretablemachinelearning.Lulu.com;2019.
strategy for 5G network: a step towards green communication. Telecommun [53] Scholkopf B, Smola AJ. Learning with kernels: Support vector machines,
Syst2018;68(2):201–15. regularization,optimization,andbeyond.MITPress;2001.
43S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
[54] VapnikVN.Anoverviewofstatisticallearningtheory.IEEETransNeuralNetw [87] LukoševičiusM.Apracticalguidetoapplyingechostatenetworks.In:Neural
1999;10(5):988–99. networks:Tricksofthetrade.Springer;2012,p.659–86.
[55] Mohammed M, Khan MB, Bashier EBM. Machine learning: algorithms and [88] Chatzidimitriou KC, Partalas I, Mitkas PA, Vlahavas I. Transferring evolved
applications.CrcPress;2016. reservoir features in reinforcement learning tasks. In: European workshop on
[56] CelebiME,AydinK.Unsupervisedlearningalgorithms.Springer;2016. reinforcementlearning.Springer;2011,p.213–24.
[57] KimK.Facerecognitionusingprinciplecomponentanalysis.In:International [89] SunH,ChenX,ShiQ,HongM,FuX,SidiropoulosND.Learningtooptimize:
conferenceoncomputervisionandpatternrecognition,Vol.586.1996,p.591. Trainingdeepneuralnetworksforinterferencemanagement.IEEETransSignal
[58] MadsenRE,HansenLK,WintherO.Singularvaluedecompositionandprincipal Process2018;66(20):5438–53.
componentanalysis.NeuralNetw2004;1:1–5. [90] ShiQ,RazaviyaynM,LuoZ-Q,HeC.AniterativelyweightedMMSEapproachto
[59] SuttonRS,BartoAG.Reinforcementlearning:Anintroduction.MITPress;2018. distributedsum-utilitymaximizationforaMIMOinterferingbroadcastchannel.
[60] SuttonRS,BartoAG,etal.Introductiontoreinforcementlearning,Vol.2,no. IEEETransSignalProcess2011;59(9):4331–40.
4.MITpressCambridge;1998. [91] BalighH,HongM,LiaoW-C,LuoZ-Q,RazaviyaynM,SanjabiM,etal.Cross-
[61] GlorennecPY.FuzzyQ-learninganddynamicalfuzzyQ-learning.In:Proceed- layer provision of future cellular networks: A WMMSE-based approach. IEEE
ingsof1994IEEE3rdinternationalfuzzysystemsconference.IEEE;1994,p. SignalProcessMag2014;31(6):56–68.
474–9. [92] Nasir YS, Guo D. Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning for dy-
[62] Goodfellow I, Bengio Y, Courville A. Deep learning, book in preparation for namic power allocation in wireless networks. IEEE J Sel Areas Commun
MITpress.2016,[Online].Available:http://www.deeplearningbook.org/. 2019;37(10):2239–50.
[63] YeH,LiGY.Deepreinforcementlearningbaseddistributedresourceallocation [93] Mnih V, Kavukcuoglu K, Silver D, Rusu AA, Veness J, Bellemare MG,
forV2Vbroadcasting.In:201814thInternationalwirelesscommunications& et al. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature
mobilecomputingconference.IEEE;2018,p.440–5. 2015;518(7540):529–33.
[64] Ye H, Li GY, Juang B-H. Power of deep learning for channel estima- [94] Kaelbling LP, Littman ML, Moore AW. Reinforcement learning: A survey. J
tion and signal detection in OFDM systems. IEEE Wireless Commun Lett ArtificialIntelligenceRes1996;4:237–85.
2017;7(1):114–7. [95] Simsek M, Bennis M, Güvenç I. Learning based frequency-and time-domain
inter-cell interference coordination in HetNets. IEEE Trans Veh Technol
[65] MnihV,KavukcuogluK,SilverD,GravesA,AntonoglouI,WierstraD,etal.
2014;64(10):4589–602.
Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. 2013, arXiv preprint arXiv:
[96] AsheralievaA,MiyanagaY.Anautonomouslearning-basedalgorithmforjoint
1312.5602.
channel and power level selection by D2D pairs in heterogeneous cellular
[66] SilverD,HuangA,MaddisonCJ,GuezA,SifreL,VanDenDriesscheG,etal.
networks. IEEETransCommun2016;64(9):3996–4012.
Masteringthegameofgowithdeepneuralnetworksandtreesearch.Nature
[97] Zhang H, Yang N, Huangfu W, Long K, Leung VC. Power control based on
2016;529(7587):484.
deepreinforcementlearningforspectrumsharing.IEEETransWirelessCommun
[67] Li Y. Deep reinforcement learning: An overview. 2017, arXiv preprint arXiv:
2020.
1701.07274.
[98] Sanguanpuak T, Guruacharya S, Rajatheva N, Bennis M, Latva-Aho M.
[68] KaragiannakosS.Theideabehindactor-criticsandhowA2CandA3Cimprove
Multi-operator spectrum sharing for small cell networks: A matching game
them.2018,[Online].Available:https://sergioskar.github.io/Actor-critics/.
perspective.IEEETransWirelessCommun2017;16(6):3761–74.
[69] Singh S, Jaakkola T, Littman ML, Szepesvári C. Convergence results
[99] BennisM,PerlazaSM,BlascoP,HanZ,PoorHV.Self-organizationinsmallcell
for single-step on-policy reinforcement-learning algorithms. Mach Learn
networks: A reinforcement learning approach. IEEE Trans Wireless Commun
2000;38(3):287–308.
2013;12(7):3202–12.
[70] AlpcanT,BocheH,HonigML,PoorHV.Mechanismsandgamesfordynamic
[100] Zhu G, Zan J, Yang Y, Qi X. A supervised learning based QoS assurance
spectrumallocation.CambridgeUniversityPress;2013.
architecturefor5Gnetworks.IEEEAccess2019;7:43598–606.
[71] Perlaza SM, Tembine H, Lasaulce S. How can ignorant but patient cognitive
[101] WuH,ZhangZ,LuoJ,YueK,HsuC-H.MultipleattributesQoSpredictionvia
terminals learn their strategy and utility? In: 2010 IEEE 11th international
deepneuralmodelwithcontexts.IEEETransServComput2018.
workshop on signal processing advances in wireless communications. IEEE;
[102] Feng M, Mao S, Jiang T. Base station ON-OFF switching in 5G wireless
2010,p.1–5.
networks:Approachesandchallenges.IEEEWirelCommun2017;24(4):46–54.
[72] Anthony M, Bartlett PL. Neural network learning: Theoretical foundations.
[103] GanX,WangL,FengX,LiuJ,YuH,ZhangZ,etal.Energyefficientswitch
cambridgeUniversityPress;2009.
policyforsmallcells.ChinaCommun2015;12(1):78–88.
[73] RuderS.Anoverviewofgradientdescentoptimizationalgorithms.2016,arXiv
[104] LiR,ZhaoZ,ChenX,ZhangH.Energysavingthroughalearningframework
preprintarXiv:1609.04747.
ingreenercellularradioaccessnetworks.In:2012IEEEglobalcommunications
[74] NiepertM,AhmedM,KutzkovK.Learningconvolutionalneuralnetworksfor
conference.IEEE;2012,p.1556–61.
graphs.In:Internationalconferenceonmachinelearning.2016,p.2014–23.
[105] Xu Z, Wang Y, Tang J, Wang J, Gursoy MC. A deep reinforcement learning
[75] YamashitaR,NishioM,DoRKG,TogashiK.Convolutionalneuralnetworks:an basedframeworkforpower-efficientresourceallocationincloudRANs.In:2017
overviewandapplicationinradiology.InsightsImaging2018;9(4):611–29. IEEEinternationalconferenceoncommunications.IEEE;2017,p.1–6.
[76] Islam M, Chen G, Jin S. An overview of neural network. Am J Neural Netw [106] YuG,ChenQ,YinR.Dual-thresholdsleepmodecontrolschemeforsmallcells.
Appl2019;5(1):7–11. IETCommun2014;8(11):2008–16.
[77] Taylor ME, Stone P. Transfer learning for reinforcement learning domains: A [107] Fan S, Tian H, Sengul C. Self-optimized heterogeneous networks for energy
survey.JMachLearnRes2009;10(Jul):1633–85. efficiency.EURASIPJWirelessCommunNetworking2015;2015(1):21.
[78] Kazmi SA, Tran NH, Saad W, Le LB, Ho TM, Hong CS. Optimized re- [108] IndexCVN.Globalmobiledatatrafficforecastupdate,2015–2020.2016,p.9,
source management in heterogeneous wireless networks. IEEE Commun Lett CiscoWhitePaper.
2016;20(7):1397–400. [109] Chang Z, Lei L, Zhou Z, Mao S, Ristaniemi T. Learn to cache: Machine
[79] KaurA,KumarK.Areinforcementlearningbasedevolutionarymulti-objective learning for network edge caching in the big data era. IEEE Wirel Commun
optimization algorithm for spectrum allocation in cognitive radio networks. 2018;25(3):28–35.
PhysCommun2020;43:101196. [110] TanzilSS,HoilesW,KrishnamurthyV.AdaptiveschemeforcachingYouTube
[80] NaparstekO,CohenK.Deepmulti-userreinforcementlearningfordistributed content in a cellular network: Machine learning approach. IEEE Access
dynamicspectrumaccess.IEEETransWirelessCommun2018;18(1):310–23. 2017;5:5870–81.
[81] SrinivasanM,KotagiVJ,MurthyCSR.AQ-learningframeworkforuserQoEen- [111] ChenM,MozaffariM,SaadW,YinC,DebbahM,HongCS.Cachinginthesky:
hancedself-organizingspectrallyefficientnetworkusinganovelinter-operator Proactivedeploymentofcache-enabledunmannedaerialvehiclesforoptimized
proximalspectrumsharing.IEEEJSelAreasCommun2016;34(11):2887–901. quality-of-experience.IEEEJSelAreasCommun2017;35(5):1046–61.
[82] Fan C, Li B, Zhao C, Guo W, Liang Y-C. Learning-based spectrum sharing [112] ChenM,SaadW,YinC,DebbahM.Echostatenetworksforproactivecaching
and spatial reuse in mm-wave ultradense networks. IEEE Trans Veh Technol in cloud-based radio access networks with mobile users. IEEE Trans Wireless
2017;67(6):4954–68. Commun2017;16(6):3520–35.
[83] Zhang Y, Tay WP, Li KH, Esseghir M, Gaïti D. Learning temporal–spatial [113] DoanKN,VanNguyenT,QuekTQ,ShinH.Content-awareproactivecaching
spectrumreuse. IEEETransCommun2016;64(7):3092–103. for backhaul offloading in cellular network. IEEE Trans Wireless Commun
[84] Sun Y, Peng M, Poor HV. A distributed approach to improving spectral 2018;17(5):3128–40.
efficiencyinuplinkdevice-to-device-enabledcloudradioaccessnetworks. IEEE [114] Tamoor-ul Hassan S, Samarakoon S, Bennis M, Latva-Aho M, Hong CS.
TransCommun2018;66(12):6511–26. Learning-based caching in cloud-aided wireless networks. IEEE Commun Lett
[85] AlnwaimiG,VahidS,MoessnerK.Dynamicheterogeneouslearninggamesfor 2017;22(1):137–40.
opportunistic access in LTE-based macro/femtocell deployments. IEEE Trans [115] WangW,LanR,GuJ,HuangA,ShanH,ZhangZ.Edgecachingatbasestations
WirelessCommun2014;14(4):2294–308. withdevice-to-deviceoffloading.IEEEAccess2017;5:6399–410.
[86] Chen M, Saad W, Yin C. Echo state networks for self-organizing resource [116] LiL,XuY,YinJ,LiangW,LiX,ChenW,etal.Deepreinforcementlearning
allocation in LTE-U with uplink–downlink decoupling. IEEE Trans Wireless approachesforcontentcachingincache-enabledD2Dnetworks.IEEEInternet
Commun2016;16(1):3–16. ThingsJ2019;7(1):544–57.
44S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
[117] HeY,ZhangZ,YuFR,ZhaoN,YinH,LeungVC,etal.Deep-reinforcement- [144] Sharma DK, Dhurandher SK, Agarwal D, Arora K. KROp: k-means clustering
learning-based optimization for cache-enabled opportunistic interference based routing protocol for opportunistic networks. J Ambient Intell Humaniz
alignmentwirelessnetworks.IEEETransVehTechnol2017;66(11):10433–45. Comput2019;10(4):1289–306.
[118] ZhongC,GursoyMC,VelipasalarS.Adeepreinforcementlearning-basedframe- [145] TangY,ChengN,WuW,WangM,DaiY,ShenX.Delay-minimizationrouting
work for content caching. In: 2018 52nd Annual conference on information for heterogeneous VANETs with machine learning based mobility prediction.
sciencesandsystems.IEEE;2018,p.1–6. IEEETransVehTechnol2019;68(4):3967–79.
[119] He Y, Zhao N, Yin H. Integrated networking, caching, and computing for [146] ZhaoL,WangJ,LiuJ,KatoN.Routingforcrowdmanagementinsmartcities:A
connectedvehicles:Adeepreinforcementlearningapproach.IEEETransVeh deepreinforcementlearningperspective.IEEECommunMag2019;57(4):88–93.
Technol2017;67(1):44–55. [147] KadamK,SrivastavaN.Applicationofmachinelearning(reinforcementlearn-
[120] BaştuğE,BennisM,DebbahM.Atransferlearningapproachforcache-enabled ing)forroutinginwirelesssensornetworks(WSNs).In:20121stInternational
wireless networks. In: 2015 13th International symposium on modeling and symposiumonphysicsandtechnologyofsensors.IEEE;2012,p.349–52.
optimizationinmobile,AdHoc,andwirelessnetworks.IEEE;2015,p.161–6. [148] SaleemY,YauK-LA,MohamadH,RamliN,RehmaniMH,NiQ.Clusteringand
[121] BastugE,BennisM,DebbahM.Anticipatorycachinginsmallcellnetworks:A reinforcement-learning-basedroutingforcognitiveradionetworks.IEEEWirel
transfer learning approach. In: 1st KuVS workshop on anticipatory networks. Commun2017;24(4):146–51.
2014. [149] Syed AR, Yau K-LA, Qadir J, Mohamad H, Ramli N, Keoh SL. Route selec-
[122] BharathB,NaganandaKG,PoorHV.Alearning-basedapproachtocachingin tion for multi-hop cognitive radio networks using reinforcement learning: An
heterogenoussmallcellnetworks. IEEETransCommun2016;64(4):1674–86. experimentalstudy.IEEEAccess2016;4:6304–24.
[123] Venables WN, Ripley BD. Modern applied statistics with S-PLUS. Springer [150] Al-RawiHA,YauK-LA,MohamadH,RamliN,HashimW.Effectsofnetwork
Science&BusinessMedia;2013. characteristics on learning mechanism for routing in cognitive radio ad hoc
[124] Hyvärinen A, Karhunen J, Oja E. Independent component analysis, vol. 46. networks. In: 2014 9th International symposium on communication systems,
Hoboken.NJ,USA:Wiley;2004. networks&digitalsign.IEEE;2014,p.748–53.
[125] Abrams M, Standridge CR, Abdulla G, Williams S, Fox EA. Caching proxies: [151] TilwariV,DimyatiK,HindiaM,FattouhA,AmiriIS.Mobility,residualenergy,
Limitationsandpotentials.1995. andlinkqualityawaremultipathroutinginMANETswithQ-learningalgorithm.
[126] Arlitt M, Cherkasova L, Dilley J, Friedrich R, Jin T. Evaluating content ApplSci2019;9(8):1582.
managementtechniquesforwebproxycaches.ACMSIGMETRICSPerformEval [152] YaoH,TianleM,ChunxiaoJ,LinlingK,SongG.AIrouters&networkmind:A
Rev2000;27(4):3–11. hybridmachinelearningparadigmforpacketrouting.IEEEComputIntellMag
[127] Psounis K, Prabhakar B. A randomized web-cache replacement scheme. In: 2019;14(4):21–30.
Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM 2001. Conference on computer communications. [153] Stampa G, Arias M, Sánchez-Charles D, Muntés-Mulero V, Cabellos A. A
TwentiethannualjointconferenceoftheIEEEcomputerandcommunications deep-reinforcementlearningapproachforsoftware-definednetworkingrouting
society(Cat.No.01CH37213),Vol.3.IEEE;2001,p.1407–15. optimization.2017,arXivpreprintarXiv:1709.07080.
[128] Dulac-Arnold G, Evans R, van Hasselt H, Sunehag P, Lillicrap T, Hunt J, et [154] Stützle T, Hoos HH. MAX–MIN ant system. Future Gener Comput Syst
al. Deep reinforcement learning in large discrete action spaces. 2015, arXiv 2000;16(8):889–914.
preprintarXiv:1512.07679. [155] Sim KM, Sun WH. Ant colony optimization for routing and load-balancing:
[129] Lee D, Choi J, Kim J-H, Noh SH, Min SL, Cho Y, et al. On the existence of survey and new directions. IEEE Trans Syst, Man, Cybern A: Syst Hum
a spectrum of policies that subsumes the least recently used (LRU) and least 2003;33(5):560–72.
frequentlyused(LFU)policies.In:Proceedingsofthe1999ACMSIGMETRICS [156] Dhurandher SK, Sharma DK, Woungang I, Bhati S. HBPR: history based
internationalconferenceonmeasurementandmodelingofcomputersystems. prediction for routing in infrastructure-less opportunistic networks. In: 2013
1999,p.134–43. IEEE 27th international conference on advanced information networking and
[130] Bastug E, Bennis M, Debbah M. Living on the edge: The role of proactive applications.IEEE;2013,p.931–6.
cachingin5Gwirelessnetworks.IEEECommunMag2014;52(8):82–9. [157] Lindgren A, Doria A, Schelén O. Probabilistic routing in intermit-
[131] BlaszczyszynB,GiovanidisA.Optimalgeographiccachingincellularnetworks. tently connected networks. ACM SIGMOBILE Mob Comput Commun Rev
In: 2015 IEEE international conference on communications. IEEE; 2015, p. 2003;7(3):19–20.
3358–63. [158] Boyan JA, Littman ML. Packet routing in dynamically changing networks: A
[132] Liu A, Lau VK. Exploiting base station caching in MIMO cellular networks: reinforcementlearningapproach.In:Advancesinneuralinformationprocessing
Opportunistic cooperation for video streaming. IEEE Trans Signal Process systems.1994,p.671–8.
2014;63(1):57–69. [159] YiJ,AdnaneA,DavidS,ParreinB.Multipathoptimizedlinkstateroutingfor
[133] HamidoucheK,SaadW,DebbahM,SongJB,HongCS.The5Gcellularbackhaul mobileadhocnetworks.AdHocNetw2011;9(1):28–47.
management dilemma: To cache or to serve. IEEE Trans Wireless Commun [160] YiJ,ParreinB.Multipathextensionfortheoptimizedlinkstateroutingprotocol
2017;16(8):4866–79. version2(OLSRv2).2017.
[134] Jaber M, Imran M, Tafazolli R, Tukmanov A. An adaptive backhaul-aware [161] GuoH,WeiT.Logisticregressionforimbalancedlearningbasedonclustering.
cell range extension approach. In: 2015 IEEE international conference on IntJComputSciEng2019;18(1):54–64.
communicationworkshop.IEEE;2015,p.74–9. [162] Subudhi S, Panigrahi S. Use of fuzzy clustering and support vector machine
[135] Xu Y, Yin R, Yu G. Adaptive biasing scheme for load balancing in backhaul for detecting fraud in mobile telecommunication networks. Int J Secur Netw
constrainedsmallcellnetworks.IETCommun2015;9(7):999–1005. 2016;11(1/2):3–11.
[136] FadlullahZM,TangF,MaoB,KatoN,AkashiO,InoueT,etal.State-of-the- [163] Suresh VM, Sidhu R, Karkare P, Patil A, Lei Z, Basu A. Powering the IoT
artdeeplearning:Evolvingmachineintelligencetowardtomorrow’sintelligent throughembeddedmachinelearningandlora.In:2018IEEE4thworldforum
networktrafficcontrolsystems.IEEECommunSurvTutor2017;19(4):2432–55. oninternetofthings.IEEE;2018,p.349–54.
[137] Yanjun L, Xiaobo L, Osamu Y. Traffic engineering framework with machine [164] LeiL,YouL,DaiG,VuTX,YuanD,ChatzinotasS.Adeeplearningapproachfor
learning based meta-layer in software-defined networks. In: 2014 4th IEEE optimizingcontentdeliveringincache-enabledHetNet.In:2017International
international conference on network infrastructure and digital content. IEEE; symposiumonwirelesscommunicationsystems.IEEE;2017,p.449–53.
2014,p.121–5. [165] Jamal MS, Ochiai H, Esaki H, Kataoka K, et al. Instruct: A clustering based
[138] Chen Y-S, Hsu C-S, Siao Y-G. Linear regression-based delay-bounded routing identification of valid communications in iot networks. In: 2018 Fifth inter-
protocolsforVANETs.WirelessCommunMobComput2014;14(2):186–99. nationalconferenceoninternetofthings:systems,managementandsecurity.
[139] Wang Y, Martonosi M, Peh L-S. A supervised learning approach for routing IEEE;2018,p.228–33.
optimizationsinwirelesssensornetworks.In:Proceedingsofthe2ndinterna- [166] Samarakoon S, Bennis M, Saad W, Latva-aho M. Dynamic clustering and
tionalworkshoponmulti-hopadhocnetworks:Fromtheorytoreality.2006, on/offstrategiesforwirelesssmallcellnetworks.IEEETransWirelessCommun
p.79–86. 2015;15(3):2164–78.
[140] Sharma DK, Dhurandher SK, Woungang I, Srivastava RK, Mohananey A, [167] TabriziH,FarhadiG,CioffiJM.Casra:Analgorithmforcognitivetetheringin
Rodrigues JJ. A machine learning-based protocol for efficient routing in dense wireless areas. In: 2013 IEEE global communications conference. IEEE;
opportunisticnetworks.IEEESystJ2016;12(3):2207–13. 2013,p.3855–60.
[141] TangF,MaoB,FadlullahZM,KatoN,AkashiO,InoueT,etal.Onremoving [168] DuanS,ChenK,YuX,QianM.Automaticmulticarrierwaveformclassification
routing protocol from future wireless networks: A real-time deep learning viaPCAandconvolutionalneuralnetworks.IEEEAccess2018;6:51365–73.
approachforintelligenttrafficcontrol.IEEEWirelCommun2017;25(1):154–60. [169] Hussain F, Anpalagan A, Khwaja AS, Naeem M. Resource allocation and
[142] Kato N, Fadlullah ZM, Mao B, Tang F, Akashi O, Inoue T, et al. The deep congestion control in clustered M2M communication using Q-learning. Trans
learningvisionforheterogeneousnetworktrafficcontrol:Proposal,challenges, EmergTelecommunTechnol2017;28(4):e3039.
andfutureperspective.IEEEWirelCommun2016;24(3):146–53. [170] LiuR,LeeM,YuG,LiGY.Userassociationformillimeter-wavenetworks:A
[143] Yao H, Yuan X, Zhang P, Wang J, Jiang C, Guizani M. A machine learning machinelearningapproach. IEEETransCommun2020.
approachofloadbalanceroutingtosupportnext-generationwirelessnetworks. [171] GalkinB,AmerR,FonsecaE,DaSilvaLA.Intelligentbasestationassociation
In: 2019 15th International wireless communications & mobile computing forUAVcellularusers:Asupervisedlearningapproach.In:2020IEEE3rd5G
conference.IEEE;2019,p.1317–22. worldforum.IEEE;2020,p.383–8.
45S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
[172] Kudo T, Ohtsuki T. Cell range expansion using distributed Q-learning [200] Muñoz P, Barco R, de la Bandera I. Load balancing and handover joint
in heterogeneous networks. EURASIP J Wireless Commun Networking optimization in LTE networks using fuzzy logic and reinforcement learning.
2013;2013(1):61. ComputNetw2015;76:112–25.
[173] Li Z, Wang C, Jiang C-J. User association for load balancing in vehicular [201] GoyalT,KaushalS.HandoveroptimizationschemeforLTE-advancenetworks
networks:Anonlinereinforcementlearningapproach.IEEETransIntellTransp basedonAHP-TOPSISandQ-learning.ComputCommun2019;133:67–76.
Syst2017;18(8):2217–28. [202] Yajnanarayana V, Rydén H, Hévizi L. 5G handover using reinforcement
[174] PervezF,JaberM,QadirJ,YounisS,ImranMA.FuzzyQ-learning-baseduser- learning.In:2020IEEE3rd5Gworldforum.IEEE;2020,p.349–54.
centricbackhaul-awareusercellassociationscheme.In:201713thInternational [203] KodaY,YamamotoK,NishioT,MorikuraM.Reinforcementlearningbasedpre-
wireless communications and mobile computing conference. IEEE; 2017, p. dictivehandoverforpedestrian-awaremmwavenetworks.In:IEEEINFOCOM
1840–5. 2018-IEEEconferenceoncomputercommunicationsworkshops.IEEE;2018,p.
[175] Ding H, Zhao F, Tian J, Li D, Zhang H. A deep reinforcement learning for 692–7.
userassociationandpowercontrolinheterogeneousnetworks.AdHocNetw [204] Mollel MS, Abubakar AI, Ozturk M, Kaijage S, Kisangiri M, Zoha A, et al.
2020;102:102069. Intelligenthandoverdecisionschemeusingdoubledeepreinforcementlearning.
[176] ChouP-Y,ChenW-Y,WangC-Y,HwangR-H,ChenW-T.Deepreinforcement PhysCommun2020;101133.
learningforMECstreamingwithjointuserassociationandresourcemanage- [205] Guo D, Tang L, Zhang X, Liang Y-C. Joint optimization of handover control
ment. In: ICC 2020-2020 IEEE international conference on communications. andpowerallocationbasedonmulti-agentdeepreinforcementlearning.IEEE
IEEE;2020,p.1–7. TransVehTechnol2020;69(11):13124–38.
[177] ZhangQ,LiangY-C,PoorHV.Intelligentuserassociationforsymbioticradio [206] Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J. Long short-term memory. Neural Comput
networks using deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Trans Wireless Commun 1997;9(8):1735–80.
2020. [207] 36.300 GT. Evolved universal terrestrial radio access (E-UTRA) and evolved
[178] ZhangQ,ZhangL,LiangY-C,KamP-Y.Backscatter-NOMA:Asymbioticsystem universalterrestrialradioaccessnetwork(E-UTRAN);Overalldescription;Stage
ofcellularandinternet-of-thingsnetworks.IEEEAccess2019;7:20000–13. 2.2011.
[179] Long R, Guo H, Zhang L, Liang Y-C. Full-duplex backscatter communications [208] Antipolis S. 3Rd generation partnership project; technical specification group
insymbioticradiosystems.IEEEAccess2019;7:21597–608. services and system aspects; telecommunication management; self-organizing
[180] GuoH,LiangY-C,LongR,XiaoS,ZhangQ.Resourceallocationforsymbiotic networks (SON) policy network resource model (NRM) integration reference
radiosystemwithfadingchannels.IEEEAccess2019;7:34333–47. point(IRP);informationservice(IS)(release11).2012,p.1–41,3GPPDraft.
[181] Raikar MM, Meena S, Mulla MM, Shetti NS, Karanandi M. Data traffic [209] LiD,ZhangB,LiC.Afeature-scaling-based𝑘-nearestneighboralgorithmfor
classification in software defined networks (SDN) using supervised-learning. indoorpositioningsystems.IEEEInternetThingsJ2015;3(4):590–7.
ProcediaComputSci2020;171:2750–9. [210] WuZ,FuK,JedariE,ShuvraSR,RashidzadehR,SaifM.Afastandresource
efficient method for indoor positioning using received signal strength. IEEE
[182] SunG,LiangL,ChenT,XiaoF,LangF.Networktrafficclassificationbasedon
TransVehTechnol2016;65(12):9747–58.
transferlearning.ComputElectrEng2018;69:920–7.
[211] Van Nguyen T, Jeong Y, Shin H, Win MZ. Machine learning for wideband
[183] Yu C, Liu Y, Yao D, Yang LT, Jin H, Chen H, et al. Modeling user activity
localization.IEEEJSelAreasCommun2015;33(7):1357–80.
patternsfornext-placeprediction.IEEESystJ2015;11(2):1060–71.
[212] WymeerschH,MaranòS,GiffordWM,WinMZ.Amachinelearningapproach
[184] Sinclair N, Harle D, Glover IA, Irvine J, Atkinson RC. An advanced SOM
to ranging error mitigation for UWB localization. IEEE Trans Commun
algorithm applied to handover management within LTE. IEEE Trans Veh
2012;60(6):1719–28.
Technol2013;62(5):1883–94.
[213] Xu Y, Zhou M, Meng W, Ma L. Optimal KNN positioning algorithm via
[185] Castro-HernandezD,ParanjapeR.ClassificationofusertrajectoriesinLTEHet-
theoretical accuracy criterion in WLAN indoor environment. In: 2010 IEEE
Netsusingunsupervisedshapeletsandmultiresolutionwaveletdecomposition.
globaltelecommunicationsconferenceGLOBECOM2010.IEEE;2010,p.1–5.
IEEETransVehTechnol2017;66(9):7934–46.
[214] Ye X, Yin X, Cai X, Yuste AP, Xu H. Neural-network-assisted UE lo-
[186] Wu C-L, Chiu T-C, Wang C-Y, Pang A-C. Mobility-aware deep reinforcement
calization using radio-channel fingerprints in LTE networks. IEEE Access
learningwithglimpsemobilitypredictioninedgecomputing.In:ICC2020-2020
2017;5:12071–87.
IEEEinternationalconferenceoncommunications.IEEE;2020,p.1–7.
[215] XiaoC,YangD,ChenZ,TanG.3-DBLEindoorlocalizationbasedondenoising
[187] ZhangH,DaiL.Mobilityprediction:Asurveyonstate-of-the-artschemesand
autoencoder.IEEEAccess2017;5:12751–60.
futureapplications.IEEEAccess2018;7:802–22.
[216] Mo Y, Zhang Z, Meng W, Agha G. Space division and dimensional reduction
[188] Dang F, Yang X, Long K. Spray and forward: Efficient routing based
methodsforindoorpositioningsystem.In:2015IEEEinternationalconference
on the Markov location prediction model for DTNs. Sci China Inf Sci
oncommunications.IEEE;2015,p.3263–8.
2012;55(2):433–40.
[217] Yoo J, Johansson KH, Kim HJ. Indoor localization without a prior map by
[189] Song C, Qu Z, Blumm N, Barabási A-L. Limits of predictability in human
trajectorylearningfromcrowdsourcedmeasurements.IEEETransInstrumMeas
mobility.Science2010;327(5968):1018–21.
2017;66(11):2825–35.
[190] MonrealeA,PinelliF,TrasartiR,GiannottiF.Wherenext:alocationpredictor [218] Dai H, Ying W-h, Xu J. Multi-layer neural network for received signal
on trajectory pattern mining. In: Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD strength-basedindoorlocalisation.IETCommun2016;10(6):717–23.
international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining. 2009, p. [219] Wang X, Gao L, Mao S, Pandey S. CSI-based fingerprinting for in-
637–46. door localization: A deep learning approach. IEEE Trans Veh Technol
[191] CicioğluM.Performanceanalysisofhandovermanagementin5Gsmallcells. 2016;66(1):763–76.
ComputStandInterfaces2021;75:103502. [220] WangX,GaoL,MaoS.BiLoc:Bi-modaldeeplearningforindoorlocalization
[192] AliZ,BaldoN,Mangues-BafalluyJ,GiupponiL.Machinelearningbasedhan- withcommodity5ghzwifi.IEEEAccess2017;5:4209–20.
dovermanagementforimprovedQoEinLTE.In:NOMS2016-2016IEEE/IFIP [221] DoctorF,HagrasH,CallaghanV.Afuzzyembeddedagent-basedapproachfor
networkoperationsandmanagementsymposium.IEEE;2016,p.794–8. realizingambientintelligenceinintelligentinhabitedenvironments.IEEETrans
[193] LeeC,ChoH,SongS,ChungJ-M.Prediction-basedconditionalhandoverfor Syst,Man,CybernA:SystHum2004;35(1):55–65.
5G mm-wave networks: A deep-learning approach. IEEE Veh Technol Mag [222] Acampora G, Loia V, Vitiello A. Distributing emotional services in am-
2020;15(1):54–62. bient intelligence through cognitive agents. Serv Orient Comput Appl
[194] Shubyn B, Lutsiv N, Syrotynskyi O, Kolodii R. Deep learning based adap- 2011;5(1):17–35.
tive handover optimization for ultra-dense 5g mobile networks. In: 2020 [223] Garcia-ValverdeT,Garcia-SolaA,HagrasH,DooleyJA,CallaghanV,BotiaJA.
IEEE 15th international conference on advanced trends in radioelectronics, A fuzzy logic-based system for indoor localization using WiFi in ambient
telecommunicationsandcomputerengineering.IEEE;2020,p.869–72. intelligentenvironments.IEEETransFuzzySyst2012;21(4):702–18.
[195] Aljeri N, Boukerche A. A two-tier machine learning-based handover [224] Klaine PV, Imran MA, Onireti O, Souza RD. A survey of machine learning
management scheme for intelligent vehicular networks. Ad Hoc Netw techniques applied to self-organizing cellular networks. IEEE Commun Surv
2019;94:101930. Tutor2017;19(4):2392–431.
[196] Wu J, Liu J, Huang Z, Zheng S. Dynamic fuzzy Q-learning for handover [225] ArjouneY,FaruqueS.Artificialintelligencefor5gwirelesssystems:Opportuni-
parameters optimization in 5g multi-tier networks. In: 2015 International ties,challenges,andfutureresearchdirection.In:202010thAnnualcomputing
conferenceonwirelesscommunications&signalprocessing.IEEE;2015,p.1–5. andcommunicationworkshopandconference.IEEE;2020,p.1023–8.
[197] DhahriC,OhtsukiT.Q-learningcellselectionforfemtocellnetworks:Single-and [226] Zhu H, Akrout M, Zheng B, Pelegris A, Jayarajan A, Phanishayee A, et al.
multi-usercase.In:2012IEEEglobalcommunicationsconference.IEEE;2012, Benchmarking and analyzing deep neural network training. In: 2018 IEEE
p.4975–80. internationalsymposiumonworkloadcharacterization.IEEE;2018,p.88–100.
[198] DhahriC,OhtsukiT.AdaptiveQ-learningcellselectionmethodforopen-access [227] WeissK,KhoshgoftaarTM,WangD.Asurveyoftransferlearning.JBigData
femtocellnetworks:Multi-usercase.IEICETransCommun2014;97(8):1679–88. 2016;3(1):1–40.
[199] WangZ,LiL,XuY,TianH,CuiS.Handovercontrolinwirelesssystemsvia [228] LiR,ZhaoZ,ChenX,PalicotJ,ZhangH.TACT:Atransferactor-criticlearning
asynchronous multiuser deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Internet Things J framework for energy saving in cellular radio access networks. IEEE Trans
2018;5(6):4296–307. WirelessCommun2014;13(4):2000–11.
46S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
[229] AhmedKI,TabassumH,HossainE.Deeplearningforradioresourceallocation SepehrAshtari(GraduateStudentMember,IEEE)received
inmulti-cellnetworks.IEEENetwork2019;33(6):188–95. theB.S.degreeinelectricalandelectronicengineeringfrom
[230] LeeW,KimM,ChoD-H.Deeppowercontrol:Transmitpowercontrolscheme Eastern Mediterranean University (EMU), North Cyprus,
basedonconvolutionalneuralnetwork.IEEECommunLett2018;22(6):1276–9. Turkey, in 2016 and the M.S. degree in telecommunica-
[231] Goodfellow I, Bengio Y, Courville A, Bengio Y. Deep learning, Vol. 1, no. 2. tion engineering from the University of New South Wales
MITpressCambridge;2016. (UNSW),Sydney,Australia,in2019.Heiscurrentlypursu-
[232] Victor K. Video hosting service based in Beijing, China. 2003, [Online]. ingthePh.D.degreeintelecommunicationandinformation
Available:https://www.youku.com/. technologyattheUniversityofTechnology(UTS),Sydney,
[233] DerpanisKG,LecceM,DaniilidisK,WildesRP.Dynamicsceneunderstanding: Australia.
The role of orientation features in space and time in scene classification. In: From2015to2016,hewasaResearchAssistantwith
2012IEEEconferenceoncomputervisionandpatternrecognition.IEEE;2012, the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
p.1306–13. NorthCyprus,Turkey.Hehasworkedasaresearchfellow
[234] SunY,PengM,MaoS.Deepreinforcementlearning-basedmodeselectionand at the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
resourcemanagementforgreenfogradioaccessnetworks.IEEEInternetThings Organisation (CSIRO) on several wireless communication
J2018;6(2):1960–71. projects. His research interest includes improvement of
[235] Feng M, Mao S. Dealing with limited backhaul capacity in millimeter- wirelesscellularcommunication,routingprotocols,software
wave systems: A deep reinforcement learning approach. IEEE Commun Mag orknowledge-basednetworking,5Gresourceallocation,and
2019;57(3):50–5. machinelearningoptimizationinwirelessnetworks.
Mr.Ashtari’sawardsandhonorsincludetheFellowship
[236] XiaoK,MaoS,TugnaitJK.TCP-drinc:Smartcongestioncontrolbasedondeep
ofExcellencefromDepartmentofElectricalandElectronic
reinforcementlearning.IEEEAccess2019;7:11892–904.
Engineering,theHighHonorsdegreeinB.S.aswellasM.S.,
[237] ShiD,DingJ,ErrapotuSM,YueH,XuW,ZhouX,etal.Deep𝑄-network-based
andFellowshipawardfromUTSFacultyofEngineeringand
routeschedulingforTNCvehicleswithpassengers’locationdifferentialprivacy.
IT.
IEEEInternetThingsJ2019;6(5):7681–92.
[238] Yu Y, Wang T, Liew SC. Deep-reinforcement learning multiple ac-
cess for heterogeneous wireless networks. IEEE J Sel Areas Commun
Ian Zhou (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the
2019;37(6):1277–90.
B.S. degree in computer science from the University of
[239] Huang C, Hu S, Alexandropoulos GC, Zappone A, Yuen C, Zhang R, et al.
Sydney,Australia,in2016.HealsoreceivedtheMBAdegree
HolographicMIMOsurfacesfor6Gwirelessnetworks:Opportunities,challenges,
from the University of Technology Sydney in 2019. His
andtrends.IEEEWirelCommun2020;27(5):118–25.
research interest includes AI, IoT, cyber–physical system,
[240] Tan Y, Yang J, Gopalakrishnan N. Self-learning, adaptive approach for intel- and blockchain. Currently, he is pursuing a Ph.D. degree
ligent analytics-assisted self-organizing-networks (SONs). 2019, US Patent 10, at the University of Technology Sydney researching on
382,979. machinelearning-basedfrostmonitoringsystems.
[241] FengS,SeidelE.Self-organizingnetworks(SON)in3GPPlongtermevolution.
NomorResGmbH2008;20.
[242] BlascoP,BennisM,DohlerM.Backhaul-awareself-organizingoperator-shared
smallcellnetworks.In:2013IEEEinternationalconferenceoncommunications.
IEEE;2013,p.2801–6. MehranAbolhasan(SeniorMember,IEEE)iscurrentlyan
Associate Professor and the Deputy Head of the School of
[243] JaberM,ImranMA,TafazolliR,TukmanovA.Amultipleattributeuser-centric
Electrical and Data Engineering, University of Technology
backhaul provisioning scheme using distributed SON. In: 2016 IEEE global
Sydney. He has over 20 years of experience in research
communicationsconference.IEEE;2016,p.1–6.
and development and serving in research leadership roles.
[244] CaoG,LuZ,WenX,LeiT,HuZ.AIF:Anartificialintelligenceframeworkfor
SomeofthesepreviousrolesincludeservingastheDirector
smartwirelessnetworkmanagement.IEEECommunLett2017;22(2):400–3.
of research programs for the Faculty of Engineering and
[245] AmiriR,AlmasiMA,AndrewsJG,MehrpouyanH.Reinforcementlearningfor
IT,andtheLaboratoryDirectorfortheTelecommunication
selforganizationandpowercontroloftwo-tierheterogeneousnetworks.IEEE
andITResearchInstitute,UniversityofWollongong.Hehas
TransWirelessCommun2019;18(8):3933–47.
authoredover160internationalpublicationsandhaswon
[246] Silva MAL, de Souza SR, Souza MJF, Bazzan ALC. A reinforcement learning-
over four million dollars in research funding. He won a
based multi-agent framework applied for solving routing and scheduling
numberofmajorresearchprojectgrants,includingtheARC
problems.ExpertSystAppl2019;131:148–71.
Discovery Project, ARC Linkage Project, and a number of
[247] Galindo-Serrano A, Giupponi L, Auer G. Distributed learning in multiuser
CRC and other government and industry-based grants. He
OFDMA femtocell networks. In: 2011 IEEE 73rd vehicular technology
currentlyleadstheSoftware-DefinedNetworksLabatUTS
conference.IEEE;2011,p.1–6.
andhiscurrentresearchinterestsincludesoftwaredefined
[248] Chen M, Saad W, Yin C. Virtual reality over wireless networks: Quality-of- networking, the IoT, wireless mesh, wireless body area
servicemodelandlearning-basedresourcemanagement. IEEETransCommun networks,cooperativenetworks,5Gnetworksandbeyond,
2018;66(11):5621–35. andsensornetworks.
[249] Samarakoon S, Bennis M, Saad W, Latva-aho M. Backhaul-aware interference
managementintheuplinkofwirelesssmallcellnetworks.IEEETransWireless
Commun2013;12(11):5813–25. Negin Shariati (Member, IEEE) is a Senior Lecturer in
[250] Chen X, Zhang H, Wu C, Mao S, Ji Y, Bennis M. Optimized computation of- the School of Electrical and Data Engineering, Faculty of
floadingperformanceinvirtualedgecomputingsystemsviadeepreinforcement EngineeringandIT,UniversityofTechnologySydney(UTS),
learning.IEEEInternetThingsJ2018;6(3):4005–18. Australia.SheestablishedthestateoftheartRFandCom-
[251] Klein A, Kuruvatti NP, Schneider J, Schotten HD. Fuzzy Q-learning for mo- municationTechnologies(RFCT)researchlaboratoryatUTS
bility robustness optimization in wireless networks. In: 2013 IEEE globecom in 2018, where she is currently the Co-Director and leads
workshops.IEEE;2013,p.76–81. research and development in RF-Electronics, Sustainable
[252] MaB,GuoW,ZhangJ.Asurveyofonlinedata-drivenproactive5Gnetwork Sensing,Low-powerInternetofThings,andEnergyHarvest-
optimisationusingmachinelearning.IEEEAccess2020;8:35606–37. ing.SheleadstheSensingInnovationsConstellationatFood
[253] SarutaK,KatoN,AbeM,NemotoY.HighaccuracyrecognitionofETL9busing Agility CRC (Corporative Research Centre), enabling new
exclusive learning neural network-< cd02d36. gif>(ELNET-< cd02d36. gif>). innovationsinagriculturetechnologiesbyfocusingonthree
IEICETransInfSyst1996;79(5):516–22. keyinterrelatedstreams;Energy,SensingandConnectivity.
[254] Silver D, Schrittwieser J, Simonyan K, Antonoglou I, Huang A, Guez A, Since2018,shehasheldajointappointmentasaSenior
et al. Mastering the game of go without human knowledge. Nature Lecturer at Hokkaido University, externally engaging with
2017;550(7676):354–9. researchandteachingactivitiesinJapan.Sheattractedover
[255] PaulladaA,RajiID,BenderEM,DentonE,HannaA.Dataandits(dis)contents: $850KworthofresearchfundingacrossanumberofCRC
Asurveyofdatasetdevelopmentanduseinmachinelearningresearch.2020, andindustryprojects,whereshehastakentheleadCIrole
arXivpreprintarXiv:2012.05345. and also contributed as a member of the CI team. Negin
[256] Kahn G, Abbeel P, Levine S. Badgr: An autonomous self-supervised Shariati completed her Ph.D. in Electrical-Electronic and
learning-basednavigationsystem.2020,arXivpreprintarXiv:2002.05700. Communication Technologies at Royal Melbourne Institute
of Technology (RMIT), Australia, in 2016. She worked in
industry as an Electrical-Electronic Engineer from 2009–
2012.HerresearchinterestsareinMicrowaveCircuitsand
47S.Ashtarietal. Array14(2022)100136
Systems, RF Energy Harvesting, low-power IoT, Simulta-
neous Wireless Information and Power Transfer, Wireless WeiNi(SeniorMember,IEEE)receivedtheB.E.andPh.D.
Networks,AgTech,andRenewableEnergySystems. degrees in Electronic Engineering from Fudan University,
Shanghai,China,in2000and2005,respectively.Currently,
he is a Group Leader and Principal Research Scientist at
JustinLipman(SeniorMember,IEEE)receivedaPh.D.in CSIRO,Sydney,Australia,andanAdjunctProfessoratthe
Telecommunications Engineering from University of Wol- University of Technology Sydney and Honorary Professor
longong, Australia in 2004. He is an Industry Associate at Macquarie University. He was a Postdoctoral Research
Professor at the University of Technology Sydney (UTS) Fellow at Shanghai Jiaotong University from 2005–2008;
andavisitingAssociateProfessoratHokkaidoUniversity’s Deputy Project Manager at the Bell Labs, Alcatel/Alcatel-
Graduate School of Engineering. He is the Director of Lucentfrom2005to2008;andSeniorResearcheratDevices
Research Translation in the Faculty of Engineering and IT R&D, Nokia from 2008 to 2009. His research interests
and is Director of the RF Communications Technologies include machine learning, stochastic optimization, online
(RFCT) Lab — where he leads industry engagement in learning, as well as their applications to system efficiency
RF technologies, Internet of Things, Tactile Internet and andintegrity.
Software Defined Communication. He serves as committee DrNiistheChairofIEEEVehicularTechnologySociety
memberinStandardsAustraliacontributingtoInternational (VTS)NewSouthWales(NSW)Chaptersince2020andan
IoT standards and Digital Twins. Prior to joining UTS, he Editor of IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications
wasbasedinShanghai,Chinaandheldanumberofsenior since2018.HeservedfirsttheSecretaryandthenVice-Chair
management and technical leadership roles at Intel and ofIEEENSWVTSChapterfrom2015to2019,TrackChair
Alcatel driving research and innovation, product develop- for VTC-Spring 2017, Track Co-chair for IEEE VTC-Spring
ment,architectureandIPgeneration.HeisanIEEESenior 2016, Publication Chair for BodyNet 2015, and Student
Member.Hisresearchinterestsareinall‘‘things’’adaptive, TravelGrantChairforWPMC2014.
connected,distributedandubiquitous.
48