Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100051
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ailsci
Revisiting active learning in drug discovery through open science
Jürgen Bajorath
Department of Life Science Informatics and Data Science, B-IT, LIMES Program Unit Chemical Biology and Medicinal Chemistry, Rheinische
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität, Friedrich-Hirzebruch-Allee 5/6, Bonn D-53115, Germany
Active learning (AL) is a machine learning (ML) approach designed would be subjected to RBFE calculations to ultimately select the most
to minimize the amount of training data for developing predictive mod- likely candidate(s) for further increased potency. As long as the pool of
els [1–3] . The underlying idea is the iterative selection of most informa- potential candidates remains small, iterative RBFE calculations followed
tive training instances to gradually refine ML models and improve their by synthesis might be readily feasible; if the pool becomes large –or if
predictive performance. For labeled and unlabeled training data, differ- sizeable computationally enumerated libraries are investigated–RBFE
ent selection strategies have been introduced [3] , attempting to balance calculations become rather challenging.
exploration (sampling of representative data) and exploitation (focus- How can one apply AL to reduce the magnitude of RBFE analysis?
ing on most desired prediction outcomes). There are related approaches From a given compound library, a confined subset must be selected for
at the interfaces between computation and experiment such as iterative which RBFE calculations are carried out. On the basis of these data, one
biological screening [4] . In this case, ML models are built to prioritize then develops an ML model to predict RBFE values from chemical struc-
small subsets of screening compound libraries for experimental evalua- ture. The trained model is used to predict RBFE values for the remaining
tion and include newly identified hits to re-train the models for the next library compounds and select another subset of promising candidates
round of selection. Iterative subset selection and model refinement aim for RBFE calculations, the results of which are then used to re-build the
at identifying the majority of available hits while limiting the number ML model and further refine the predictions. This process, reminiscent
of database compounds that are experimentally tested. of iterative screening, is continued until a pre-defined number of com-
Despite the increasing popularity of data-hungry deep learning ap- pounds from subsets has been investigated, aiming to identify the most
proaches in drug discovery, high-quality compound activity or in vivo potent library compounds via ML. It is based on the premise, of course,
property data are often limited. This is a major reason why ML ap- that ML is computationally much less expensive than RBFE analysis.
proaches capable of operating in sparsely populated data spaces are This scheme was investigated by Thompson et al. Starting from a
attractive. Moreover, data generation might sometimes be rather ex- computational library of congeneric compounds, the authors were able
pensive and time-consuming. In such situations, AL-driven predictions to detect 75 of the 100 top-ranked RBFE compounds by sampling of only
might greatly contribute to, for example, focusing experimental design 6% of the library [5] ; an impressive result. Three earlier studies (includ-
on the most promising compounds. Hence, although AL has already been ing two preprints) already applied AL in the context of RBFE analysis
considered for about two decades in pharmaceutical research [1] , it con- (using distinct system set-ups), as discussed by the authors. The first
tinues to be a topical –and intellectually stimulating–approach. of these studies [10] reported a similar success rate in identifying top-
In a new contribution to AILSCI, Thompson et al. make use of AL scoring compounds on the basis of a comparably small library sample.
to address an expensive modeling task, that is, the calculation of rela- However, the work by Thompson and colleagues reaches far beyond
tive binding free energy (RBFE) of test compounds as a measure of po- these earlier studies, and many others in the AL field, for several rea-
tency alterations [5] . In lead optimization, RBFE computations, which sons. For benchmarking the AL approach, the authors required RBFE
date back to the 1980s [ 6 , 7 ], have become popular for predicting po- data. Therefore, they generated a library of 10,000 congeneric com-
tent compounds as candidates for synthesis [ 8 , 9 ]. Recent progress in pounds and computed RBFE values for all of them. Notably, the authors
RBFE analysis has largely been due to increasing computational power, made the entire library with RBFE data and custom code generated for
graphics processing unit (GPU) computing, and advances in conforma- their analysis publicly available to ensure full reproducibility and enable
tional sampling procedures [8] . However, although RBFE calculations follow-up investigations; an outstanding contribution to open science.
can now be carried out on a larger scale to guide candidate selection Moreover, going beyond earlier studies, Thompson et al. systematically
and reduce synthetic efforts [9] , the calculations continue to be compu- explored five ML methods and different main parameter settings for AL
tationally demanding and represent a substantial cost factor for larger including the (i) selection of the initial subset, (ii) number of compounds
compound libraries, as pointed out by Thompson and colleagues [5] . In sampled per iteration (size of each subset), and (iii) acquisition function
other words, RBFE analysis is a time-consuming computational exercise (for selecting training instances). Especially the acquisition function is
to limit even more expensive experimental efforts. For a given lead op- often thought to play a critical role for AL. The authors found that their
timization series, or multiple series pursued in parallel, each compound AL results were robust and surprisingly insensitive to the use of alter-
E-mail address: bajorath@bit.uni-bonn.de
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ailsci.2022.100051
Received 2 December 2022; Accepted 2 December 2022
Available online 5 December 2022
2667-3185/©2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ )J. Bajorath Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100051
native ML methods and different parameter settings (including random [2] Reker D. Practical considerations for active machine learning in drug discovery. Drug
selection of the initial data subset and the use of a greedy (exploitation- Discov Today Technol 2019;32:73–9 .
[3] Yu J, Li X, Zheng M. Current status of active learning for drug discovery. Artif Intell
based) acquisition function). The largest influence on the results was
Life Sci 2021;1:100023 .
observed for the number of compounds sampled per iteration, with a [4] Bajorath J. Integration of virtual and high-throughput screening. Nat Rev Drug Dis-
preference for subsets comprising at least 60 compounds [5] . The ob- cov 2002;1:882–94 .
served insensitivity of the AL results to varying parameter settings is
[5] Thompson J, Walters WP, Fenga JA, Pabon NA, Xu H, Goldman BB, Moustakas D,
Schmidt M, York F. Optimizing active learning for free energy calculations. Artif
particularly interesting. While the insensitivity might partly depend on Intell Life Sci 2022;2:100050 .
the characteristics of the compound system under investigation, it also [6] Kollman PM. Molecular modeling. Ann Rev Phys Chem 1987;38:303–16 .
indicates that the choice of acquisition functions is less critical for AL [7] Beveridge DL, Dicapua FM. Free energy via molecular simulation: applica-
tions to chemical and biomolecular systems. Ann Rev Biophys Biophys Chem
than often assumed and that small training sets can be sufficient for 1989;18:431–92 .
generating well-performing ML models. [8] Abel R, Wang L, Harder ED, Berne BJ, Friesner RA. Advancing drug discovery
The work of Thompson et al. provides new insights into AL and through enhanced free energy calculations. Acc Chem Res 2017;50:1625–32 .
[9] Schindler CEM, Baumann H, Blum A, Böse D, Buchstaller HP, Burgdorf L, Cappel D,
strongly supports open science.
Chekler E, Czodrowski P, Dorsch D, Eguida MKI, Follows B, Fuchs T, Grädler U,
Gunera J, Johnson T, Jorand Lebrun C, Karra S, Klein M, Knehans T, Koetzner L,
Declaration of Competing Interest Krier M, Leiendecker M, Leuthner B, Li L, Mochalkin I, Musil D, Neagu C, Ripp-
mann F, Schiemann K, Schulz R, Steinbrecher T, Tanzer EM, Unzue Lopez A, Via-
cava Follis A, Wegener A, Kuhn D. Large-scale assessment of binding free energy
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial calculations in active drug discovery projects. J Chem Inf Model 2020;60:5457–74 .
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence [10] Konze KD, Bos PH, Dahlgren MK, Leswing K, Tubert-Brohman I, Bortolato A,
Robbason B, Abel R, Bhat S. Reaction-based enumeration, active learning, and
the work reported in this paper.
free energy calculations to rapidly explore synthetically tractable chemical space
and optimize potency of cyclin-dependent kinase 2 inhibitors. J Chem Inf Model
Data Availability 2019;59:3782–93 .
No data was used for the research described in the article.
References
[1] Warmuth MK, Liao J, Rätsch G, Mathieson M, Putta S, Lemmen C. Active learning
with support vector machines in the drug discovery process. J Chem Inf Comput Sci
2003;43:667–73 .
2