Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
AASRI
Procedia
AASRI Procedia 2 ( 2012 ) 223 – 228
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
2012 AASRI Conference on Power and Energy Systems
Seawave Power Farm Design: A Case Study
V. Franzittaa, A. Violaa and M. Trapaneseb*
aUniversità di Palermo –Dipartimento di Ricerche Energetiche e Ambientali- Palermo-Italy
bUniversità di Palermo – Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettrica, Elettronica e delle Telecomunicazioni – Palermo – Italy.
Abstract
Current energy crisis and general concerns on environmental issues have triggered an ever increasing effort on harvesting
renewable energies.
Amongst renewable energy sources, sea wave energy is definitely the one that has been less utilised.
© 2012 Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
This is probably caused by two reasons: i) the strong technical novelties that are required to extract the energy that is
contained in a highly and stochastically variable motion; ii) the difficulty o find a suitable electrical system able to convert
the energy contained in the motion of the sea into electrical energy.
In this paper we propose an approach to set up a general methodology toward the design of a seawave farm. The first step
is explained how to choose the conversion system, in the second step is discussed the connection scheme among the
converters, in the third step is reported a case study of a whole seawave farm.
© 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
©S e2l0e1c2t iPounb laisnhedd/ obry pEelseerv ireer vBi.eVw. S uelnedcteiorn r eansdp/oorn pseiberi lrietvyie owf uAndmere rreiscpaonns Aibipliptyl ioefd A Smceireicnacne A Rppelsieeda Srccihe nIcnes Rtietsuetaerc h Institute
O pen access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Keywords:seawave; linear generator; power farm;
1. Introduction
Public concerns on environmental issues have stimulated an ever increasing effort on harvesting renewable
energies [1-5].Among them, several approaches to harvest sea wave energy have been proposed; almost all of
them introduce a mechanical conversion device between the waves and the electromagnetic generator. [6]
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +39-091-23860292 fax: +39-091-488452.
E-mail address:marco.trapanese@unipa.it.
2212-6716 © 2012 Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.doi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2012.09.038224 V. Franzitta et al. / AASRI Procedia 2 ( 2012 ) 223 – 228
To generate a substantial amount of power, Wave Energy Converters have been proposed. Several
solutions have been discussed, some consider a single energy absorber others consider several abosrbing unit.
In this case, the absorbing units are arranged in several rowsor in a farm.Such units may generate 10–100
[kW] depending on their size and wave spectrum. A larger buoy may absorb more energy but a too large buoy
will not rise, only sways.[7]
This stage converts the mechanical energy contained in the waves into a more usable mechanical energy; it
can be a hydraulic coupling device or a mechanical gear and, in any case, introduces additional losses and
additional maintenance requirements. In order to reduce these losses a generator directly coupled to the sea
waves should be used. Linear electrical generator has been recently studied for the exploitation of sea wave
energy. Most of these projects considers mechanical converters in MWs scale and therefore not very suitable
for a sea like Mediterranean sea where the energy density is lower than in the ocean. Moreover a general
methodology to design a seawave power farm has not been fully established.
In this paper we discuss an approach to design a seawave farm through a case study. This case is located in
north west part of sicily.
2. Description of the proposed design approach
The first step to approach the general design of a seawave farm is the choice of the converter. In order to
perform this task one must consider the characteristics (in terms of waves, sea depth, currents etc) of the area
where the generator will be located. In the case under study the waves are not very high (as it is shown in a
following section we are in the mediterranean sea) as a result one must use a converter that is able to exploit
such a limited source. It can be seen that in this case the best solution is represented by a conversion system
has the structure of fig.1. Other conversion topologies can be realized but the one of fig.1 captures the
essential features of the most of conversion systems.
Fig. 1. Schematic description of conversion system based on PM linear generator
In this device the slider of the PM linear generator is driven from a buoyant (that is rigidly connected to the
slider) and counteracted by a spring. The generated emf is produced from the motion of the vertical level of
the sea. The typical frequency of sea waves is in the range of the tenth of Hz and as a result a machine with a
high number of poles is needed in order to obtain an output whose average frequency is in a range that is
easily convertible.
The choice of the technology is the input for the design of the farm, which is split in 8 steps.
The first step deals with the site evaluation and preparation: the characteristics of waves are measured and
are used to chose the detailed design of the converter to be used and the preparation which are needed in the
installation area.V. Franzitta et al. / AASRI Procedia 2 ( 2012 ) 223 – 228 225
In the second step, the mechanical installation requirements are specified and the mechanical drawing of
the installation are specified.
In the third step the level of low voltage is chosen. In the fourth section the distribution equipment to be
used is identified. In this section a discussion on the maintenance strategy to be used in the farm is given. In
section fifth and sixth losses and voltage drop and power quality are calculated.
In this section the energy requirements needed are calculated. The evaluation of section 4, 5 and 6 are used
in section 7 to design the protective relays to be used in the farm. Finally, in section 8 a business plan of the
plant is presented.
Following the above outlined steps, a power farm has been designed and its size has been chosen in order
to maximize the energy extraction in the waters of west Sicily. The data used to optimize the converter and
the farm are some experimental data on the energy density of seawes on a point located on the north west part
of Sicily in the middle of Mediterranean sea. The numerical results and optimization of this procedure is
illustrated in this paper[1].
3. Generator structure and interconnection scheme
The design approach above outlined has led to design a power farm based on several low power units
electrically interconnected.
The parameters of the first prototype are shown in the following table:
Table 1.Characteristics of the PM generator obtained
Geometric Parameter Value
Pole pitch [mm] 150
Slot height 70
Number of phases 1/3
Number of slots per pole per phase 3/1
Stator slot width [mm] 12.5
Tooth height [mm] 12.5
Stator yoke height [mm] 60
Length of the magnet [mm] 50
The prototype has been manufactured and is shown in fig.2.
Fig.2 a) Half of the stator of the machine and b) cross section of one of modules that compose the stator.
Two interconnection schemes have been chosen and compared-They are shown in fig.3226 V. Franzitta et al. / AASRI Procedia 2 ( 2012 ) 223 – 228
Fig.3 Interconnection schemes
The converter were simulated by assuming a standard numerical model of the inverter. The parameters that
we have considered is the ripple in dc link, the time of use of each inverter the continuity of the generation.
The simulation was run many times and in each run each generator was exposed to a set of waveform
generated as illustrated. Each generator had the characteristics of the one reported above.
In fig. 4 the ripples of the dc link for the two approaches are compared. In fig. 4 the voltage ripple of the dc
link of the centralized approach is compared to the typical voltage ripple of a single generic converter in the
case of the decentralized approach. It can be clearly seen that in all respects the partially centralized approach
guarantees a more reliable and efficient operating condition. Moreover, the requirement on the buffer
capacitance are less tight because the dc link continuously receives power from some generators of the farm
and, therefore, its voltage is more easily kept at the value required to generate power in optimum condition.
As far as the use of each inverter is concerned, in the partially centralized approach the inverter is used
constantly even if the energy carried by the seawaves is small, for the decentralized approach the inverter are
used discontinuously and for a percentage of time lower than 50 %. The continuity and the smoothness of the
generation is enormously higher in the partially centralized approach. This is due to the fact that a common
dc link can have a higher buffer capacitance and therefore it is much more stable than a dc link connected to a
single generator.
2
1,5
1
0,5
0
0 0,1 0,2 0,3 0,4
t
dVV. Franzitta et al. / AASRI Procedia 2 ( 2012 ) 223 – 228 227
Fig. 4Voltage ripple of the dc link (continuos line decentralized approach, dotted line semi centralized approach)
4. Case study
The previous solutions have been chosen with the methodology above outlined in order to be installed on
the north west part of sicily.
The location is shown in fig. 5
Fig. 5 Geographical location of seawave farm
The power farm will not connected to the grid but it will be used to produce hydrogen. That will be used to
produce electricity through a fuel cell.
5. Conclusions
In this paper we present an approach to the design of seawave power farm. The generators used in the farm
are Permanent Magnet (PM) linear generators driven by the seawavesand, therefore, they generate highly
distorted emfs. We propose and compare two possible ways to connect the generator to the grid. One is a
decentralized approach where for each generator there is a conversion subsystem that permits the direct
connection of the generator to the a.c. grid, the other one is based on partially centralized approach where an
a.c.-d.c. rectifier is connected to the generator and the rectifier outputs is pumped into a dc link that can
receive the power from other units and that can supply a dc-ac converter directly connected to the power grid.
We compare the performances of the two approaches in terms of ripple of the dc link voltage, the time of use
of each inverter and the continuity of the generation and we show that the partially centralized approach is
definitely more efficient and reliable of the centralized approach.
Finally we present the location of a case study in north west part of Sicily (Italy)
Acknowledgment
This work was funded in part by "IMPETUS" program of Italian "Ministerodell'ambiente"228 V. Franzitta et al. / AASRI Procedia 2 ( 2012 ) 223 – 228
References
[1] Bonanno, A., Franzitta, V., Muzio, F.P., Trapanese, M. A multiphysics approach to the design of a
seawave energy conversion system. Proceedings of ICEST, Singapore, 2008: 2197.
[2] Di Dio, V., Franzitta, V., Muzio, F., Scaccianoce, G., Trapanese, M. The use of sea waves for generation
of electrical energy and hydrogen. MTS/IEEE Biloxi - Marine Technology for Our Future: Global and Local
Challenges, OCEANS, 2009.
[3] Franzitta, V., La Gennusa, M., Peri, G., Rizzo, G., Scaccianoce, G.– A Toward a European Eco-label
brand for residential buildings: Holistic or by-components approaches? Energy 2011;36:4 -1884.
[4] Franzitta, V., Rizzo, G., Renewable energy sources: A mediterranean perspective ICBEE 2010 - 2nd
International Conference on Chemical, Biological and Environmental Engineering, Proceedings : 48.
[5]Lo Brano V. , Orioli A., Ciulla G., Culotta S.Quality of wind speed fitting distributions for the urban area
of Palermo, Renew Energy 2011;36:3- 1026.
[6] Beels C., Troch P., Kofoed J.P, Frigaard P., Kringelum J.V., Kromann P.C., Donovan M.H., De Rouck J.,
De Backer G.A methodology for production and cost assessment of a farm of wave energy converters. Renew
Energy 2011;36- 3402.
[7] ThorburnK.,Leijon M., Farm size comparison with analytical model of linear generator wave energy
converters- Ocean Eng 2007;34-908.