Array13(2022)100117
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/array
Securing localization-free underwater routing protocols against
depth-spoofing attacks
Ayman Alharbia,*, Alaa M. Abbasb,c, Saleh Ibrahimb,d
aDepartment of Computer Engineering, Umm Al-Qura University, Makkah, 21955, Saudi Arabia
bDepartment of Electrical Engineering, Taif University, Haweyah, Saudi Arabia
cDepartment of Electronics and Electrical Communications, Faculty of Electronic Engineering, Menoufia University, Menouf, 32952, Egypt
dDepartment of Computer Engineering, Cairo University, Giza, Egypt
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: Localization-free depth-based opportunistic routing protocols are an energy efficient choice for underwater
Underwater acoustic sensor networks wireless sensor networks (UWSNs). However, most depth-based routing protocols are vulnerable to sinkhole
Routing protocols attacks caused by depth spoofing. In this paper, we propose an energy-efficient depth-based probabilistic routing
Depth-based routing
protocol (DPR) that is resilient against depth spoofing. By encouraging unqualified (suboptimal) relay nodes to
Secure routing
randomly forward data packets, the adversarial effects of depth-spoofing can be mitigated. As the randomized
Sinkhole attacks
forwarding probability increases, a better packet delivery ratio can be achieved when under depth-spoofing
Depth-spoofing attack
attacks. To keep energy consumption in check, we propose a simulation-based methodology for finding the
optimal forwarding probability. By adjusting the unqualified node forwarding probability, the proposed DPR
protocol can effectively resist depth-spoofing attacks with a reasonably efficient energy overhead. A delivery
ratio exceeding 90% can be achieved under attack with energy overhead as low as 35% under normal conditions.
In comparison with relevant existing protocols, the proposed protocol achieves better energy efficiency, resil-
ience efficiency, and scalability.
1. Introduction packet depth until it reaches a surface sink. Relay nodes hold packets
received from the channel and wait for other nodes, which may be closer
Securing underwater sensor networks (UWSNs) has gain consider- to the surface, giving them a chance to forward first. Nodes closer to the
able attention in recent years. This is due to the fact that security vul- surface go first and announce their depth in the header of forwarded
nerabilities are continuously exploited by adversaries and third parties packets. Upon learning that a neighbor has already forwarded the held
for political and financial advantages [1]. A wide variety of attacks exist, packet, it is assumed to be closer to the surface, and thereafter, deeper
with objectives ranging from sniffing the network [2] to disrupting or nodes discard their held copies.
totally disabling operations [3]. UWSNs Routing protocols have been One of the threats against DBR protocols techniques, the sinkhole
exposed to variety of several attacks [4]. Such attacks may affect the attack. Unlike a denial-of-service attack that aims to overwhelm network
performance of the routing lightly or even completely. In this paper, we resources, a sinkhole attack aims to inhibit the network from delivering
focus on securing the depth-based routing protocol (DBR) [5] against a valuable information [12]. It is considered one of the most critical and
selected proven attack. DBR protocol and its recent variants, such as severe attacks, as it is very hard to observe [13] and can reduce the
[6–11] are particularly favorable for UWSNs due to that fact that they do lifetime of the network by 70% [10].
not require full node localization, which is a challenging task in the Although the opportunistic behavior of DBR relay nodes saves en-
underwater environment. The original DBR protocol, as well as its many ergy, it enables a variant of the sinkhole attack called the depth-spoofing
derivatives, determines routes using one-dimensional depth informa- attack. An adversary can take advantage of the behavior pattern by
tion, which is easily obtainable by measuring pressure. In these pro- convincing relay nodes in a certain neighborhood to drop their held
tocols, the data generated by underwater nodes are collected by sinks packets prematurely. Since the work done by Ref. [14], it has been
placed at the water’s surface. Each routing hop attempts to minimize the known that a carefully positioned adversary announcing a smaller depth
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: aarharbi@uqu.edu.sa (A. Alharbi).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2021.100117
Received 10 August 2021; Received in revised form 8 October 2021; Accepted 2 December 2021
Availableonline6December2021
2590-0056/© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).A. Alharbi et al. A r r a y13(2022)100117
can inhibit neighboring relay nodes from forwarding, thus causing a packet header. Unqualified forwarders immediately drop the received
routing sinkhole. packet. Qualified forwarders, on the other hand, keep them in a priority
Naïve secure routing approaches to resist this attack, such as queue for a holding time, TH, calculated by the following formula:
cryptography-authenticated routing, e.g. Ref. [15], can be circumvented
T H=K(R(cid:0) d), (1)
by a compromised node. Trust-based secure routing, as mentioned by
Refs. [16,17], requires the exchange of second-hand information, which where K is the constant of proportionality, defined as K =2τ/δ, τ is the
exhausts additional resources in the already constrained UAN resources. maximum propagation time, defined as τ =V/R, V is the acoustic signal
Some physical layer techniques, such as the estimation of the angle of
propagation speed, R is the node communication range, d is the
arrival using vector acoustic sensors [18], can potentially help avoid advantage in depth due to this forwarder defined as d = dsender(cid:0)
depth-spoofing attacks. However, the additional cost and complexity of dforwarder, and δ∈(0,R] is a constant that determines the maximum
such elaborate physical layer technologies contradict the philosophy of
holding time. The smaller the value of δ is, the longer the maximum
the DBR protocol, which seeks to provide a low-cost localization-free
holding time will be.
routing protocol.
This greedy strategy gives a qualified forwarder closer to the surface
Motivated by the facts that (a) depth-based routing is one of the most
the chance to forward the received packet before the holding times of
successful classes of routing protocols in UANs, (b) depth-based routing
deeper qualified forwarders expire. If a packet is being held for later
is inherently susceptible to depth-spoofing vulnerability, and (c) the
forwarding in a relay node and a duplicate of the same packet is received
efficiency of existing countermeasures against depth-spoofing vulnera-
such that the node is no longer qualified to forward the recently received
bility is limited, we propose a new approach to mitigate depth-spoofing
duplicate packet, the relay node drops the copy of the packet it held.
attacks. Our contribution to this work can be summarized in two points:
To identify copies of the same packet, DBR packet headers contain
the source ID and a source-unique sequence number. Each relay node
• We propose probabilistic forwarding as an effective countermeasure
keeps track of all received packets using a local cache of (source ID,
against depth-spoofing sinkhole attacks.
sequence number) pairs. Once a node decides to drop a packet, all copies
• We minimize the energy overhead of the proposed protocol by
of the same packet received later hit the local cache and are immediately
adjusting the forwarding probability according to the specific
dropped regardless of the sender’s depth found in the header of the copy.
network deployment.
Because of its low overhead cost, DBR is considered a practical answer to
UAN challenges.
The protocol proposed in this paper attempts to achieve the
following objectives: (a) to be simple to implement and analyze and to
2.1.2. DBR adaptations
establish its effectiveness in thwarting the depth-spoofing attack; (b) to
Due to the significant success of DBR, several adaptations of the
have minimal overhead when operating in normal conditions and also in
protocol have been proposed in the literature. The energy-efficient
the presence of a depth-spoofing attacker; (c) to be suitable for UANs
depth-based routing (EEDBR) proposed in Ref. [21] aims to improve
with different node densities and traffic loads through proper setting of
network lifetime by factoring nodes’ residual energy into the forwarding
protocol parameters; and (d) to be applicable to a variety of opportu-
decision. However, nodes are required to exchange depth and residual
nistic routing protocols, including DBR and its variants.
energy information regularly, which adds extra overhead. To address
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we review
this, nodes keep depth and residual energy information regarding those
relevant background and related work on depth-based routing and then
neighbors with lesser depth and use that information to select a next-hop
illustrate the attack model. In Section 3, we present the proposed pro-
forwarder.
tocol. In Section 4, we detail the evaluation methodology and the
Similarly, the lightweight depth-based routing (LDBR) protocol
simulation settings to be used for evaluation. In Section 5, we present the
proposed in Ref. [10] improves the overall lifetime of the network by
simulation results, discuss our observations, and highlight the main
following a similar strategy that lets nodes with residual energy lower
findings. Finally, in Section 6, we present the concluding remarks and
than a preset threshold discard received packets, allowing other quali-
future work.
fied forwarders with sufficient residual energy to step forward.
The interference-aware energy-efficient depth-based routing proto-
2. Background and related work
col proposed in Ref. [15] attempts to reduce potential interference be-
tween next-hop forwarders by factoring in node density in the
In this section, we review the traditional DBR protocol and its de-
neighborhood of each candidate relay node during the relay selection
rivatives. We then present the specifications of depth-spoofing attacks
process.
and review previous attempts to secure DBR protocols against this type
The energy-efficient cooperative opportunistic routing (EECOR)
of attack.
protocol in Ref. [22] uses a fuzzy-logic approach to select a forwarding
node from among neighbors. In addition to depth information, the relay
2.1. Depth-based routing protocols
selection process uses packet delivery probability and energy con-
sumption ratio to determine the holding delay for each forwarder.
DBR [5] is a special class of geographic routing protocols. Instead of
The RE-PBR routing protocol [23] enhances DBR and EEDBR routing
using nodes’ full location information, DBR only needs one-dimensional
strategies by incorporating other parameters, such as link quality, to
depth information. Depth information is readily available through determine the best candidate link based on the sender’s neighboring
simple pressure sensors, unlike the daunting task of underwater locali-
node positions. In addition, to improve energy efficiency, RE-PBR selects
zation required for other protocols, such as vector-based forwarding and
only one neighbor to participate in the forwarding process and elimi-
its variants [19,20]. Another advantage of DBR is that no additional
nates the holding time upon receiving packets.
control traffic is needed. Coordination between nodes occurs when
The DBR forwarding decision was improved by considering the
nodes announce their current depths to their neighbors within a special
depth difference of two-hop neighbors in Refs. [6,24,25]. The
field in the header of forwarded packets.
WDFAD-DBR protocol proposed in Ref. [6] handles the uneven and
sparse distribution of nodes by collecting two-hop depth information to
2.1.1. Basic operation of DBR protocol
guide relay selection. The protocol uses the history of neighbors in the
Upon learning of a neighbor’s transmissions, a DBR node decides neighbor’s table to predict the neighbor’s behavior and to improve
whether it is a qualified forwarder or not. A qualified forwarder is a node
network performance. Subsequently, RPSOR [25] enhanced the
with a depth smaller than the sender’s depth marked on the received
2A. Alharbi et al. A r r a y13(2022)100117
WDFAD-DBR protocol by considering the depth differences, energy b) The adversary can place malicious nodes at the most damaging
level, and the shortest path of forwarders. RPSOR calculates priority location in the network.
function, which is increased exponentially for small-depth differences of
candidate forwarding nodes. Fig. 1 illustrates how the depth-spoofing attack works. The source
SORP [26] was developed based on a depth-routing mechanism to node S has one qualified forwarder R, which can transmit packets
avoid void areas, which might exist in some topologies. The stateless directly to sink D. The malicious node A is placed such that it can receive
routing protocol detects void regions, as well as local trapped nodes, and transmissions of S and all its neighbors, namely R. When S transmits a
then avoids including them in the routing process. data packet, both R and A will pick it up, since they are all within the
Authors in Ref. [27] have proposed RSAR and CoSAR protocols based transmission range of S. The attacker will try to prevent R from for-
on depth information. RSAR reduces the burden of low-depth nodes by warding the packet received from the source. While R will hold the
classifying nodes in the network into several energy grades. The deepest packet for a short while in its transmission queue, A will quickly
nodes will have higher energy grades, while nodes closest to the water retransmit its copy of the packet announcing a fake depth that makes it
surface will have smaller grades. Each source node calculates the weight look closer to the surface than R actually is. Consequently, R will drop its
based on depth, energy grade, and remaining energy of the next for- copy of the packet, which will effectively be lost.
warding node. However, RSAR transmits packets using a single link, The assumption that the malicious node has the same transmission
which may lead to unreliable delivery. To mitigate this issue, the CoSAR range as the legitimate nodes can be justified: If the malicious node
protocol depends on a cooperative forwarding mechanism. transmits the spoofed packets to a larger range than that reached by the
To minimize end-to-end delay and achieve better network perfor- source, the malicious node can inadvertently deliver the packet to the
mance based on the depth routing technique, the authors of [28] pro- destination or at least to a relay node that is closer to the destination
posed the DRADS, iDRADS, and Co-iDRADS delay sensitive routing than the neighbors of the source. In this case, the malicious node will
protocols. Depth information is utilized in each protocol to assure a cooperate in the delivery process rather than disrupting it. Similarly, if
reliable link and short delivery time in the routing process. the transmission range of the malicious node is smaller than that of the
A recently proposed Energy Efficient Depth-based Opportunistic legitimate nodes, the depth-spoofed packet may not reach some of the
Routing with Void Avoidance (EEDOR-VA) [29] uses a reactive routing neighbors of the source node, which allows them to successfully relay
mechanism to acquire a node hop count from a sink and combine this data packets to the destination. Therefore, the most effective depth-
information with node depth to determine the node priority in the for- spoofing attack is possible when the transmission range of the attacker
warding process. EEDOR-VA selects candidate forwarding sets to avoid is close to the transmission range of the legitimate nodes.
routing voids and coordinates between nodes within the candidate set to
reduce redundant transmissions.
2.3. Depth-spoofing attack mitigation mechanisms
Unfortunately, all the abovementioned DBR-variant protocols are
susceptible to depth-spoofing attacks, which will be explained in the
A partial solution to the depth-spoofing attack was proposed by the
next subsection.
resilient pressure-based routing (RPR) protocol in Ref. [8]. RPR, like
DBR, uses depth information to determine packet holding times but
2.2. Depth-spoofing attack employs cryptographic authentication and a sliding window threshold.
During the forwarding decision, instead of comparing the depth
This attack against depth-based routing is intended to cause a advantage to a fixed minimum threshold, the received packet header
sinkhole-like effect, which prevents packet delivery. We adopt the attack will contain a lower bound threshold and an upper bound threshold.
model presented in Ref. [14], which makes the following assumptions: Only nodes within the threshold window are required to forward. Each
sender determines the threshold window for the next hop by choosing
a) Malicious and legitimate nodes have the same transmission range. two depths randomly from its neighbor list. The communication
Fig. 1. Depth-spoofing attack. Attacker node A misleads relay node R into believing that the packet has already moved up towards the surface, thus inhibiting R from
forwarding and causing a blackhole effect.
3A. Alharbi et al. A r r a y13(2022)100117
overhead of PRP is tremendous because randomized threshold windows Algorithm 1 (continued)
tend to form routes with more hops than the purely opportunistic DBR. P.timer.expires←tF ⊳ set the packet forwarding time
The increase in the number of packet transmissions per unique packet P.timer.start ⊳ start the holding timer for forwarding the received packet
delivered can be up by 100%–300%, depending on the network density. Q.add(P)⊳ insert the received packet at proper place in the holding queue
The recently proposed depth-based secure routing (DBSR) [15] uses end if
end if ∎
cryptography to sign depth information within the routing headers. To
reduce the overhead, DBSR employs a cryptographic signature to protect
the integrity of only the routing headers. The use of a cryptographic Algorithm 2
authentication mechanism eliminates depth-spoofing by intruders, but Holding timer expires.
the protocol remains wide open to depth-spoofing attacks by adversaries
that can compromise nodes. Moreover, DBSR assumes that private Inputs: held packet, P, forwarding queue, Q.
signing keys are configured manually on each node, which increases the Outputs: forwarding decision a∈{forward,drop}.
maintenance cost of a UAN in case new nodes need to be added to an if P.dropFlag⊳ if packet is marked for dropping
x←random([0,1))
existing deployment.
if x < p
The SEECR [30] protocol was also developed to secure depth-based a←forward ⊳ forward with probability p
routing protocols. Each node compares its packet against a potential else
spoofed one using two queues. If the value of the attack threshold of any a←drop ⊳ drop with probability 1(cid:0) p
node is reached, then the protocol ignores this node in the routing end if
else ⊳ if not marked for dropping
process thereafter. However, since the attack model and relevant as-
a←forward ⊳ forward unconditionally
sumptions have not been clarified in this work, we have decided to
end if
compare the RPR protocol with our proposed DPR protocol. Q.remove(P)∎∎
3. Proposed protocol
The operation of DPR is controlled by a new parameter, p, which
To mitigate the effect of the depth-spoofing attack, we propose an denotes the unqualified forwarding probability. The process of handling
improved version of the DBR protocol, called the depth-based probabi- a packet received from the MAC layer and the process of finally for-
listic routing protocol (DPR). In this section, we specify the proposed warding a held packet at the scheduled time are listed as Algorithm 1
routing protocol and analyze its expected behavior under depth- depicted in Fig. 2 and Algorithm 2 depicted in Fig. 3.
spoofing attacks as well as under normal conditions. The main difference in DPR operation compared to traditional DBR is
the action taken when a node receives a neighbor’s retransmission of a
3.1. DPR specifications packet that already exists in the node-forwarding queue. Traditionally,
DBR drops a buffered packet when the newly received retransmission of
The DPR packet header format is adopted from DBR without the packet deems the node an unqualified forwarder, which allows an
changes. Specifically, the first two fields of DPR represent the source attacker to force forwarders to drop their packets. To solve this problem,
address and source-unique sequence number, which are used to identify the proposed DPR instead marks the buffered packet for future potential
unique packets. The third field—the depth—indicates the last sending dropping. The final decision to drop the marked packet occurs after the
node depth. holding timer of the marked packet expires. The proposed DPR makes a
non-deterministic decision to forward the marked packet with proba-
Algorithm 1 bility p or to drop it with probability 1–p. The higher the value of p is, the
Receive Packet from MAC more resilient the proposed protocol should be to depth-spoofing at-
tacks. The adjustment of p will be studied in the following subsection.
Inputs: received packet, P, current time, t, received packet cache, C, forwarding
queue, Q, current node depth, D, and threshold for minimum depth advantage, dmin. 3.2. Optimal unqualified forwarding probability
Outputs: Updated cache, C, and forwarding queue, Q.
Procedure:
d ←P.depth–D⊳ calculate depth gain To determine the optimal value of the unqualified forwarding
if C.contains(P.srcID,P.seqNo)⊳ if the received packet already exists in the cache probability p or the forwarding probability for short, we first study the
if Q.contains(P.srcID,P.seqNo)⊳ if the received packet is already queued effect of p on the performance of the network in two cases: (a) under
P′←Q.get(P.srcID,P.seqNo)⊳ obtain the old packet depth-spoofing attack and (b) under normal conditions.
if d >dmin ⊳ if depth gain above the threshold When the network is under attack, each of the good forwarders
tH←calculateHoldingTime(d)⊳ using equation (1) within the attacker’s communication range are called vulnerable nodes.
tF←t+tH⊳ calculate the forwarding time
if P′.timer.expires>tF ⊳ if the forwarding time is sooner than old forwarding When the attacker retransmits a packet with a spoofed depth, copies of
time the same packets found in the forwarding queues of vulnerable nodes are
P′.timer.expires←tF⊳ update queued packet forwarding time to the earlier called vulnerable packets. DPR causes vulnerable nodes to keep vulner-
time able packets, which would have otherwise been dropped in DBR due to
end if the depth-spoofing attack. Vulnerable nodes will only mark vulnerable
else if d<0 ⊳ if the duplicate packet was received from a sender closer to the
packets for dropping but will eventually forward each of them with
surface
P′.dropFlag←true ⊳ mark the corresponding queued packet for dropping probability p. Therefore, the probability of dropping a vulnerable packet
end if is (1(cid:0) p). When the number of vulnerable nodes with a path to the sink
end if is n, the depth-spoofing attack is successful if all vulnerable nodes
else ⊳ received fresh packet simultaneously decide to drop the vulnerable packets. Therefore, the
C.add(P.srcID,P.seqNo)⊳ add received packet id to the cache probability of a successful depth-spoofing attack is reduced to (1(cid:0) p)n.
if d
tH
> ←cd am li cn u⊳
la
i tf
e
Hde op ldth
in
g ga Ti in
m
a eb (o dv )e
⊳
t h ue
si
nth gr e es qh uo al td
io n (1)
On the other hand, when the network is operating normally, prob-
tF←t+tH⊳ calculate the forwarding time abilistic unconditional forwarding is expected to cause additional traffic.
P.depth←D ⊳ update the packet depth Namely, forwarders that become unqualified upon learning of their
P.dropFlag←false ⊳ do not drop the packet yet neighbors forwarding packets that already exist in their queues will still
(continued on next column) have a chance to forward each of these packets with probability p. The
4A. Alharbi et al. A r r a y13(2022)100117
Fig. 2. Flowchart of Algorithm 1, performed when a packet is received from the MAC layer. The shaded area highlights the modification introduced in the proposed
depth-based probabilistic routing protocol.
resulting potential multiple forwarding of the same packet increases the using DPR under normal conditions with the given forwarding proba-
overhead and negatively affects the efficiency of the routing protocol. bility, and F0 is the total number of packets transmitted by all nodes
Therefore, it is important to analyze the overhead. using DPR under normal conditions with p =0, which is equivalent to
We estimate the communication overhead by finding the expected the behavior of the original DBR protocol.
number of additional packets forwarded by DPR that would not be To measure the efficiency of the proposed protocol in resisting the
forwarded by DBR. If the qualified forwarder of a packet has m un- depth-spoofing attack, we define the resilience efficiency metric as fol-
qualified neighbors holding a copy of the same packet, then the expected lows:
number of additional forwarded packets is (p⋅m) packet. Unqualified r
forwarding neighbors is a subset of all neighbors within a node’s η p= wp ×100%. (4)
p
communication range. Obviously, neighbors that have already for-
warded a specific packet are no longer considered unqualified for- A higher resilience efficiency indicates the ability to achieve a higher
warders of that packet. Therefore, m can be much smaller than the delivery ratio when the network is under attack while keeping the
node’s degree (number of neighbors). Other factors can affect the overhead low when the network is operating normally. The forwarding
number of successfully forwarded packets, such as the contention level probability p is chosen to maximize the network resilience efficiency.
and the MAC protocol in use. For example, if the transmissions of two or
more unqualified forwarders happen to interfere, some or all of them 4. Evaluation methodology and simulation
may fail, thus causing no further traffic and reducing overhead. There-
fore, the overhead caused by probabilistic forwarding is expected to be Since the main objective of an adversary launching a depth-spoofing
reasonably low. black-hole attack is to cut off delivery, the delivery ratio should arguably
To sum up the effect of the probability parameter p, there seems to be be the key effectiveness indicator of the proposed countermeasure. The
a trade-off between the achievable delivery ratio and the overhead due efficiency of the proposed approach can be demonstrated by showing
to the additional packets forwarded. It is expected that a large p im- that the additional forwarding overhead is limited. Excessive additional
proves delivery ratio when the network is under a depth-spoofing attack forwarding directly increases energy consumption and indirectly in-
but also increases overhead when the network is not under attack. Due creases delay and reduces throughput. Therefore, showing that the
to the interplay between network topology, MAC protocol, and traffic additional forwarding overhead is marginal is sufficient to indicate that
load, we propose that the value of p be statically tailored for a given the negative effect of the proposed approach on the subsequent metrics
scenario using simulation. Given a specific UAN deployment, we simu- (delay, throughput, and energy) is limited.
late it with various values of p for each of the two cases: with attack and To evaluate the effectiveness and cost of the proposed probabilistic
without attack. Two metrics are calculated—the delivery ratio rp, and forwarding technique, we set up the following simulation scenario. We
overhead, wp—corresponding to each value of p. The delivery ratio rp for deployed the underwater nodes randomly in a volume of 500 m ×500
a given forwarding probability p is calculated as follows: m ×250 m, where 250 m was the maximum depth. A single sink was
placed at the center of the surface area. When placing underwater nodes,
D′
r p= Dp 0, (2) s wp ae sc i aa ll
w
c aa yr se cw oa ns
n
t ea ck te en
d
t ao
n
g du ta hr aa tn tt he ee nth oa dt
e
t h de
e
gr re es eu l dti in dg
n
n oe tt ew xo cr ek
e
dto tp ho el o dg ey
-
gree set for the corresponding network density.
′
where D p is the number of packets delivered by DPR under attack with For this simulation, the underwater node that was the farthest from
the given forwarding probability, and D0 is the number of packets the sink node was chosen as the source of traffic. The total number of
delivered by DPR under normal conditions with p =0, which is equiv- underwater nodes varied according to the target network density and
alent to the behavior of the original DBR. The overhead, wp, is calculated maximum node degree, and 100 different network topologies were
as follows: generated corresponding to each network density in order to increase
confidence in the results. Fig. 4 illustrates three sample networks cor-
F
w p= Fp, (3) responding to each of the three network densities and node degrees. The
0
blue dots represent underwater relay nodes, the red dot represents the
source, and the green dot represents the sink. The dotted lines represent
where Fp is the total number of packets transmitted by all the nodes
5A. Alharbi et al. A r r a y13(2022)100117
Fig. 3. Flowchart of Algorithm 2, performed when the timer for a packet held
in the forwarding queue expires, in order to decide whether to forward or drop
the packet. The shaded area highlights the modification introduced in the
proposed depth-based probabilistic routing protocol.
connectivity between nodes within each other’s communication range.
One malicious node, performing a black-hole attack through depth-
spoofing, was placed 1 m below the source node. This placement
caused the attack to inhibit as many of the neighbors of the source node
as possible from relaying source packets, thus enabling the attacker to
launch a black-hole or gray-hole attack against the targeted source.
The simulation settings are summarized in Table 1. We adopted the
physical layer model used in Ref. [29], which includes the path loss
model, the absorption model, the ambient noise model, and the BPSK
modulation bit-error-rate model, which are defined in Equations (5)–
(8), respectively. Path loss is defined as follows:
A(f)=A 0+10κlog 10(d)+d×10(cid:0)3α(f) (5) Fig. 4. Sample networks with different node densities.
where f is the center frequency in kHz, A0=30dB is a normalizing
constant, κ is the spreading factor, d is the distance in meters and a is the
6A. Alharbi et al. A r r a y13(2022)100117
Table 1 repeated for each of the 100 generated network topologies and the mean
Simulation settings. result was reported.
Parameter Setting The simulation model was developed in Java with a MATLAB
scripting interface. The software package, available online at [32], can
Deployment space 500 m ×500 m ×250 m deep
easily be used to reproduce the results presented in the following
Network density sparse medium dense
— Number of nodes 47 75 150 section.
— Max. node degree 5 8 15
— Number of simulated topologies 100 100 100 5. Results and discussion
Channel model Spherical spreading, additive noise
Communication range 150 m
Bit rate 12.5 Kbit/s In this section, we elucidate the effect of the forwarding probability
Data generation rate 10 Byte/s parameter p on the performance of the proposed DPR under different
Packet payload 50 Bytes network conditions. Then, we compare the proposed protocol with
Total data transmitted 100 packets
existing relevant protocols.
MAC ALOHA
5.1. DPR resistance to depth-spoofing attacks
absorption coefficient, which is further defined as follows:
/
0.11f2 44f2 To demonstrate the resistance of the proposed DPR protocol against
α(f)= 1+f2+ 4100+f2+2.75×10(cid:0)4f2+0.003dB km (6) depth-spoofing attacks, we simulated the sample networks in the pres-
ence of an active attacker and observed the packet delivery ratio rp at
We simulated the spherical spreading by setting the spreading factor each value of p. The results are shown in Fig. 5. The delivery ratios are
κ=2 in Equation (5). The ambient noise can be approximated by the calculated as a percentage of the ideal case of DBR under no attack using
following power spectral density: (2). In all three networks, depth-spoofing successfully created a sinkhole
N(f)=50(cid:0) 18log 10(f) (7) that hindered the delivery of packets. As the unqualified forwarding
probability p increased, DPR successfully delivered more packets. The
The signal-to-noise ratio can be calculated using the following packet delivery ratio exceeded 90% when p≥0.9, p≥0.7 and p≥0.4,
formula: for the sparse, medium density, and dense networks, respectively. In
γ(f)=SL(cid:0) N(f)(cid:0) A(f) effect, probabilistic forwarding has the potential to reduce or even
eliminate the sinkhole effect of depth-spoofing attacks. As observed in
Fig. 5, the denser a network is, the lower will be the forwarding prob-
where SL is the acoustic transmission power in dB. The electrical power
ability needed to achieve a certain delivery ratio.
transmission Pt in Watts is defined as
P =2πz ×0.67×10(cid:0)18×100.1SL
t d 5.2. DPR overhead
where zd is the ocean depth in meters. Assuming BPSK modulation, the
Increasing the forwarding probability p increased the overall number
average bit error probability is calculated as follows:
⎛ √̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅⎞
of packets transmitted by DPR. Fig. 6 shows the overhead of DPR wp as
defined by (3), at various forwarding probabilities p. In all three net-
1 100.1γ(f)
ε= ⎝1(cid:0) ⎠ (8) works, the overhead of DPR increased monotonically with p. The worst-
2 1+100.1γ(f)
case overhead in sparse, medium, and dense networks were less than
39%, 66%, and 61%, respectively. Therefore, the overhead increased
Therefore, the probability of successful reception of a packet of
with network density, confirming our earlier analysis that a larger
length m bits is (1(cid:0) ε)m. Transducers were configured with a bit rate of
number of suboptimal unqualified nodes are involved in probabilistic
12.5 Kbps. The transmission power was adjusted such that the nominal
forwarding. The results indicate that networks with lower node density
communication range is 150 m.
can tolerate higher forwarding probabilities with lower overhead
In our simulations, we adopted a basic ALOHA MAC protocol, in
compared to higher density networks.
which packets are transmitted immediately regardless of the state of the
channel and frames lost due to collisions are not retransmitted. ALOHA
is a practical alternative in acoustic underwater MAC, considering the
extremely high propagation delay, which renders synchronized pro-
tocols impractical [34]; hence, ALOHA has been frequently employed in
UAN literature, such as [31].
Traffic was generated at a rate of 10 bytes per second, whereas each
packet held a 50-byte payload. Thus, one packet was generated every 5
s. The source was configured to stop after transmitting exactly 100
packets, and the simulation was run for as long as it took for all the
traffic caused by these messages to disappear from the network.
′
The number of packets delivered to the sink, D , was observed and
p
divided by the corresponding ideal number of traditional DBR in the
absence of the malicious attacker to obtain the delivery ratio, rp, as
defined in (2).
For each of the three network densities, four sets of scenarios were
simulated: (a) DBR protocol with the attacker inactive, (b) DBR protocol
with the attacker active, (c) DPR protocol with the attacker inactive, and
(d) DPR protocol with the attacker active. When DPR was used, the Fig. 5. Without probabilistic forwarding, no packets can be delivered under the
simulation was repeated with various values of forwarding probability, depth-spoofing attack. Using a higher forwarding probability p improves the
ranging from p=0.1 to p = 1. In each scenario, the experiment was packet delivery ratio for networks of all densities. The higher the network
density, the faster the improvement in packet delivery ratio.
7A. Alharbi et al. A r r a y13(2022)100117
5.4. Comparison with existing protocols
In this section, we compare the proposed DPR protocol with existing
relevant protocols. As mentioned earlier, DBSR [15] provides a partial
solution to the depth-spoofing attack using cryptography but remains
vulnerable in case of node compromise. Another limitation of DBSR
comes from the key assignment problem, which causes a scalability
issue. To demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed
DPR protocol, we compare its performance with the existing RPR pro-
tocol [8] in terms of packet resilience efficiency, energy overhead,
network lifetime, and end-to-end delay.
5.4.1. Energy efficiency comparison
Based on the assumption that all packets are transmitted at the same
transmission power level, the energy efficiency of the network can be
indicated by the number of delivered packets as a ratio of the total
number of packet transmissions under normal conditions. Table 2 lists
Fig. 6. Effect of forwarding probability on delivery cost in the absence of
the average number of packet transmissions per delivered packet for
depth-spoofing attack, with varying node densities.
each of the DBR, RPR, and the proposed DPR protocols for every
simulated network. For instance, when the high-density network is
5.3. Adjusting the forwarding probability
operating normally, DBR costs the network about 47 packet trans-
missions per delivered packet, and RPR costs the networks 113 packet
The performance of DPR exhibited a tradeoff between resistance to
transmissions per delivered packet, whereas the proposed DPR costs the
depth-spoofing attacks represented by the packet delivery ratio and the
network only 50 packet transmissions per delivered packet. To compare
overhead represented by the delivery cost. The optimal forwarding
the efficiency of the depth-spoofing countermeasures introduced by RPR
probability should maximize the resilience efficiency defined in (4).
and DPR, the energy efficiency of the original DBR is taken as a refer-
Fig. 7 illustrates how the optimal resilience efficiency is affected by
ence, and the energy efficiencies of DPR and RPR are calculated as a
the network density. In the sparse network, where the overhead is
percentage of the DBR energy efficiency. The energy efficiency of the
significantly limited, it seems that the delivery ratio is the overwhelming
proposed DPR is compared to RPR in Fig. 8. Clearly, the proposed DPR
factor affecting resilience efficiency. Therefore, the best resilience effi-
has superior energy efficiency compared to RPR. The results also showed
ciency was achieved at a very high forwarding probability, p = 0.9. In
that the proposed DPR protocol has a slightly lower energy efficiency
denser networks, however, the overhead played a more significant role
than the original insecure DBR protocol. This little energy overhead is
and pushed the optimal forwarding probability lower. In the medium
justifiable by the significant security advantage of DPR against depth-
density network, the optimal forwarding probability was p = 0.5,
spoofing attacks, as will be shown in the next subsection.
whereas in the dense network, it was p =0.3. From this observation, we
can confirm that networks with higher node densities are expected to
5.4.2. Resilience efficiency comparison
achieve better security/efficiency balance with DPR at lower values of
Resilience efficiency, defined in (4), indicates the energy efficiency
forwarding probability p.
of the depth-spoofing avoidance mechanism. The simulation results,
shown in Fig. 9, indicate that when the proposed DPR protocol is
operating at the optimal forwarding probability, the DPR resilience ef-
ficiency surpasses that of RPR. In both cases, the network under a depth-
spoofing attack delivers a significant fraction of packets. However, due
to the lower energy efficiency of RPR, a great amount of energy is spent
delivering each packet even when the network is under normal condi-
tions. This indicates that the proposed DPR strikes a better balance be-
tween achieving a high delivery ratio when the network is under attack
and the energy cost when the network is not under attack.
5.4.3. Network lifetime comparison
We adopted the network lifetime definition given by Ref. [21], which
focuses on the first depleted node as an indicator of the network lifetime.
We assume that the network is homogenous (all nodes have the same
battery capacity and the same transmission power), and all packets have
fixed sizes. Therefore, the node depletion rate is proportional to the
packet transmission rate, and the first depleted node is the node that
makes the most frequent transmissions. To facilitate the comparison, we
define the node depletion rate as follows:
Table 2
Number of packets transmitted per delivered packet under normal conditions.
DBR RPR Proposed DPR
Fig. 7. Finding the optimal forwarding probability using the resilience effi-
ciency, η. In the sparse network (a), the maximum η is at p = 0.9. In the Sparse network 17.95 41.74 24.64
medium-density network (b), the maximum η is at p =0.5. In the dense network Medium density Network 28.02 63.51 32.73
(c), the maximum η is at p =0.3. Dense network 46.92 113.34 50.23
8A. Alharbi et al. A r r a y13(2022)100117
Fig. 8. Energy efficiency of depth-spoofing countermeasures in the absence of Fig. 10. Network lifetime comparison.
an attacker. Energy efficiency is represented as a percentage of the energy ef-
ficiency of the original DBR.
Fig. 11. End-to-end delay comparison.
Fig. 9. Comparison of resilience efficiency. forwarding probability parameter, we proposed a methodology for
adjusting the forwarding probability for a specific network topology
Numberof nodetransmissions using simulation. However, using a constant forwarding probability for
Nodedepletionrate=
Numberof deliveredpackets all nodes and for the entire duration of deployment may sometimes be
suboptimal. Therefore, there is room for further improvement of
We take the node depletion rate of DBR as a reference and hence
network performance by dynamically adjusting the forwarding proba-
represent the network lifetime as a fraction of the corresponding DBR
bility. Moreover, the proposed DPR can further be improved by
network lifetime. As shown in Fig. 10, the proposed DPR keeps the
considering the residual energy of each node to determine the for-
lifetime of the network above 95% of the DBR lifetime, whereas RPR
warding probability in order to attempt to extend the network lifetime.
reduces the network lifetime to approximately 40%.
Recently [33], presented a Master-Slave Architecture for UAN routing to
reduce channel contention by designating master nodes as the only
5.4.4. End-to-end delay comparison
potential forwarders. Incorporating such an architecture within the
End-to-end delay is the time spent delivering an application message
proposed DPR protocol can also be considered. These improvements are
from a source to a destination/sink node. As shown in Fig. 11, the effect
left for future research.
of the proposed DPR on end-to-end delay is insignificant regardless of
the network density.
Credit author statement
6. Conclusion Ayman Alharbi: Conceptualization, Investigation, Writing – Original
Draft, Visualization, Funding Acquisition. Alaa M. Abbas: Validation,
In this paper, we proposed a security improvement to secure DBR Writing – Review & Editing. Saleh Ibrahim: Conceptualization, Meth-
against depth-spoofing sinkhole attacks using non-deterministic for- odology, Software, Investigation, Writing – Original Draft,
warding. The simulation showed that the proposed DPR protocol is
Visualization.
potent against depth-spoofing sinkhole attacks. Since energy consump-
tion is of utmost importance in underwater networks, the proposed
protocol was also shown to have a limited energy overhead. Compared Declaration of competing interest
to its main competitor, RPR, the proposed DPR has approximately
double the energy efficiency. The DPR also has a negligible effect on The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
end-to-end delay. Since the performance of DPR is determined by the interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
9A. Alharbi et al. A r r a y13(2022)100117
Acknowledgment [15] Alharbi A. DBSR: a depth-based secure routing protocol for underwater sensor
networks. Int J Adv Comput Sci Appl 2020;11(9). https://doi.org/10.14569/
ijacsa.2020.0110974.
This work was supported by the Deanship of Scientific Research at [16] Jinfang J, Guangjie H, Lei S, Chan S, Kun W. A trust model based on cloud theory in
Umm Al-Qura University, grant code 19-COM-1-01-0019. underwater acoustic sensor networks. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics
2017;13(1):342–50. https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2015.2510226.
[17] Han G, Jiang J, Shu L, Guizani M. An attack-resistant trust model based on
References
multidimensional trust metrics in underwater acoustic sensor network. IEEE Trans
Mobile Comput 2015;14(12):2447–59. https://doi.org/10.1109/
[1] Yang G, Dai L, Si G, Wang S, Wang S. Challenges and security issues in underwater TMC.2015.2402120.
wireless sensor networks. Procedia Computer Science 2019;147:210–6. https:// [18] Bereketli A, Guldogan MB, Kolcak T, Gudu T, Avsar AL. Experimental results for
doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2019.01.225. direction of arrival estimation with a single acoustic vector sensor in shallow
[2] T. Dargahi, H. H. S. Javadi, and H. Shafiei, "Securing underwater sensor networks water. Journal of Sensors 2015:401353. https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/401353.
against routing attacks," Wireless Pers Commun, vol. 96, no. 2, pp. 2585-2602, 2015/05/19 2015.
2017/09/01 2017, doi: 10.1007/s11277-017-4313-1. [19] Xie P, Cui J-H, Lao L. VBF: vector-based forwarding protocol for underwater sensor
[3] Signori A, et al. Jamming the underwater: a game-theoretic analysis of energy- networks. In: Networking 2006. Networking technologies, services, and protocols;
depleting jamming attacks. Atlanta, GA, USA. In: Presented at the proceedings of performance of computer and communication networks; mobile and wireless
the international conference on underwater networks & systems; 2019. https://doi. communications systems, vol. 3976. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
org/10.1145/3366486.3366546 [Online]. Available:. Heidelberg; 2006. p. 1216–21 (Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
[4] Jiang S. On securing underwater acoustic networks: a survey. IEEE [20] Barenco Abbas CJ, Montandon R, Sandoval Orozco AL, Garcia Villalba LJ. EBVBF:
Communications Surveys & Tutorials 2019;21(1):729–52. https://doi.org/ energy balanced vector based forwarding protocol. IEEE Access 2019;7:54273–84.
10.1109/COMST.2018.2864127. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2913026.
[5] Yan H, Shi Z, Cui J-H. DBR: depth-based routing for underwater sensor networks. [21] Wahid A, Kim D. An energy efficient localization-free routing protocol for
In: NETWORKING 2008 ad hoc and sensor networks, wireless networks, next underwater wireless sensor networks. Int J Distributed Sens Netw 2012;8(4):
generation internet, vol. 4982. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 307246. https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/307246.
2008. p. 72–86 (Lecture Notes in Computer Science. [22] Rahman MA, Youngdoo L, Insoo K. EECOR: an energy-efficient cooperative
[6] Yu H, Yao N, Wang T, Li G, Gao Z, Tan G. WDFAD-DBR: weighting depth and opportunistic routing protocol for underwater acoustic sensor networks. IEEE
forwarding area division DBR routing protocol for UASNs. Ad Hoc Netw 2016;37: Access 2017;5:14119–32. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2730233.
256–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adhoc.2015.08.023. [23] Khasawneh A, Latiff MSBA, Kaiwartya O, Chizari H. A reliable energy-efficient
[7] Javaid N, Jafri MR, Khan ZA, Qasim U, Alghamdi TA, Ali M. iAMCTD: improved pressure-based routing protocol for underwater wireless sensor network. Wireless
adaptive mobility of courier nodes in threshold-optimized DBR protocol for Network 2018;24(6):2061–75. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11276-017-1461-x.
underwater wireless sensor networks. Int J Distributed Sens Netw 2014;10(11): 2018/08/01.
213012. https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/213012. [24] Zhang M, Cai W. Energy-efficient depth based probabilistic routing within 2-hop
[8] M. Zuba, M. Fagan, S. Zhijie, and C. Jun-Hong, "A resilient pressure routing scheme neighborhood for underwater sensor networks. IEEE Sensors Letters 2020;4(6):
for underwater acoustic networks," Dec 2014 2014, no. Conference Proceedings: 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/LSENS.2020.2995236.
IEEE, pp. 637-642, doi: 10.1109/GLOCOM.2014.7036879. [Online]. Available: [25] Ismail M, et al. Reliable path selection and opportunistic routing protocol for
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7036879. underwater wireless sensor networks. IEEE Access 2020;8:100346–64. https://doi.
[9] Shah M, Javaid N, Imran M, Guizani M, Khan ZA, Qasim U. Interference aware org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2992759.
inverse EEDBR protocol for underwater WSNs. Conference Proceedings: IEEE; Aug [26] Ghoreyshi SM, Shahrabi A, Boutaleb T. A stateless opportunistic routing protocol
2015 2015. p. 739–44. https://doi.org/10.1109/IWCMC.2015.7289175 [Online]. for underwater sensor networks. Wireless Commun Mobile Comput 2018:8237351.
Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7289175. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/8237351. 2018/11/11 2018.
[10] Gul S, Jokhio SH, Jokhio IA. Light-weight depth-based routing for underwater [27] Ali M, Khan A, Mahmood H, Bhatti N. Cooperative, reliable, and stability-aware
wireless sensor network. Conference Proceedings: IEEE; Feb 2018 2018. p. 1–7. routing for underwater wireless sensor networks. Int J Distributed Sens Netw 2019;
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICACS.2018.8333483 [Online]. Available: https:// 15(6). https://doi.org/10.1177/1550147719854249. 1550147719854249, 2019/
ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8333483. 06/01.
[11] Ahmed T, Chaudhary M, Kaleem M, Nazir S. Optimized depth-based routing [28] Javaid N, Shakeel U, Ahmad A, Alrajeh N, Khan ZA, Guizani N. DRADS: depth and
protocol for underwater wireless sensor networks. Conference Proceedings: IEEE; reliability aware delay sensitive cooperative routing for underwater wireless sensor
Dec 2016 2016. p. 147–50. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICOSST.2016.7838592 networks. Wireless Network 2019;25(2):777–89. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11276-
[Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7838592. 017-1591-1. 2019/02/01.
[12] Nithiyanandam N, Parthiban L. An efficient voting based method to detect sink [29] Mhemed R, Comeau F, Phillips W, Aslam N. Void avoidance opportunistic routing
hole in wireless acoustic sensor networks. Int J Speech Technol 2020;23(2): protocol for underwater wireless sensor networks. Sensors 2021;21(6). https://doi.
343–54. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10772-020-09700-3. 2020/06/01. org/10.3390/s21061942.
[13] Kala PC, Agrawal AP, Sharma RR. A novel approach for isolation of sinkhole attack [30] Saeed K, Khalil W, Ahmed S, Ahmad I, Khattak MNK. SEECR: secure energy
in wireless sensor networks. 29-31 Jan. 2020. In: 2020 10th international efficient and cooperative routing protocol for underwater wireless sensor networks.
conference on cloud computing. Confluence: Data Science & Engineering; 2020. IEEE Access 2020;8:107419–33. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3000863.
p. 163–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/Confluence47617.2020.9057981. [31] Torres D, Friedman J, Schmid T, Srivastava MB, Noh Y, Gerla M. Software-defined
[14] Zuba M, Fagan M, Jun-Hong C, Zhijie S. A vulnerability study of geographic underwater acoustic networking platform and its applications. Ad Hoc Netw 2015;
routing in Underwater Acoustic Networks. Oct 2013. Conference Proceedings: 34:252–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adhoc.2015.01.010. 2015/11/01/.
IEEE; 2013. p. 109–17. https://doi.org/10.1109/CNS.2013.6682698 [Online]. [32] Ibrahim S. Underwater acoustic network simulator (UANSim). Oct, https://github.
Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6682698. com/Saleh860/UANSim; 2021.
[33] Jan S, et al. Investigating master–slave architecture for underwater wireless sensor
network. Sensors 2021;21(9). https://doi.org/10.3390/s21093000.
10