composite environment.(home appliances like tv, bathroom taps, key chains, coffee mugs, computers, mixer grinder, mixie, lights, cars, homes, offices, cities, finally the human body). multi-agent system approach improves human experience and quality of life without precise knowledge of the causal communications and computing technologies. puc is interconnected as pervasive network of smart devices that politely, separately collect data and process to convey information. this environment acclimatizes the allied context and activities in a global scenario. globally privacy issues are highlighted



research is also being done in being able to move applications. applications will need to move off of a workstation onto a tab, or perhaps the application will move with the user. distributed web service monitoring process discussed in. olivetti research laboratory has created the orl teleporting system to create mobile applications using the x window system. a proxy x server routes the input and output of an x application to any x display. research is also being done in the hardware necessary to create low-cost devices which can connect to the internet.



the trend will be toward small, disposable computers. the mit media laboratory is proposing a design of a network interface chip that would be small and inexpensive. it is called the filament chip. weiser et al. envisions buying a six-pack of computers. these devices are meant to be practically invisible, and casually used. that means the user interfaces must be



eldayem et al., a security technique based on watermarking and encryption is proposed using digital imaging and communications in medicine(dicom). huffman compression algorithm is used for compression of images without the affecting the quality of original file. khedr et al., a hashbased security scheme for a simple, low cost and scalable security scheme relying on one-way hash functions and synchronized secret information. the scheme provides a two steps mutual authentication between the backend server and the tag. it follows the tag delegation and secures tag ownership transferring for a secure channel between the tag reader and the backend server to complete the authentication process.



chandramohan et al., an evolutionary model to maintain the integrity of original data stored in cloud provider region. to preserve valuable information evolutionary model based privacy preserving in the cloud and develop trust among providers for maintaining the users confidentiality globally. soliman et al. evaluate and compare the most prominent anomaly-based ids systems for hierarchical wsns and identifying their strengths and weaknesses. comparison is carried out using a set of critical evaluation metrics to ensure the



hao et al. support the public verifiability without help of a third-party auditor, the proposed protocol does not leak any private information to third-party verifiers moreover it is verified through theoretical analysis. wang et al. easitia is a pervasive traffic information acquisition system which adapts a cross-correlation-based vehicle-detection algorithm and it is designed based on wireless sensors networks. moreover it follows an cost-effective collaborative traffic information processing mechanism, based on real road environment experimental analysis. christos et al., the exchange of information in mobile nodes is in an ad hoc networking to do collaborative context awareness for identical context processing. to withhold systems high performance maintenance, a fame of hierarchical information model with an information diffusion process is organized periodically.



haodong et al., a search engine named snoogle is designed using an information retrieval technique and to reduce communication overhead it follows a bloom filter. it would find a particular mobile object located geographically and also it lists the objects that fit to users query. moreover, to preserve sensitive information preserving mechanisms have adopted. zheng et al., an algorithm is developed by weighted round-robin(wrr) and a greedy algorithm for aiming to maximize battery efficiency globally for the computerassisted health-care systems. an efficient energy management system is designed for healthcare management. taleb et al., a pervasive computing environment is more interrogating for an affective incarnation of sensor infrastructures with computing systems. moreover, to identify and detect the periodic changes took place in patients, a high secret information preserving and sharing system is needed to inform and report the current states with the health-care management.



vengattaraman et al. software testing agent is constructed as a hybrid agent as a multi-agent testing attempt to validate the multi-agent system based on application perspective, with a regular working environment and exceptional working environment. abirami et al., a keyword based approaches used for retrieving information from document images are surveyed from the past researches on character based text extraction from document image retrieval. huang et al., a framework for cloud storage in order to maintain and preserve the users privacy an interactive protocol is designed. however, an extirpation-based key derivation algorithm is developed for the framework and evaluated with the lazy revocation, multi-tree structure and symmetric encryption algorithms for its performance. vengattaraman et al. an e-learning technique for the development of information and communication technology(ict) based on effort prediction. however it is observed from different perspectives of system, learner and teacher until the ground level of personalization in the e-learning environments fulfilling by providing domain specific contents.



taleb et al. advances are to do the need to trust any party such as a mediator server or peers with their position and uniqueness. ccs application may bridge numerous isolated wsns and take actuation dealings. we have seen a lot of flourishing vehicleand mobile phone-based ccs services



different approaches for maintaining privacy in puc-(pervasive and ubiquitous environment). wang et al. proposed his work securely permit customers to access and utilize services in various networks. he presents a service register and invention mechanism implemented through a ladder of examining its management. the scheme built upon a short public key relation that provides validation, non-refutation, anti-playback, and access power. elegant cards are worn as protected for digital record. the proposed system is executed using java and xml as the exclusive standard for interactions and information swapping.



the author proposed a test bed for evaluating the efficiency of services by filtering its functional and nonfunctional qos-(quality of services) parameters. by mathematical evaluation the qos parameters are verified for service efficiency. the proposed approach concludes by deriving parameters and their function for evaluation, one can prove the efficiency, precautions and recital of service. by adopting these features in puc we can derive our own parameters and functions for maintaining privacy and security in all ubiquitous computing environments.



communication elements, thus motivating toward what is called the cyber substantial humanity convergence. zhuo hao et al., information flows from the corporeal to the cyber world and vice versa acclimatize the congregate world of human behavior and social dynamics. research issues and confront from a worldwide standpoint. cyber world collective features comprehensive situation-awareness top down vs bottom up, the authority of the stacks,



a ccs application may bridge numerous isolated wsns and take actuation dealings. there presents a lot of flourishing vehicle and mobile phone-based ccs services. data from such applications are also estimated to be uninterrupted streaming data at a very large volume, storing, dispensation and interpreting these data in a real-time comportment is critical. through these reviews, we hope it will help to motivate the more scientific development and evolution for future ccs applications.



in this paper for defining the ubiquitous computing environments as erudition environments in which all students have access to a diversity of digital devices and services. moreover, it includes the pc associated to internet and also mobile computing devices. if at all found at anytime and anyplace a service is in need by using ubiquitous computing. moreover the definition of ubiquitous computing holds the idea of both teachers and students are active accomplice in the learning process, who critically scrutinize information create new knowledge in a variety of ways communicate what they have learned and choose which tools are appropriate for a particular task.



cloud providers have their own flexibility while framing their privacy laws and may get varied between companies even it is directly propositional to the national law and order schemes it also differs as per the country violations. it is mainly due to initiation of information leverage of customers who are doing some illegal activities against one nation internal security and maintain their military and other secrecy about them to bordering nations and so on. author proposed a novel framework and technique to handle the privacy issue, uninterruptedly to preserve the users confidential data stored in cloud environment.



as ubiquitous policy saturates the every-day lives of regular citizens, the proposed privacy protection procedures may have mounting impact on their lives. it is important that study of privacy fortification tolerate in mind what must be protected. in this paper, we have systematically scrutinized privacy issues in ubiquitous and pervasive computing. to identify key functionalities and services of puc have proposed a reference malicious attack managing practice from the organized viewpoint programming ubiquitous application notion, services and runtime support. in this work privacy issues are promoted into several sub-viewpoints enormously it extorts functionalities from services as modeling, preprocessing, elucidation, capriciousness and illuminating and decisions.



privacy breaching is everywhere in current technological computing and communication. this paper exhibits the necessity of upcoming computing privacy risks and corresponding preventing measures for a pervasive and ubiquitous based environment. pervasive and ubiquitous computing(puc) should become a reality in real time human lives environment. puc users expect to access resources and services anytime and anywhere throughout the world, its pros and corns allow users to utilize globally.



the cloud storage. a security threat is introduced for key agreement scheme using elliptical curve discrete logarithm problem. to preserve the vehicle user information privacy and anonymous authentication an efficient location based service(lbss), double registration detection for users using dynamic privacy preserving key management scheme(dike) are proposed with normal threshold technique. the way to improve the ubiquitous devices localization on human body to monitor healthcare system by mixed supervised and unsupervised time series analysis method. rao et al., a plugin for the internet browser integrated with double authentication and hybrid obfuscation technique to preserve the user data in cloud services. moreover, by placing the key and data in different cloud environment by adopting the divide



this work is a part of the research projects sponsored under the major project scheme, ugc, india, reference no.: f.no.41-616/2012(sr), dated 18 july 2012 and department of science& technology(dst), inspire fellowship, government of india. the authors would like to express their thanks for their financial support offered by the sponsored agencies.



