optimisation is an overall term used in many areas, intelligent computation in different types also in different sciences to reach of the best values(i.e., these values take multi names such as minimum, maximum, less cost, high performance, etc.) based on the nature of the problem and what the researchers need to prove from this problem(i.e., based on the objective function/functions of the problem). sometimes the field of used determined the specific definition of term optimization.



optimization is the act of getting the finest result beneath given circumstances. the optimization divided into(maximization minimization, single variable multi variables, with without constrains). there are two types of objective functions optimization, single objective function and multiple objective function. optimization has three basic elements which are decision variables, objective, and constraints. an optimization algorithm is distinguished a procedure which is executed iteratively by comparing various solutions till an optimum or a satisfactory solution is found, there are many types of optimization namely continuous optimization, bound constrained optimization, constrained optimization, derivative-free o optimization, discrete optimization, global optimization, linear programming and nondifferentiable optimization. multi researchers work in the field optimization.



al-janabi and alkaim present a novel tool called drflls to fine the optimal values to missing values. by developing random forest algorithm, seven categories of similarity measures were defined. these categories are person similarity coefficient, simple similarity, and fuzzy similarity(m1, m2, m3, m4 and m5). al-janabi and madi present study based on intelligent computation through deep analysis to five prediction data mining techniques to determine which one achieve an optimal biomedical analysis, this study appear not the mathematical computation always lead to optimal solution as popular but the nature of data is consider the main parameter in determined the optimal way



develop the lion optimization algorithm(loa) by replacing the kernel of loa in searching machnizam by using a smart feature(i.e., spirally searching& bubble net searching) to increase the accuracy, at the same time reduce the execution time to reach of the goal.















