the note is organized as follows. section 2 recalls the basic notions concerning typed graphs with interfaces; while section 3 performs the same task concerning dgs-monoidal categories, illustrating their correspondence with graphs with discrete interfaces. section 4 presents the main remarks about discrete and disconnected graphs; while section 5 shows some preliminary results on disconnected dpo rewriting. the final section 6 wraps up this note, offering some further pointers to the literature.



nodes are denoted by their sort. moreover, nodes in the input(output) interface are denoted by circling them with a dotted(solid, respectively) circle: it might be restrictive(a node might occur twice in an interface), but for this simple example will do. finally, edges are boxes with an entering tentacle(from the source) and a leaving tentacle(to the target).



for example, graph f1 contains four nodes and four edges. the node labelled x is an input node, while z is an output node. edges are labelled by boxing their type: the two edges in f1 labelled f have an outgoing tentacle to the node labelled z, and an incoming tentacle from two different nodes, both labelled y.



please note that more direct derivations can be performed by d(p) than by p. however, the former class could be suitably restrained: chosen a match ml, a oneto-one correspondence could be obtained, for example by considering only those derivations obtained via the so-called natural pushout complement. we refer the reader to[7, section 3].



view of graph rewriting, since they allow for an inductive presentation of the direct derivations obtained via the dpo approach, yet preserving all its concurrency features. while the latter issue is discussed with some details in section 5, we do not tackle the former, and we refer the reader to and especially. indeed, disconnected graphs were first studied there, and the present paper can be considered as a reformulation and generalization(to hyper graphs) of some of the results occurring there, partly filtered through some remarks in.



