the rapidly changing environments of the internet suffer from problems like fragile trustworthiness of millions active entities on the internet, e.g., humans and mobile agents. this problem is nontrivial, as more and more commercial transactions get carried out over the internet. therefore, devising an effective approach for verification of trustworthiness in such complex environments is essential, since the trust mechanisms play a key role in the security of multi-agent systems. also the trust



the rest of this paper is organized as follows: section 2 covers the relevant literature. in section 3 the ntropi model and its analysis are presented. section 4 discusses the proposed model in detail. section 5 explains the experimental results and presents the evaluation process. section 6 presents the conclusion and suggests future work.



recommendations. an example where unknown recommenders may be useful is when the alternative is to have no recommendation at all. this situation is analogous to asking for directions on the street, and demonstrate that at times one may successfully use advice from a stranger, i.e. when nothing is known about the recommending agent. this is particularly true in situations where possession of any information is better than no information, and, at the same time, there is belief in the benevolence of the recommender as well as low perceived risk.



since its reputation algorithm results in the selection of recommendations with the highest weightings, it will potentially be ignoring other recommendations that also originated from trustworthy recommenders, albeit from those with lower comparative trustworthiness levels. given a sufficiently high number of recommendations(for the same trust value) from lower trust recommenders, their recommended trust values may still be the winning value because their sum-of-weights will outweigh the recommenders with higher trust but with a lower population within the local set of recommendations. a better algorithm would be one where a new trust value is produced by the reputation/combination algorithm based on the recommendations received from all the trusted recommenders from the whole range of trust levels.



the maximum-likelihood method estimates the parameters for the dirichlet distribution. the parameters are not available in closed-form. we use a simple and efficient iterative scheme for obtaining the parameter estimates in this model from past experiences with other agents. this is our main contribution.



assume that a is the truster agent, b is the trustee agent and c is the recommender agent. let there be k different discrete rating levels. this translates into having a state space of cardinality k for the dirichlet distribution(in the case of our model k is 5). let the rating level be indexed by i.



the agent skeleton is designed to allow researchers to implant within their appraiser agent-customized trust representations and algorithms while permitting standardized communication protocols with other entities. all appraiser agents participating in the art testbed are descendants of the same abstract class agent. this class defines a set of abstract methods to be coded by the researcher to define the behavior of his/her appraiser agent, as well as a set of methods to facilitate the communication with other appraiser agents. the agent class also provides methods for interacting with the simulation engine(for tasks such as verifying bank balances).



