in this paper, we give a systematic account of resource semantics via a family of stone-type duality theorems that encompass the range of systems from the layered graph logics, via boolean bi, to separation logic. our analysis can also be extended to the intuitionistic variants of each logic, variants with additional multiplicatives[6,7,10] and, we conjecture, the modal and epistemic systems described in[20,26]. as corollaries we retrieve the soundness and completeness of the standard truthfunctional models in the literature.



we begin by presenting the classical logic of layered graphs, lgl. the intuitionistic version of lgl, ilgl, is presented in. we begin with a formal, graph-theoretic definition of layered graph that, we claim, captures the concept as used in modelling complex systems[14,15,23]. informally, two layers in a directed graph are connected by a specified set of edges, each element of which starts in the upper layer and ends in the lower layer.



source frame with the corresponding functor from bbi duality. on morphisms, we take the inverse image of the natural transformation in both resource hyperdoctrine and indexed resource frame morphisms. a full proof can be found in the extended research note.



we have given a systematic treatment of stone-type duality for the structures that interpret bunched logics, starting with the weakest systems, recovering the familiar bbi, and concluding with separation logic. our results encompass all the known existing algebraic approaches to separation logic and prove them sound with respect to the standard store-heap semantics. as corollaries, we uniformly recover soundness and completeness theorems for the systems we consider.



we have also obtained analogous results for the intuitionistic variant of lgl(ilgl, developed in), bi and intuitionistic fobbi, of which intuitionistic separation logic is a specific model. our theorems can also be extended to the bunched logics with additional multiplicatives corresponding to negation and disjunction: dmbi, cbi and the full range of sub-classical bunched logics. these results will be presented elsewhere. we conjecture that the treatment can additionally encompass a range of bunched modal and epistemic systems(e.g.,,, and), as well as higher-order variants of separation logic via general hyperdoctrines. we believe this treatment will simplify completeness arguments for bunched logics by providing a modular framework within which existing results can be extended. more generally, the notion of indexed resource frame and its associated completeness argument can easily be adapted for a wide range of nonclassical predicate logics.



second, we conjecture that our approach can be extended to account for the operational semantics of program execution given by hoare triples. as a consequence, we aim to interpret computational approaches to the frame rule such as bi-abduction within our semantics. we believe the evident extension of our framework with the duality-theoretic approach to hoare logic can facilitate this. we wish to investigate if the duality theorems can be used to bring algebraic or topological methods to bear on these important properties of separation logic.



