the use of multi-media in chinese college english education is becoming more and more popular. compared with traditional teaching model, there are many advantages in the use of multi-media, and the paper has listed three of them. at the same time, due to the limitation of time, space and money, practical problems exist in the use of multi-media. the paper suggested some ways to solve the problem and mke a objective prediction for the future of multi-media teachinng.



in the 21st century, with the development of higher education and the rapid growth of economic and cultural globalization, the mastery of english has become an increasingly important index to evaluate the level of a college student. to some extent, the mastery of english will determine the survival and competitiveness of every single person and even the survival and the competitiveness of the whole nation.the chinese civilians have already realized the significance of english, that is why the tests which evaluate the comprehensive language ability like cet4 or cet 6 are so popular nowadays. at the same time, the chinese government, such as the ministry of education, has shown great concern for english studying by promulgating some specific standards for english mastery. all these have posed a formidable challenge for domestic english teaching and domestic english teachers. the traditional english teaching methods, such as grammar-translation method, listening and speaking method, cognitive approach, communicative approach, have been unable to meet the need for english knowledge and english ability in the chinese society, a new



thirdly, multi-media technology is an excellent tool for language output. english teaching operated by multi-media technology can provide large amounts of information and plentiful knowledge, which can strikingly enhance teaching efficiency and effect. compared with traditional teaching way, multimedia teaching delivers messages through images, sound and animation, which is more direct and simpler. it can stimulate students' multiple senses and deepen memory, which is extremely beneficial for language output. since class time is limited, the knowledge that the traditional teaching methods can provide is also very limited. however, with the help of multimedia technology in the english class, teachers can output knowledge points through various ways such video clips, pictures, english songs,etc. students can get the auditory and visual stimulation repeatedly in the class, thus turning the knowledge points into long-term memory, and their comprehensive abilities like listening, speaking, reading and writing will be enhanced at the same time. in addition, students are allowed to download teaching materials after class, which can not only get rid of the limitation of class time, but also greatly liberate the minds of students. so they can really focus on the thinking and discussion of teaching content instead of note-taking. therefore, compared with the traditional teaching model, multimedia teaching is highly effective and efficient.



second, teachers should improve their abilities to use multi-media devices and make multi-media coursewares. all colleges and universities should establish systematic and long-term training for teachers according to their own conditions. and teachers should upgrade their knowledge reserve and skills incessantly. there should be periodical evaluation of the coursewares made by teachers, or there should be contest of coursewares based on criteria of function, knowledge and delight.



in the era of globalization, along with the emergence of a variety of educational sites, the rise of social networking sites, a lot of communication tools like microblogging or msn', the relationship between english education and multimedia will become closer and closer, but as professor guonong nan pointed out in the article"chinese educational technology in the 21st century","it is necessary to emphasize the reserach of multi-media application, but if you think multi-media can replace teachers, that is wrong." if we see things from the perspective of pure instrumentalism, multi-media teaching will become a toy that can display sound, light and animation. it will fail to attract students to think and discuss, and it will lead to the distraction of attention and lack of interest or other issues.after all, teaching is a person-to-person communication, only when teachers can use their extensive knowledge, pesonal charm and sincere attitude to influence and touch students, can multimedia tools be made best use of.



