as indicated in the abstract, this paper is the first result about a universal cellular automaton on the ternary heptagrid. although the somehow bigger number of neighbours for one cell is an argument in favor for a smaller number of states than in the case of the pentagrid, this was never proved before. also note that a direct translation of the result obtained in the pentagrid, using the continuous transformation constructed in[6,7] would certainly produce an automaton with at least the same number of states as in the pentagrid. this is why proving a better result needs a definite amount of work. as the reader will see, it is not at all trivial. moreover, as this is performed in another grid which has its own properties, this result cannot be simply considered as an improvement of.



note that a switch is an oriented structure: on one side, it has a single track u and, on the the other side, it has two tracks a and b. this defines two ways of crossing a switch. call the way from u to a or b active. call the other way, from a or b to u passive. the names comes from the fact that in a passive way, the switch plays no role on the trajectory of the locomotive. on the contrary, in an active crossing, the switch indicates which track between a and b will be followed by the locomotive after running on u: the new track is called the selected track.



as indicated by its name, the fixed switch is left unchanged by the passage of the locomotive. it always remains in the same position: when actively crossed by the locomotive, the switch always sends it onto the same track. the flip-flop switch is assumed to be crossed actively only. now, after each crossing by the locomotive, it changes the selected track. the memory switch can be crossed by the locomotive actively and passively. in an active passage, the locomotive is sent onto the selected track. now, the selected track is defined by the track of the last passive crossing by the locomotive. of course, at initial time, the selected track is fixed.



somewhere to keep track of the fact whether the locomotive incremented r or it decremented r. this is one type of control. the other control comes from the fact that several instructions usually apply to the same register. again, when the locomotive goes back from r, in general it goes back to perform a new instruction which depends on the one it has just performed on r. again this can be controlled by what we called the selector in[3,1].



the switches organize the meeting of tracks according to the principles defined in the previous section. by definition, four paths meet at a crossing and three ones meet at a switch. as in[1,10], such a meeting is materialized by a tile which plays a special role and which we call the centre of the meeting. the other parts of the tracks abut to a neighbour of the centre. this neighbour is called the first cell of the considered track.



each cell has a numbering of its sides from 1 to 7. the central cell excepted,for the other cells, side 1 is the side shared with the father. in the central cell, side 1 is a side fixed once and for all. once this side is fixed, all the others are also fixed: the numbers of the side increase when counter-clockwise turning around the tile which supports the cell. note that the sons of a black node in the fibonacci tree are given by sides 4 and 5 and that those of a white node are given by sides 3, 4 and 5.



