the ambient logic(al) has been proposed for expressing spatial properties of processes of the mobile ambient calculus(ma). restricting both the calculus and the logic to their static part yields static ambients(sa) and the static ambient logic(sal), that form a model for queries about semistructured data. sal also includes the non-standard fresh quantifier(i).



the al approach is however much more intensional than is the case for standard type systems. indeed, the whole spatial structure of the calculus is reflected in the logic. for instance, the formula n[r] is satisfied by processes of the form n[p] with p|= r. al also handles the dynamics of computation through the usual o modality. finally, al includes adjunct connectives for every spatial construct. for instance, the guarantee operator specifies that a process is able to satisfy b whenenever it is put in parallel with any process satisfying r. this connective gives a functional flavour to the logic, in the sense that the formulas may then describe a service offered by the process they refer to. it has been shown that adjuncts, together with the o connective, allow one to express some very intensional properties, and in fact to capture all constructs of the calculus[14,13].



this result is derived in two steps. we first establish it for the quantifier-free formulas(theorem 4.4), and then extend it to fresh-quantified formulas based on the use of prenex forms(proposition 5.3). to establish adjunct elimination on quantifier-free formulas, we first define a notion of intensional bisimilarity, along the lines of, in which we bound the number of test steps. then, two properties justify the encoding: a property we call precompactness, which expresses finiteness of behaviours, and the existence of characteristic formulas for the classes of bounded intensional bisimilarities.



apart from, this is, to our knowledge, the first result delimiting precisely the expressiveness of a spatial logic. other works about expressiveness only give some hints. a first result about the separation power of al is presented in. other examples of expressive formulas for al are shown in, such as formulas for persistence and finiteness.



the setting in which we obtain our encoding is rather different in the dynamic case(see). there, the presence of adjuncts considerably increases the expressive power of the logic. for instance, allows one to construct formulas to characterise processes of the form open n. p, and, using the@ connective, we may define a formula to capture processes of the form out n. p.



the use of a bounded intensional bisimilarity and the notion of precompactness is original. intensional bisimilarity plays an important role in the characterisation of the separation power of the logic. our proof suggests that it is also a powerful and meaningful concept for the study of expressiveness.



the presence of the connective in the logic is crucial with respect to decidability issues. the undecidability of the model-checking of sal with classical quantification has been established in. quite unexpected decidability results for spatial logics with and without quantification were then established in and. is closely related to the present study; roughly, the decidability result of relies on finiteness of processes, whereas our encoding exploits finiteness of observations. most recently, the undecidability of the model-checking problem for sal has been established. this last work studies many variations around sal, derives decidability results with and i, and presents a prenex form result similar to ours.



the precompactness property says that if we bound the granularity of the observations, only finitely many distinct situations may occur. the characteristic formula property says that each of these situations is expressible in the intensional fragment. the idea of the encoding is then just to logically enumerate all these possible situations.



due to its finiteness, the construction of our proof could seem to be effective. however, this cannot be the case due to an undecidability result for the model-checking problem on sal. this is quite surprising, since only an effective enumeration of the bisimilarity classes is missing to make the proof constructive. moreover, such an enumeration exists for sa without name restriction, via testing sets as defined in. this reveals an unexpected richness of sa compared to pure trees.



let us note salint the intensional fragment with classical quantification. we ask the question of adjuncts elimination for extensions of this logic. the undecidability result of implies that there is no effective adjunct elimination for salint+{}. we establish now a more precise result:



we have established the adjuncts elimination property for sal, a logic for trees with binders including the fresh quantifier i. this involves putting a formula in prenex form and then doing the transformation on the quantifier-free formula. the adjunct-free fragment salint turns then to be a minimal logic.



i would like to thank m.j. gabbay for enlightening discussions about nominal sets theory. the anonymous referees and g. ghelli helped me significantly to improve the first version of this presentation. i also want to thank d. sangiorgi, l. monteiro, l. caires, and d. hirschkoff for their advice all along this work.



in this section, we establish proposition 6.2 that is used for the proof of theorem 6.1. it follows from lemma a.2, that itself depends on lemma a.1. roughly speaking, the aim of this section is to find some sufficient conditions so that substitutions can be applied both on the side of the formula and on the side of the process while keeping satisfaction.



r= r1| r2. we may assume by symmetry that p1|= r. also by symmetry, we may assume p1|= r1 and 0|= r2. if p2|=r, then r1 separates p1 from p2 and is a smaller formula: contradiction.



r= r1| r2. we may assume by symmetry that p1|= r. also by symmetry, we may assume p1|= r1 and 0|= r2. if p2|=r, then r1 separates p1 from p2 and is a smaller formula: contradiction.



