the rest of the work is divided into 5 sections. the related work of cluster based key management mechanisms with its merits and demerits are described in section 2. in section 3, the proposed cluster hash key based key management for cluster based networks is discussed in detail with its system model. section 4 provides the simulation results of the proposed scheme by evaluating the network with increased malicious nodes in the environment. finally, section 5 concludes the work.



lin you et al. described a key management scheme for wireless sensor networks, where the work proposed a key distribution scheme using hash chain with deployment knowledge(dkh-kd). it established a pairwise key based on the number of hash chains. the pairwise key was established through reverse hash chain values. it improves the establishment of pairwise key more efficiently but computational cost is significantly increased with the rekeying process.



ehdai et al. described a 2d hash-based scheme, where the author used two hash functions to solve the security issues in the sensor network and it works efficiently against node capture attack. the work greatly reduces the energy consumption but computation overhead increased due to the rekeying process.



anita et al. described a novel hybrid key management scheme for establishing secure communication in wireless sensor networks which decreases the computational overheads and guaranteed high-level security over communication networks. the work shows that the performance of the network is enhanced but it is difficult to implement in real-time situations.



after generating the master key km, the node a has to obtain its pairwise key to communicate with the destination node b. assume that node a wants to communicate node b secretly by establishing pairwise key kpair. here each node in the cluster will have a pairwise key obtained from the established hash chain hc. the establishment of a pairwise key is given as follows



phase-1 generates master key km and activates before the sensors are established in the network. phase-2 describes the key predistribution which enables the security of the network. phase3 is used for creating a secured link in multi hop distance. the first phase is the key distribution phase, here initial key ki is generated and pre distributed with each node in the network during the deployment of the network. each node sni then will generate master key km with ki and one-way hash function kh.



