cluskey et al. studied the possible ways to take the online exam without having proctor supervision. the authors have discussed in detail the common cheating scenario that is adopted by the students, and how to prevent the students from cheating. they have suggested some techniques for developing an online testing plan and some online exam control procedures such as taking exams at one set time, using respondus lockdown browser(rdl), verifying student id, and so on. tejra et al.



sescp-f: in this section, the system will make a database. each answer script will be in the same database where the system will check for plagiarism for each answerscript. the paraphrasing tool is used to check plagiarism. it is a python-based tool that uses synonym usage, changing the grammatical structure, and changing part of speech as a technique. semantic-based method, grammar-based method, grammar semantics hybrid method, and clustering techniques are also used to check plagiarism.



sescp-g: this section will define plagiarism and eliminate answer scripts. we want human interactions here. answer scripts having plagiarism of seventy percent or more will be forwarded to the teacher. they will judge and control those answer scripts for future procedures.



in an online test, candidates should answer the questions within the prescribed time. the test window collapses when the test is over, and facilities receive real-time reports. the proposed automated system may scrutinize the answer scripts thoroughly and provide results in the shortest possible time. the testers checked the answers and argued accordingly. for long-type questions where the results are not random, the testers check the answers and calculate accordingly. the tests conducted online and passed on to the candidates can be by email or website.



in the span of the internet metaphors, countries like bangladesh still facing issues in building a proper e-learning system to handle the covid19 outburst. this work may help to resolve the critical obstruction of e-learning which is an e-exam. the drawback of the online exams can be overlooked with the help of artificial intelligent, blockchain, rdp, and smart login systems. this paper presents an ai-based blockchain framework that secures the online examination system. it is expected that our proposed system will play a vital role in the evolution of elearning, where teachers can take a proper exam just like they are physically present in the classroom.



