although wireless sensor networks(wsns) have been utilized for over one decade, it is now heavily used by many modern applications such as medical observance, disaster management and environmental monitoring. this type of network suffers from limited energy and a short lifetime in addition to the low channel bandwidth. bandwidth represents the major challenges of such systems due to the great impact of communication cost on the consumption of nodes power. clustering has been proven to be one of the best techniques to conserve the energy of wsns. leach(low energy adaptive clustering hierarchy) protocol is one of the most fundamental works of wsn clustering. however, this protocol suffers from some drawbacks, especially in the setup phase where ch is selected randomly. this work aims to enhance leach by identifying a cluster head according to the lowest degree of consuming energy. the results clarify the ability of this work to enhance leach while prolonging the lifetime and improving the performance of wsn.



continuous technological progress works to convert the distributed systems from large to small and tiny scales are known as wireless sensor networks(wsns). wsns are gigantic systems composed of a large number of miniaturized, distributed and limited-energy sensor nodes. these nodes are usually spread over a certain region in order to collect various types of environmental data. many recent applications depend on wsn such as medical observance, disaster management and environmental monitoring. the collected data are always sent to a base station(called sink) for processing and analysis. this type of network suffers from limited energy and a short lifetime due to the limited non-rechargeable power of the small batteries in sensor nodes. the network lifetime is defined by the round when all nodes have died, and the sensor node is defined as dead when its energy is out. the limited lifetime and low channel bandwidth are the major challenges of such systems due to the great impact of communica-



clustering as a reduction technique has been proven to be one of the good techniques to conserve the energy of wsns. with clustering, sensor nodes are grouped into an optimized number of clusters with a lower number of nodes. as such, each cluster must have at least one node acting as a cluster header, which is often abbreviated as ch, which is responsible for receiving and aggregating the sensed data, then forwarding them to the base station. consequently, the packets sent to the base station are reduced and the communication bandwidth is conserved as a result. the most important target is to reduce the energy used to receive and send more sensed data.



the communication cost is the major consumer of wsn energy. there are many factors other than distance that can affect the communication cost as stated by.; the present work decides to use the communication cost as the main criteria in the election of chs instead of using any indirect factors that impact the communication cost.



on the other hand, leach suffers from many defects due to the random selection of chs. first, a low powered node has the same chance to be a ch as a high powered node, which can be the main source of energy depletion. second, leach was not clear enough about any constraint on the number of chs in the network. finally, although all chs must have the ability to immediately link to the base station(bs), leach did not consider any clustering features such as location, energy, communication cost, etc. between itself and the bs.



the memetic algorithm to define vices set for each header. the presence of the defined vices of the cluster header(candidate headers) drives this work to the third contribution of the scheduling mechanism to arrange the defined ch with its vices in the correct order. this work tries to achieve an efficient energy consumption of wsns using the waking-sleeping scheduling mechanism for managing which head must wakeup to perform all tasks of receiving the collected data, aggregating them and sending them to bs.



the remaining part of this paper is organized as follows: section 2 briefly reviews the previous related works to the present work. the proposed ie2-leach protocol is presented in section 3. in section 4, the simulation results are revealed. finally, section 5 concludes the work and highlights future directions for other aspects of improvement in wsn.



the works of and both address the energy consumption problem and present clustering by considering the energy and distance. in order to select the chs in the setup phase, the first work calculates the distances between all the nodes. a node with the minimal distance and higher residual energy is designated as ch. the node is considered as a high power node if the calculated residual energy is higher than the threshold. in the second work, the ch selection is based on the optimal number of clusters confirmed by the lower energy dissipation.



in order to balance the energy consumption of wsn, the work by introduced esacc scheduling mechanism which monitors the network performance to ensure that only some redundant nodes are scheduled to work while the others sleep. sleeping nodes are awakened to replace the dead nodes and maintain network performance. their main objective is to find a minimum set of working nodes that succeed to reduce the consumption of power and maintain the coverage area.



the work of is most related to the present work because of the common primary objective of improving the cluster head selection of leach. they have introduced an improved energy efficient cluster head selection protocol(ieechs-wsn) by selecting dual cluster heads in a separated cluster based on the distance. the first ch transfers the information to the sink node, and sink node then accepts the data and that sent via the second ch. as such, the energy usage for connection with the sink is distributed between the dual chs.



the method of this work is the same as of leach, in that it consists of two phases: setup and steady state. the significant difference from leach occurs at the setup phase as this work tries to face the problem of chs selection randomly. in our setup phase, the chs are selected and their vices are identified. in order to determine whether or not any sensor node can be a ch with minimum threats on its lifetime, ie2-leach introduces a header selection method that considers the impact of the transmission cost between that node and bs on its residual energy during the selection decision.



the present approach is introduced mainly to enhance the leach protocol with three contributions. since being a clusterhead drains the battery of that node, the first contribution is to introduce a novel selection method for the capable nodes(that can be chs). in the second contribution, we proposed an efficient method to define the vices of each ch to avoid sending redundant information. the third contribution aims to balance the energy usage among the vices of each header. the objectives of these contributions are to prolong the lifetime of wsn, while improving its ability to transfer and extend.



