the recent innovations in network application and the internet have made data and network security the major role in data communication system development. cryptography is one of the outstanding and powerful tools for ensuring data and network security. in cryptography, randomization of encrypted data increases the security level as well as the computational complexity of cryptographic algorithms involved. this research study provides encryption algorithms that bring confidentiality and integrity based on two algorithms. the encryption algorithms include a well-known rsa algorithm(1024 key length) with an enhanced bit insertion algorithm to enhance the security of rsa against different attacks. the security classical rsa has depreciated irrespective of the size of the key length due to the development in computing technology and hacking system. due to these lapses, we have tried to improve on the contribution of the paper by enhancing the security of rsa against different attacks and also increasing diffusion degree without increasing the key length. the security analysis of the study was compared with classical rsa of 1024 key length using mathematical evaluation proofs, the experimental results generated were compared with classical rsa of 1024 key length using avalanche effect in(%) and computational complexity as performance evaluation metrics. the results show that rbmrsa is better than classical rsa in terms of security but at the cost of execution time.



decryption. cryptography is defined as storing data or messages and converting such data or messages into a chaotic state that only the right user can access and process. encryption algorithm is the security of data to confidentiality privacy access control, among others. the original form of data is the clear text or plaintext, which is converted into codes that are not understood. decryption means conversion of message in the chaotic state back to readable forms at the other end. the rsa is one of the examples of asymmetric key cryptography, invented and named after the three scientists.



nowadays, despite the increase in key length, classical rsa is still prone to different attacks as a result of advancements in computing technology and hacking methods, instead of increasing the key length of classical rsa or increasing the primes involve to generate keys, we tried to enhance the classical rsa so as to compensate the classical rsa without increasing the key length(1024). recently, some cryptography algorithms that were developed gave their best with time but at the detriment of security. this research study introduced a random bit-insertion algorithm with modified rsa(rbmrsa) to increase the security strength of the rsa cryptosystem without increasing the key length by converting the ciphertext more complex structure so that the attacker would not decrypt easily even if the attackers knew the secret key, thereby making it more reliable and efficient. the bit insertion is proposed in this research study to effectively overcome the weakness of the classical rsa cryptosystem and achieve high diffusion degree and efficient security against different rsa attacks. the fermat little theorem is used to test the primality of the 3 prime numbers needed to generate both encryption and decryption keys because strong prime numbers are needed in rsa security.



authors in proposed a framework that provides dual security for rsa cryptosystem but the dual security system is not applicable in all systems because the algorithms for the formation of the key have increased the complexity of the proposed system. also developed an enhanced scheme of rsa cryptosystem. the algorithm utilizes four large prime numbers. these multiple primes make the computational and space complexity of the novel system higher than classical rsa. the public component of n is derived by multiplying two large numbers. the value of encryption and decryption is generated by multiplying four large prime numbers. the newly built algorithm resists brute forte attack. and the new approach is much more efficient when compared with classical rsa. a parallel technique using a new parallel data structure known as a concurrent index list of character blocks was proposed by authors. the aim is to fasten the rate of execution of the rsa cryptosystem, and the system does not take care of the security aspect of the rsa.



this is the first step of any encryption process, which comprises a series of procedures involved in generating public keys and secret key by the receiver y. in this framework, modified rsa, the intended receiver y performs mathematical steps below to compute public and secret key. these are some of the definitions involved in encryption operations.



the conventional rsa is not secure against known plain text attack, while rbmrsa resists the attack. k.p.a. has various plaintexts with its cipher texts version. the attacker exploits known plaintext to obtain a newly captured plaintext that is encrypted using a similar key.



avalanche effect: the amount of variation that occurs in ciphertext by slight change or variation in plaintext is the avalanche effect. a good cipher or encryption algorithm must generate completely different output for a minimal change in the input. the degree of changes in the ciphertext is proportional to the level of security of an algorithm, i.e., the higher the avalanche effect of an algorithm, the higher the security level of such an algorithm. the aim behind flipping only a single bit in avalanche effect(%) is to test the sensitivity of the proposed algorithm by examining if the very slightest change in the plaintexts would completely produce a radical or huge change in the ciphertext, so it will be difficult for an attacker to perform statistical analysis on the ciphertext.



time complexity solely depends on the message sizes, which means encrypting the same message twice will generate the same ciphertext. hence, the security of rbmrsa is a result of high computational difficulty and complexity. section 4.1 of this paper has also compared the classical rsa and proposed rbmrsa using mathematical proofs for security evaluation.



in this work, rbmrsa, a new security approach to messages, was developed. this approach was implemented using the java programming language. the complexity measure of the algorithm helps in the performance evaluation of rbmrsa for complexity; the results showed that the computational complexity of the rbmrsa technique is higher than the rsa algorithm due to the execution time incurred, which corroborates the fact that there is always a tradeoff between security and execution time. the measures of sensitivity of the algorithm to a slight change in plaintext(avalanche effect) were conducted. the result proves that the amount of bit varied in the ciphertext to a total number of bits in ciphertext in(%) of rbmrsa is 46%, rsa is 0.20%. hence, the greater the avalanche, the higher the security level, which infers that the rbmrsa algorithm is sensitive to a bit of change in plaintext by producing significant changes in the ciphertext.



