the mixed integer programming formulation presented in includes binary variables representing the assignment of points to groups, and continuous variables representing the hyperplanes that separate each pair of groups from different classes. in this work, we consider a formulation that only resorts to variables of the first kind, that is, binary variables representing the assignment of points to groups. since we consider a single group for each class of points, these binary variables determine the selected points(i.e., points that are not declared to be outliers). the formulation can be extended to the multi-group case in a straightforward way.



has a nonnegative optimal value, where m is a big positive number. this follows from the application of a classical result by balas to the mixed integer programming formulation for the 2-class classification problem considered in. since this model is a linear programming formulation, then it can be solved efficiently, hence such a feasibility check is of practical use.



note that the feasibility of this linear programming model does not depend on the actual value of m, namely if m is small then some solutions are lost but the problem remains feasible. however, small values of m will lead to meaningless mathematical solutions. as observed in, setting m to a value a few orders of magnitude larger than the size of the box encapsulating the data points typically suffices to produce good quality solutions.



the initial model is composed by the z-variables with no constraints, and lazy constraints are dynamically added with the procedure mentioned in section 3. this implementation was compared with the same algorithm when cuts are incorporated with the integer-programming-based separation procedures described in section 4. the algorithm was coded in the java programming language, using cplex 12.8 as the linear programming solver(for the linear relaxations and checking for feasibility) and mixed integer programming solver(for the separation problems).



