rfid is a technology with important business value and huge potential. rfid promises to replace the old barcode and contributes to the real time visibility of the goods, regardless of the location of the supply chain. we find rfid applications in various fields, but its main use is in tracking objects(assets).



although rfid has been around for more than a half century, it is only in recent years that this technology has been gaining significant momentum due to the convergence of lower cost and increased capabilities of rfid tags. currently, rfid is emerging as an important technology for revolutionizing a wide range of applications, including supply chain management, retail, aircraft maintenance, anti counterfeiting, baggage handling, and healthcare. it also heralds the emergence of inexpensive and highly effective pervasive computers that will have dramatic impacts on individuals, organizations, and societies. many organizations are planning or have already exploited rfid in their main operations to take advantage of the potential of more automation, efficient business processes, and inventory visibility. for example, recent news shows that wal-mart has reduced out-of-stocks by 30 percent on average after launching its rfid program. many predictions agree that rfid will be worth billions of dollars in new investments.



while rfid has previously been considered a forward looking technology, its adoption across a variety of industries has seen it become a lot more commonplace. as rfid is being more prevalent across a variety of industries, logistics organizations seeking to gain a competitive advantage are already utilizing the technology in a variety of innovative ways the industry has not seen before. the question that many providers are now asking is: where is rfid going? the answer, it seems, is that the technology has a bright future with more value added features appearing at similar costs.



rfid is a prospective automatic identification method, being considered by many as one of the most pervasive computing technologies in history. rfid is based on storing and remotely retrieving data using devices called rfid tags or rfid transporters. an automatic identification technology such as an auto-id system based on rfid technology is an important asset for inventory systems for two reasons. first of all, the visibility provided by this technology allows an accurate knowledge of inventory level by eliminating the discrepancy between inventory record and physical inventory. secondly, rfid technology can prevent or reduce sources of errors. benefits of using rfid technology include the reduction of labor costs, the simplification of business processes and the reduction of inventory inaccuracies.



