in this paper, we discuss a study where graduate students completed learning activities to practice specific skills(e.g., asking a patient questions during an interview) within a virtual reality learning environment(vrle). in the study, we investigate whether the collaborative nature of the learning activities and the authentic design of the learning experience, including the learning tasks, learning environment, and the social authentic problems(scardamalia& bereiter, 2014). situated learning theory(i.e., situated cognition theory) holds that knowledge should be delivered in authentic contexts, which involves placing learners into learning contexts where learners can observe, evaluate, participate, and interact with others, including experts who can model behaviors(lave& wenger, 1991). situating learners in an authentic learning context offers them opportunities to develop knowledge and skills for real-world situations while the support of a classroom instructional context with a teacher and peers.



an authentic learning context, also referred to as a learning environment, consists of the task, the environment, and the culture and should reflect how the knowledge and skills learned will be used for authentic tasks in real life. the learning context could be physical or virtual, and it should resemble the real world with the complexity, limitations, options, and possibilities found in real life and it may include simulated and immersive tasks and a realistic environment.



when creating instruction and learning experiences, designing a realistic learning environment based on a real-world context is an important goal, as replicating real-world complexities is essential to maximize a significantly higher recall of learned content and better skill transfer. human memory is highly dependent on the environment in which the learning or event occurs(smith& vela, 2001), as recall of concepts learned occurs best when the learning context is replicated in the test environment. thus, carefully designing the instructional context to the real-world context is essential to maximize the knowledge or skill learned for potential transfer.



functional the degree to which the virtual environment simulates the stimulusresponse characteristics of the real world. for example, the response of the environment when the user presses a switch or pushes a door. does the virtual environment replicate the real-world response to such actions?



fidelity is"the degree to which the detail and quality of an original, such as a picture, sound, or story, is copied exactly"(cambridge dictionary, n.d.). a learning environment's physical, functional, psychological, and social fidelity governs how closely it replicates the real-life/performance environment, creating a complex and realistic learning environment that provides the safety of formal learning.



authenticity is important in enhancing the learning outcome in a virtual reality-based learning environment. several studies have shown that the authenticity of a vrle impacts the cognitive, affective, and social learning processes. a vrle where the authentic learning experience is created would impact processes. therefore, it is necessary to study how the media and technology features of the vrle impact cognitive, affective, and social learning(kozma, 1994).



learner motivation regulates the energy and attention assigned to a task or activity(ratey, 2001), and higher satisfaction leads to higher motivation and learner engagement. enjoyment is an activity-related emotion and can be observed as a by-product of motivation and learner engagement. studies that measure the affective outcome of a vrle have shown that ease of use and relevance of learning content leads to higher levels of satisfaction among learners. moreover, enjoyment levels were higher in a more authentic learning environment(harley et al., week of their diagnosis of mental health issues in counseling course and provided several scaffolds, including tutorials on using the technology. the two units were chosen near the end of the course to provide students time to become familiar with the instructional methods of the course and the vrle environment. further, two units were used in this study, rather than one, to account for the possibility of unit content making a difference in students' experiences, perceptions, and learning. we compared role-playing activities in a simulated context and environment to standard methods(i.e., assigned readings, videos, class discussions) used to instruct students on the disorders and the procedures for interviewing and diagnosing patients.



when designing authentic virtual experiences, the authenticity of the learning environment, task, and culture is important. the virtual counselor training facility was created in the vr environment, second life. the students downloaded the client software to their computers to access the vr environment. once logged in, they could explore the virtual world with an avatar they choose, interact with others, build things, and purchase items with in-world funds. there was no cost for users to download the client software, explore, or interact with others. second life provided many benefits for activities in the diagnosis of mental health issues in counseling course, including ease of access for the instructor and students during and outside of scheduled learning times and options to design the environment and avatars to meet instructional and learner needs. the physical and functional authenticity of the environment was achieved by closely recreating the structure and complexity of the building where students would normally apply their skills.



learning outcomes for the vrle activities include developing interviewing and diagnosis skills and correct procedural application. two different skill sets are needed for interviewing: facilitative and clinical skills. facilitative skills focus on developing rapport with a patient and building a therapeutic alliance. clinical skills concentrate on information gathering and diagnosis(case conceptualization). specific skills needed to conduct diagnostic interviews include determining the presenting problem(s), observing signs, listening for symptoms, gathering information to differentiate one disorder from other disorders, and determining if the presenting problem impairs personal functioning(american psychiatric association, 2013).



the cap scale was administered after each of the three learning activities for both units. we thus had three data sets for each unitone for the literature review, video, and the vrle. the data from the cognitive and affective subscales were summed to get a cumulative score for every learner for the data collected after each activity in both units. we thus had cumulative scores for three activities in each unit.



a mixed-method research design was chosen because qualitative and quantitative research approaches offer opportunities to analyze and interpret the data using different methods. this research design will provide a complete picture, and including both approaches will strengthen the validity of the study design(oleinik, 2011).



the quantitative research strand in this study is based on objective methods and numeric data that explore a research query from a humanistic or idealistic approach to understand the participant's beliefs, experiences, attitudes, behavior, and interactions. by triangulating the data from a qualitative and a quantitative approach, we can analyze the data objectively and through a humanistic view.



when reviewing the qualitative data, we completed a content analysis of the open-ended questions from the attitudinal survey using both an inductive(denzin, 2012; thomas, 2006) and a semantic approach(oleinik, 2011), allowing the data to determine the themes. next, we used a descriptive exploratory approach to complete the thematic analysis. our theoretical lens in our qualitative data collection and analysis is based on past research on authentic and situated learning, as well as observations of students during the learning activities, and our review of the data collected with the goal that aspects of the theory will guide us in determining what is most important in the data(noble& smith, 2014). content analysis is a widely used research approach for making replicable and valid inferences from texts(or other meaningful matter) to the context of their use(salkind, 2010).



one for literature review, video, and a 3d virtual environment. the data from the cognitive and affective subscales were summed to get a cumulative score for every learner for the data collected after each of the three activities in both units. a one-way anova was conducted on scores for every unit to compare the mean confidence level for each of the three activities in that unit.



was conducted on these scores to compare the mean level of perceived confidence for each of the three activities in a unit. this was followed by the bonferroni t-test to make a pair-wise comparison of each activity in the unit. the confidence levels of the learners after each type of activity for both units were statistically at par with each other, showing no significant difference in confidence levels in any of the units. these results showed that the vr-based activity was at par with their regular learning activities in developing confidence in learning transfer.



integrated findings. the physical, functional, affective, interactive, and social experiences noted by the learners reflect that the vrbased learning activity and the environment were perceived as very realistic and authentic by the students. this outcome is confirmed by what was captured in the quantitative data, thus verifying our results.



integrated findings. it is evident from the qualitative data analysis for the second research question that students' self-efficacy beliefs for individual tasks in the counseling and diagnosis practice varied a lot after the experience within the vr environment. the perceived confidence was also distributed on a broad spectrum after the vr activity. moreover, students experienced metacognitive reflection about their learning and practice needs because of the vr activity. the realization of what the interview process entails and what skills and knowledge they need to build on was evident through the qualitative data. in conclusion,



we also found that the average confidence of learners to perform the task after the vr learning activity was on par with their confidence after other pedagogical approaches used during the course. qualitative data revealed a broad spectrum of confidence levels among learners after the task. while some learners experienced increased confidence and others said their confidence had decreased, several learners expressed a change in self-efficacy beliefs about specific tasks such as diagnosing, interviewing, and assessing as well as experienced metacognitive realizations about the skill and knowledge they needed to work on for the actual performance context of counseling interviews. these self-efficacy beliefs and metacognitive realizations were unexpected in this study that may help understand how vrles affect the learning process. for further understanding of this finding, we will define each of these constructs theoretically and then discuss the implications of the same from the findings.



like all studies, some limitations must be considered when reviewing the results of this study. first, relevant prior research studies on our topic were limited. although a pilot study was completed to develop a theory, our research topic had yet to be studied to provide a theoretical foundation for our research questions. second, this study was conducted in one course with one set of students and one instructor, potentially limiting the generalizability of the results. we encourage additional studies to examine similar questions with other populations. other limitations involve the capabilities of the technology to produce highfidelity rendering of content and interaction fidelity. specifically, the lack of control of avatar body movements(e.g., facial expressions, hand



students perceived the learning context in the vrle, comprising the learning environment and the learning tasks, as authentic. further, students perceived the fidelity of the design of the learning environment and learning tasks as authentic. however, some students did have technology challenges that impacted their perceived fidelity and authenticity. thus, learning experiences in a vr environment need to be designed and tested to ensure optimum technological performance in the learning context. for example, checking whether the vr experience will function well at the location of the training facilitation when multiple users are engaging with it simultaneously. it is also important to ensure that learners are provided onboarding to the vr platform or environment to familiarize them with the technology before they experience the intended learning activity.



