extraction of a large super-function(sf) is one of the most important factor in realizing sf based machine translation. this paper presents a method to automatically extract sf from a japanese-english bilingual corpus. the extraction process matches japanese noun and english noun in each bilingual sentence in a bilingual corpus using a bilingual dictionary. the experimental results show that this method performs very well in automatically extracting sf for machine translation. then, we discuss a problem of sf based machine translation from the result of the evaluation experiment using extracted sf.



increasingly, when information is searched for on the internet, the infomation desired is written in a foreign language. when internet users get a foreign document from a search engine, they take a longer time to understand the document than a native document. therefore, machine translations is indispensable for reading a foreign document. however, current machine translation systems have many problems. almost no users are satisfied with current machine translation systems, because the accuracy and the quality of translations have not reached a level which fills the demand of a user.



to solve this problem, this paper presents a method to automatically extract sf from a japanese-english bilingual corpus. in particular, while examining the structure of a sentence we pay attention to the nouns contained in each bilingual sentence in the bilingual corpus, so that sf are automatically extracted by matching a common noun to source and target language using a dictionaly. we conduct a translation experiment using sf extracted from a large bilingual corpus, and clarify the validity and problems of translation using sf.



in the next section we describe the purpose of this research. in section 3 we explain a definition and a structure of sf about sf based machine translation. in section 4 we describe the method of extracting sf from a bilingual corpus automatically. in section 5 we show the validity of this method by conducting the translation experiment, and consider the experimental result. finally in section 6 we give remarks about the conclusion and future works.



first, we randomly selected 200 bilingual sentences from the bilingual sentence pairs which could have sf extracted. next, we extracted sf automatically and manually from the 200. finally, we compared the automatically extracted sf and the manually extracted sf. as a result, 184 sfs(92%) corresponded. the cause of the differences in the 16 sentences which did not correspond were morphological analysis errors and a shortage of noun classification rules. here are examples of mismatches.



194,689 sentences which have extracted sf were used as the test set. all sf(158,634) extracted in section 5.1 were used in the experiment. the success condition of this experiment is when the translation results in the original sentence, any other is considered a failure.



we presented a method to automatically extract sf from a corpus. in particular, while examining the structure of a sentence we paid attention to the nouns contained in each bilingual sentence in the bilingual corpus. sf was automatically extracted by matching a noun common to source and target languages using a dictionary. we performed a closed test using extracted sf, and showed that it can translate by sf extracted automatically. because sf with two or more translation candidates existed, it proved that we need to narrow down candidate sf.



