internet polls are becoming nowadays more and more important as they are being used on a large scale. their security aspects are probably the most significant and hardest issue to be solved when we consider web surveys. in this paper we present an innovative solution which considerably increases the security of internet polls and the reliability of their results by discriminating between human-cast and machine-cast votes. we define the basic idea of the method used to achieve our goal, its security properties and the testing results on a working prototype. in order to better test the performance and the effective robustness of the solution from the security point of view, we also propose a public challenge.



online polls can be defined as online surveys of public(or a sample of public) opinion to acquire information about a specific topic. being a web application, a poll can suffer from a variety of attacks typical of this kind of programs. in particular, the most relevant one has to be considered the explicit alteration of poll results by means of automatic voting programs(bots), which act like human users in order to vote repeatedly.



of the poll voting options into a runtime-generated and heavily degraded image, in different rows. the order-based method posses a higher level of security compared to the cookie-based method and it is less restrictive than the ip locking scheme, since every user is allowed to vote. however, security weaknesses has been found in textual captchas[5,6,11,12] and it is possible to bypass the protection scheme only by focusing on the different length of choice strings, rather than extracting the full text from the image.



the main problem in captcha-based protection schemes has been shown to be the type of test used, which cannot be considered anymore completely effective to tell humans and computers apart. due to this reason, we devised a new technique for preventing alteration of internet polls results which is based on the human ability to recognize a generic object displayed by a picture never seen before. using a test based on this ability, we can discriminate between humans and computers, thus preventing automated programs to arbitrarily modify the distribution of poll results.



the proposed scheme can be considered fair in the sense that it does not prevent any human user from participating to the poll, even if multiple voters share the same ip address. indeed, every voting session is separate from the others so that two or more users can vote to the same poll, at the same time, even using the same workstation. the only exception is the ip address locking which happens when a voter repeatedly fails the test. in that specific case, if different voters share the same ip address of the possible attacker, they are prevented from accessing the poll. moreover, the suggested scheme can be considered fair even towards visually impaired people, since it allows the voters to switch to an audio security challenge.



pictures are extracted from a database that contains a very large number of different images belonging to a considerably high number of categories. thus, the probability to get the same picture twice is low, making the automatic classification of the database content much harder to achieve. regarding the creation of the database, possible approaches are shown in.



the system applies a number of transformations on every selected image, such as resizing it by a random percentage of the original size, rotating it by a randomly chosen angle or flipping it on its vertical axis. more complex operations like random distortion can also be applied, in order to make harder performing image comparisons by means of boundary detection. furthermore, the system dynamically modifies the shade of a number of pixels with a randomly chosen percentage of its original color, in order to increase the difficulty of performing an attack based on colors recognition.



multiple categories are associated to a single picture, rather than only one. this way, if we ask a user to recognize the picture representing a feline, we can provide an image with either a tiger or a cat. the algorithm for selecting categories and pictures is based on the simple idea that, given an image a belonging to the category c, a second image b will be chosen from a category that has no pictures in common with c. with this scheme, there is no chance that the user might be asked to recognize an object that is displayed in both two pictures.



similarity-based attack, which tries to guess the correct binding between the indicated category and one of the displayed pictures by exploiting visual image similarities. the attack is a two-step procedure: in the first one, the bot builds up a repertoire of reference images for each category, retrieving several pictures from the poll page, which are then categorized by a human being. the second step is the real attack and works by repeatedly comparing the two candidate images against previous instances of pictures that fit the category indicated in the poll. if a match is found, that image is used as the guess and a vote is attempted. in case the vote is unsuccessful, the other image is added to the collection associated with the category and the process restarts.



in order to verify the correctness of our proposed solution, we developed a prototype implementing the main idea and its security properties. we then performed a series of tests by simulating the usual behavior of a voting bot implementing both the blind-voting attack and the similarity-based attack. we also set up a wider test through an internet open challenge 4.



in this paper we presented the picture-based scheme, a new solution for preventing automatic and massive alteration of internet polls results, developed to address security issues arose with an existing protection method. the novelty of this solution is the direct embedding of the captcha-based protection inside the poll page, whilst its security aspects rely on the inability of modern computer to correctly recognize concepts expressed by pictures and sounds contained into audio streams. it can be defined as(1) fair, since it does not discriminate users,(2) robust, due to its strong captcha properties and(3) resistant to classification of all pictures constituting its database. in addition, the proposed scheme allows a simple and immediate integration of the poll inside internet portals and web pages, which is a feature particularly important for granting high visibility and accessibility to online surveys.



