abstract this paper investigates the use of a simplified set of arabic phonemes in an arabic speech recognition system applied to holy quran. the cmu sphinx 4 was used to train and evaluate a language model for the hafs narration of the holy quran. the building of the language model was done using a simplified list of arabic phonemes instead of the mainly used romanized set in order to simplify the process of generating the language model. the experiments resulted in very low word error rate(wer) reaching 1.5% while using a very small set of audio files during the training phase when using all the audio data for both the training and the testing phases. however, when using 90% and 80% of the training data, the wer obtained was respectively 50.0% and 55.7%.



in this paper, we assessed the performance of the cmu sphinx trained language models using simplified phonemes consisting of arabic diacritic letters, instead of the commonly used romanized phonemes, and detailed the processes and experiments introduced in. the rest of this paper is organized as follows: the use of arabic speech recognition systems applied to the holy quran is discussed in section 2. the different processing and experimental setups are detailed in section 3. the results of the different experiments are discussed in section 4. finally, the conclusion and future research are discussed in section 5.



speech recognition systems are very popular since they allow a more intuitive and natural way for humans to interact with devices and machines. however, applying asr techniques to the arabic language is still in its early stages when compared to asr for english. there are various challenges that are facing any project related to asr such as stuttering, coughing, false starts, dis-fluency, pitch, and repetitions but have moreover the challenges that arise from the pace of speech as described in. in the context of the holy quran, elongations are another challenge for accurate recognition since some ayat allows different lengths for the pronunciation of some letters of a word, which leads to the same word being pronounced differently even by the same speaker and still be a valid pronunciation that needs to be correctly recognized.



these results help to realize that this phoneme simplification using diacritic arabic letters has the potential of attaining promising results since the wer obtained in many experimental settings was less than 2% with a minimum of 1.5%. this confirms that it is possible to achieve very good word recognition accuracy with simplified arabic phonemes. even if most of the minimum wer were obtained when the dimension of the gaussian mixtures was set to 32, the minimal wer was similarly reached with a setting of the gaussians to 24 and



finally, it is very important to remember that all these results were obtained using all the audio files for both the training and the testing of the trained model. using this experimental setting did not test the model on unseen audio data. this resulted in a model dependent on the trained audio files. this led to more experimental settings to be carried out. in order to assess the trained language model on unseen data, some of the audio files need to be excluded from the training phase and used only during the testing phase.



in order to assess the performance of the language model on audio files unseen during the training phase, different experiments were set by varying the percentage of unseen audio files during the training. instead of always using 100% of the files for both the training and the testing, audio files were separated into two groups: one for the training and the other for the testing. the audio files were randomly separated into either to be used for the training of the language model or for its testing when the resulting wer is computed.



