most agents in a system are designed to operate based on the condition-action rule. the agent system act according to the information acquired by the sensors located in the domain. the aim of this research report is to explain technique used in implementation of a condition-action rules in an agent component of an expert healthcare support system(heassy) unit. steps and techniques of knowledge search and implementation in the heassy unit is presented.



during the process of condition-action rule, the problem is to achieve the optimal decision(vlassis, 2007). it is not the matter of action but the best action for each domain state. the domain is observed by perceiving its environment through sensors. the availability of measurements determines the state of the domain(condition) which in turns activates the respective response(action). therefore, the observability of the system is assumed all time. observability is a vital issue and must be addressed properly.



the collected data contained in the domain at a time provides the knowledge of the domain state st, at that time. the set of all states of the domain will be denoted by s. in our context, the discrete states, with finite number of state are assumed. depending on the nature of the problem, the continuous states, with infinite number of states may exist in other types of systems. the domain is fully observable if all sensors at a time



in this section, the first part of antecedent or domain status is discussed. sets of domain status form conditions of the domain. the action can be for a single condition or for a combination of conditions. if two or more conditions of the domain are needed for an action, the two conditions are said to be dependent conditions, otherwise the condition is a dependent condition. in this section a two-fold state is discussed.



the optimum action. a condition, be an independent or dependent has an action. as it was mentioned before, some conclusions depend on facts and principles behind the given condition. these facts come after deduction of arguments. the deductive arguments act as a solution indicator. for example, if the physiological transducer state is high(40o c for instance), it can be concluded that the patient has fever. note that, high temperature can be a symptom of other diseases. this is the reason for consulting medical experts in a higher level of health services.



although the smart home health systems communicate with high level health services to consult medical experts, a knowledge database could assist in a well framed system. the system with database, regardless of its location,(within a network reach) can respond to the smart home health system. the communication language between the systems must be clearly stated.



