in this paper, we propose a clustering ensemble method based on dempster-shafer theory. in the first step, base partitions are generated by evidential clustering algorithms such as the evidential c-means or evclus. base credal partitions are then converted to their relational representations, which are combined by averaging. the combined relational representation is then made transitive using the theory of intuitionistic fuzzy relations. finally, the consensus solution is obtained by minimizing an error function. experiments with simulated and real datasets show the good performances of this method.



clustering is an important task in machine learning and pattern recognition. it is a statistical method to divide objects into groups, in such a way that objects are similar within each group, and dissimilar across different groups. clustering methods have proved useful in many real-world application domains, such as data mining, image segmentation, etc.



according to the form of clustering output, we can distinguish between hard and soft partitional clustering; the latter includes fuzzy and evidential clustering. in particular, evidential clustering, based on dempster-shafer(ds) theory(also called the theory of belief functions)[8,31], has recently attracted the attention of many researchers. evidential clustering computes a credal partition, which describes cluster membership uncertainty using ds mass functions.



in this paper, we combine credal partitions, a very general form of partitions that can be generated by hard, fuzzy, rough or evidential clustering algorithms. after mapping the base partitions to their relational representations, we combine these partitions in a coarser frame, where we only need to consider two focal sets. the combined relational representation is made transitive using the theory of ifrs. finally, we generate an evidential partition that matches the combined relational representation, providing a much more informative output than can be



in eac, the co-association matrix is computed by only taking into account whether two objects belong to the same cluster or not. some researchers[19,37,40] have proposed to use additional information to construct a similarity measure that is more expressive about the relationship between objects. for instance, yang proposed a fuzzy co-association matrix to summarize the ensemble of fuzzy partitions, where the membership of an object to clusters is expressed by a fuzzy membership function.



in this section, we introduce the proposed method. the generation and combination of base credal partitions are described in section 3.1. the computation of transitive closures to make the combined relational representation transitive is then addressed in section 3.2, and the method for computing the final credal partition is presented in section 3.3.



clusters. for instance, in one dataset with two clusters, they construct base partitions with up to 80 clusters. the underlying assumption is that objects that truly belong to true same cluster are likely to be assigned to the same cluster in different partitions, which is summarized in the co-association matrix. the number of clusters in the final aggregated partition is determined by analyzing the dendrogram after applying



different pieces of evidence. preliminary results have already demonstrated the feasibility of this approach. for example, in refs.[13,28] the authors propose to define mass functions on the lattice of interval partitions of a set of objects; they obtain a consensus belief function by a



in the eac method, the final result is obtained by applying hierarchical clustering to the association matrix. we could apply the same procedure to matrices(belij({sij}))or(plij({sij}), similarly to what was proposed in ref.. however, our objective is to recover a credal partition, which cannot be obtained by a hierarchical clustering algorithm.



combined relational minimum-transitive is beneficial for datasets with complex-shaped clusters, but it can sometimes degrade the performance for datasets with overlapping clusters. the reason is that, where there is an overlapping area between clusters and we make the fuzzy relation transitive, objects from different clusters become similar to each other, which hinders the performance of the method. as far as the number of clusters in the base partitions is concerned, better results are generally obtained in cases 2 and 3, i.e., with a larger number of clusters.



be uncertain and represented by a mass function. this very general formalism encompasses hard, fuzzy and rough partitions as special cases. credal partitions of special forms can be generated by hard, fuzzy or rough clustering algorithms, and general credal partitions can be obtained by evidential clustering procedures such a evclus, ecm, bpec, ccm, etc.



using the similarity between relational representations and intuitionistic fuzzy relations studied in ref., we have proposed a way to transitivize the combined relational representation by computing the transitive closures of two fuzzy relations, based on a t-norm. our experimental results suggest that the minimum t-norm often yields the best results, especially for datasets with complex-shaped clusters. however, making the relational representation transitive does not always improve the results, and may even degrade them in the case of datasets with many spherical clusters.



we have applied this method to a variety of simulated and real datasets. it has been shown to perform well in terms of adjusted rand index as compared to the eac method and to the ecm algorithm alone. it should also be emphasized that, in contrast with eac and most existing ensemble clustering methods, our approach computes a credal partition, which constitutes a richer description of the clustering structure of a dataset, as compared to hard or fuzzy partitions.



although very encouraging, these results are still preliminary. the determination of the number of clusters remains a crucial issue that remains to be thoroughly investigated. the application of this approach to very big datasets with a large number of clusters still represents a challenge. finally, we could apply this approach not only to combine credal partitions, but also to combine all kinds of partitions generated by all kinds of clustering algorithms. these research directions will be investigated in future work.



