(30% w/v as drinking water), salt(8% salt diet) and sucrose+ salt(30% w/v as drinking water+ 8% salt diet). after 6 weeks, rats were euthanized by cervical dislocation. sperm function was assessed post mortem. blood sample was drawn via the retro-orbital sinus for



catalase(cat) activity was determined by measuring the exponential disappearance of h2o2. the enzyme reaction was started by adding 0.1 ml of testes homogenate to 2.9 ml of 50 mm phosphate buffer, ph 7.0 containing 12 mm h2o2. the absorbance was recorded at 240 nm immediately at 15 s interval until 2 minutes. a blank was also taken without sample.



and/ or salt diet had no effect on food intake until the second week of study where the sucrose and sucrose+ salt fed rats had reduced food intake(p< 0.05) compared with control and salt fed rats. furthermore, by the third week, the food intake in all the treated groups was significantly reduced(p< 0.05) compared with control rats. at the fourth and fifth weeks, sucrose fed rats had a significant reduction in food intake(p< 0.05) compared to the other experimental groups. in addition, at the fifth week, the food intake in the sucrose+ salt fed rats was significantly reduced(p< 0.05) when compared with control rats, although it was significantly higher(p< 0.05) than the sucrose fed rats.



significant reduction(p< 0.05) in body weight compared with control. meanwhile, sucrose intake resulted in a higher body weight(p< 0.05) than salt or sucrose+ salt intake. additionally, the salt fed rats had higher body weights(p< 0.05) than sucrose+ salt fed rats. finally, at the sixth week of study, the salt and sucrose+ salt fed rats had reduced body weight(p< 0.05) when compared with control. a further reduction(p< 0.05) in body weight was observed by the sixth week in sucrose+ salt fed rats when compared with the control, sucrose and salt fed rats.



combination with salt. for most part of the study, comparison of food intake in rats fed a high sucrose diet with those fed on high salt diet revealed that the animals fed on high salt diet had a significantly increased food intake compared with sucrose-fed rats. sucrose satiating effect has been observed in earlier studies[14,33] with increased feeling of fullness associated with sweetness of sugar. this observed reduction in food intake as a result of high sucrose consumption is in line with the glucostatic hypothesis of food regulation where central glucoreceptive elements respond to rise in blood glucose concentration[35,36]. high salt feeding, on the other hand had no significant effect on food intake when compared with control and this is similar to the observation of ogihara et al..



furthermore, a high sucrose diet appeared not to cause any significant alteration in serum electrolyte levels; however, a high salt diet or in combination with high sucrose, significantly raised the serum level of chloride ion, with no changes in other electrolytes measured. consumption of high salt diet may result in retention of sodium and expansion of extracellular fluid volume, thus raising plasma sodium level. although there were no changes in sodium ion levels after high salt diet consumption, the observed elevation in chloride ion level corroborates a previous report. morita et al. also reported that high sodium diet resulted in no significant change in serum electrolyte levels, but increased urinary sodium excretion. determination of urinary sodium level may have presented a clearer view on why plasma sodium level remained unchanged, but urinary sodium level was not measured in this study.



