store sales information and they are too expensive for ordinary users. a wireless electronic scale based on msp430 microprocessor is introduced. it can download the commodity information from personal computer by wireless communication, store sales data and upload to pc, obtain commodity prices by the commodity code and so on.



msp430f135 mixed signal microcontroller is the control core of system. the output signal of strain sensor is firstly conditioned by instrument amplifier and inverting amplifier. secondly the conditioned signal is analog-to-digital converted by adc module which is integrated in msp430f135.



msp430f135 processed the ad result and memory relevant information in at45db081 which is flash memory. the weighing result was displayed by led which is drive by 74hc373 chip. the sales data is sent by ptr2000 which is a wireless communication module. max232 which is a serial port communication chip is used between ptr2000 and host computer. the receiving program is developed by vb language.



the output voltage after conditioning is 0~3.3v which is matched with adc module in msp430f135. the msp430 12-bit sigma-delta adc can operate either using a built-in reference of 1.2 v, or an externally connected reference voltage. here, an external resistor divider is used to provide the reference voltage. with the bridge sensor powered from the same voltage source, this has the advantage of implementing a vccindependent, ratio metric measurement principle. if the bridge sensor would be powered from vccand using the internal voltage reference for the adc module, the measurement results would change as vcc changes.



the time and data information of weight come from real-time clock/calendar chip pcf8563. the pcf8563 is a cmos real-time clock/calendar optimized for low power consumption. a programmable clock output, interrupt output and voltage-low detector are also provided. all addresses and data are transferred serially via a two-line bidirectional i2c-bus. maximum bus speed is 400 kbit/s. the built-in word address register is incremented automatically after each written or read data byte.



after many times of actual measurement and serials of adjustment, 0~5 kg weight is converted to 0~3.3 v voltage. then the conditioned voltage is sampled by 12-bit sigma-delta adc module, and 0~4096 data is obtained. in order to improve the precision, the result is processed by the method of moving average filter.



the electronic scale can not only measure weight of commodity, but also upload detailed transactions information to host pc and download commodity information from pc by wireless communication and serial port. the maximum load capacity is 5 kg with a resolution of 1g. the application of ina326 and opa2234 has successfully solved the program that how to amplify the weak signal and restrain interface. the combination of msp430 and ptr2000 can effectively communicate with host pc. max232 realizes the level conversion. user interface is convenient for user to modify commodity price and analyze consumer habits. it will be better if the whole system can include multiple slave electronic scales.



