q.e should be read as: the agent with name a(alice) runs the program e with qubits and inand outputs as specified. an agents thus is a piece of code running on a particular processor. in this context, it only makes sense



from now on, we denote i= iii for the set of input qubits and o= iq' for the set of output qubits, and call d(hi) and d(ho) the quantum input and output space respectively. the semantics of a network with respect to a schedule is thus that it relates quantum states in d(hi) plus classical input to quantum states in d(ho) and classical output with particular probabilities. note that the type of the transition system is a mapping from initial to final sorts; this component is identical in the denotational semantics we develop in sec. 2.2.



we throw away all distributed information, that is, sorts and communication events, we just have an ordinary pattern, i.e. a quantum operation. there is one caveat: since computation occurs asynchronously, there is usually some choice in the order in which different agents execute events in their program,



i.e. there are different possible schedules. however, since at each instance of the computation local events operate on disjoint sets of qubits, it does not actually matter in which order these operations are applied, or, in fact, whether they are executed at the same time. this statement is proved formally in sec. 2.4; we postpone the full proof until then since it has bearing on other situations that are covered below. therefore, any schedule of the computation leads to the same quantum operation. so to determine the operation elements of l, we choose a particular schedule, and then compose patterns in



suppose now that the network contains classical outputs o= ioi. we need to make a distinction between signal outputs, which are measurement outcomes, and external outputs, which are values that were originally input by some agent and sent around the network. by definition, the external outputs oe= ioi,e depend only on the classical input i; these constant values are sent around the network via classical channels. it is precisely the signal outputs os= ioi,s that depend on the quantum operation and vice versa. indeed, when there are signal outputs particular measurement outcomes are in the denotational semantics these are contained within the quantum operations. it is this abstraction, together with schedule-independence which makes the denotational framework advantageous. indeed, classical inputs are the same for all schedules, and classical outputs, depending on classical inputs and measurement values, thus occur with the same probabilities for all schedules, since l is schedule-independent. putting all of this together, we arrive



where os= o1,s o2,s, and the quantum operations operate on the same i and o as above. so we only need to check that first composing the quantum operations and then restricting them is the same as first restricting and then composing. however, this follows from the analogous result for ordinary patterns.



