technology-assisted learning via ict(or e-learning) has become progressively more vital for academia and corporate training. furthermore, e-learning has potentially become one of the most significant developments in icts. motivated by such compelling advantages as: geographical reach, learner control(in terms of flexibility and convenience), and cost effectiveness in course delivery and management, educational institutions and professional organizations are embracing e-learning by implementing an expanding array of technologyenabled platforms.



recently, saudi arabia has called for a national plan to adopt it spanning the country. the plan strongly recommends the implementation of e-learning and distance learning, and their prospective applications, in higher education. in a major transformation of conventional education, the saudi ministry of higher education has recently launched the national centre of e-learning& distance learning, set up a repository to organize the change, and prepare e-learning materials to help universities adopt the system and transform to a scheme of e-learning quickly.



of greater acceptance and effective utilization of its. this study draws heavily on the seminal work of venkatesh and bala and baker et al. due to their interrelated nature dealing with it acceptance and adoption testing as a common thematic issue. more specifically, venkatesh and bala provide tam3 as a theoretical base model while baker et al. provide the quasi replication and testing approach of a theoretical model in a different culture.



this study sets out an empirical research for investigating e-learning acceptance and assimilation in saudi arabia as having a unique culture that is different from the western culture where tam originated. the fundamental contribution of this study is to exploit tam3 to predict technology acceptance of e-learning in saudi arabia as a developing country, in addition to inquiring for some related postimplementation interventions that might contribute to the acceptance and assimilation of e-learning systems in developing countries. the specific objectives of this study are:(i) to develop a customized technology acceptance model using tam3 for the determinants of the acceptance and assimilation of e-learning;(ii) to employ survey research to test the customized e-learning model per se; and(iii) to outline outcomes of the study, such as, the antecedents of e-learning technology acceptance and managerial interventions and control for better organizational e-learning management. it is hoped that this project provides a roadmap to a better understanding of the success factors and post-implementation interventions contributing to the acceptance and assimilation of e-learning systems in developing countries in general.



mirza and al-abdulkareem reviewed the current situation of e-learning in the middle east(me). they presented drivers and barriers to e-learning, the different types of e-learning initiatives, steps being taken toward overcoming the challenges, and a possible future of e-learning through a case study of ongoing developments of e-learning in saudi arabia. educational organizations in the me are varying in their engagement in e-learning as some are pioneering while the majority are progressing visa-vis those that are still laggards.



post-implementation interventions represent a set of organizational, managerial, and support activities that take place after the deployment of a system to enhance the level of system acceptance by users. post-implementation interventions can be vital so that users are able to go through the initial shock and react favorably to changes associated with the new system. the core theme of post-implementation interventions should be to make users feel that the new system is an opportunity to enhance their job performance, and give them the ability and necessary resources to use the new system smoothly. tam3 suggests a group of post-implementation interventions: training, organizational support, and peer



w.w. chin, b.l. marcolin, p.r. newsted, a partial least squares latent variables modelling approach for measuring interaction effects: results from a monte-carlo simulation study and voice mail emotion/adoption study, in: paper presented at the international conference on information systems, cleveland, oh, 1996.



