in 2004, guangdong province launched the computerized english test for college entrance examination. in 2009, cet band-4 and band-6 were taken in some colleges and universities, as well as english listening and speaking test reform occurred in guangdong province. in 2011, an annual exam of more than 60 national higher education adults to apply for graduate examination were given on line.



computerized exam. it mainly includes the keyboard and mouse click. the examinee can use the mouse to click on a position in the text or graphic article; highlight text or graphics drag text digital or graph to the specified location or order, etc. in addition to the keyboard and mouse, there are other input devices such as touch screen, fluorescence pen, track ball and joystick microphone such as using the microphone to collect oral response etc.



interactivity level: it means to what extent do test items respond to to input of the examinees.most of the computerized examination papers are non-interactive, such as candidates clicking on the mouse to make the selection to complete the problem solving process. but there are also some of the limited interactions applied to computerized examination papers with relatively small highly interactive tests. there is an interactive combination of two or more steps of branch functions, e.g. a workshop is in conflict, the candidate's task is to resolve it. first step in this application is display of video images of the workshop conflict, and then the multiple-choice questions are related to how to resolve conflicts. once candidates have selected an option, the second video scene related is on display.this assessment used a two-stage interactive branch level, which can be applied in computerized speaking test.



scoring methods are how to quantify the examinees' responses. there have been some ready automatic scoring software like peg, erater intelligent engineer, assessor,inquizit, standards of which are quite different from each other. some consider simply the shallow characteristics while others apply theory of advanced computational linguistics and methods. they are all similar to people and can act the role as markers and examiners



firstly, all candidates participate in routine test and then secondly the optimizing test.to begin with,optimizing test estimates of the ability of the candidates in the first stage and computer select the most optimized test items for each candidate, rules of which are to provide maximum test information with the least items. the maximum amount of information is also used as the termination principle; the average difficulty score method is the way to estimate ability(weiss, 1974).



degree of difficulty show s each candidate's ability to answer all of the questions correctly.in the error control test mode, due to the transformation of the initial project and the project selection in the actual operation of this model, there are three variations of which basic steps are exactly the same. variable branching start from a moderately difficult project selection, the general principle is that candidates answered all the items if the answer is correct, otherwise go from the easier to the more difficult projects. maximum likelihood estimation methods are used to estimate students' abilities..the above-described are four basic model of machine variants, using different methods to accomplish essential parts in the cat.



1examination venues: choice of the examination venues include: number of seats and computers, security, test data storage and transmission. some exam may also be limited by the software which can be used the examination process. for the same exam, all examination venues must be consistent in soft, hardware.



