action with the entity. when performing a risk analysis of a system where trust considerations play a major role, the system model must include information on how actors actually make decisions based on trust. this is illustrated by the example below.



should one of these rules be adopted? or perhaps different rules or other measures would be better? these questions cannot be answered without a thorough understanding of the system. the first rule could be a good choice if most honest sellers were willing to ship items before they receive payment. the second rule may be a good choice if the purchaser agent is able to give reasonably correct probability estimates for the behavior of the sellers based on a phone conversation.



in order to perform a successful analysis of the system it is important to involve various stakeholders such as end-users, decision makers and engineers. these groups will typically have very different backgrounds and levels of training, and the language should be a tool for arriving at a joint and correct understanding of the system(under the guidance of an analyst). therefore the models expressed in the language must be intuitive and easily understandable for the involved parties.



event occurring on the transmitter of the message and a receive event occurring on the receiver of the message(at the arrow head). for each lifeline the events are ordered in time from top to bottom. in addition, every message must be transmitted before it is received.



billy cancels the deal after receiving the reply to his question. this alternative has probability 0.4, which can be seen in the upper left part of the palt operand. probabilities are shown from left to right in the order of the operands, so the first(uppermost) operand of the outermost palt has probability 0.6, while the second operand has probability 0.4.



if billy chooses to send the payment then again one of two things may happen: either the seller sends the item(with probability 0.8), or she does not(with probability 0.2). if she does not then billy must write off the money, represented by the message from billy to himself.



clearly, trust affects the behavior of billy. however, there is no explicit representation of the way he makes his choice of behavior based on trust. our objective is to represent this explicitly in the specification. but first we need to define what we mean by trust.



thus defined, trust is a belief of the trustor regarding the behavior of the trustee. since trust is a belief it is a subjective notion. an actor is an active entity which has goals, intentions and capabilities. an actor may be an organization, a human or an automated artefact such as hardware and software. often a trustor will only expect the trustee to perform a transaction if a certain scenario takes place. we call this the antecedent scenario of the trust with respect to the transaction.



in our example billy would be the trustor, while the seller would be the trustee. the antecedent scenario would be that billy sends advance payment after the phone conversation, and the transaction would be that the seller sends the item after receiving payment. if billy believes that the probability that the seller will send the item is 0.9, then this means that billys trust in the seller with respect to this transaction is 0.9. the asset in question would be the combination of the items received by the purchaser agent and the money he has available for purchasing new items. if an item is paid for, but not received, then this asset will decrease in value.



in our example we need to know to what degree the purchaser agent trusts a seller to send the item after receiving advance payment, i.e. the subjective probability assigned to this outcome by the purchaser agent. we also need to know how this trust influences his decision whether to send advance payment or not.



