hypertextbooks for computer science contents present an interesting approach to better support learners and integrate algorithm animations into the learning materials. we have developed a prototype for integrating a selection of the functionality of such a hypertextbook into the established moodle lms. this paper describes the goals and realization of this module together with an example.



our first prototype for a vizcosh is based on the popular and established moodle learning content management system. section 2 presents the goals for the development of the modue. section 3 describes the approach taken for meeting these goals, followed by a short demo of the resulting content pages in moodle in section 4. section 5 presents a brief evaluation of the module and concludes the paper.



limitations exist; for example, the author of the module has decided not to support sub-chapters or deeper levels of structure. additionally, the module is not interactive, so that forums, chats etc. cannot be integrated into the content, but can be linked from anywhere in the page.



the ability to print the current chapter including the thumbnails is also helpful. here, the underlying book module simply renders the page content(s) without the navigation elements and redisplays them as a web page in a new browser window. of course, the dynamic visualization elements are reduced to static images if the contents are printed on paper.



we are interested in cooperating with researchers and teachers who want to use the module. this especially concerns the support for other algorithm animation or visualization systems that can be run using java webstart. several persons may not use moodle, but some other platform, for example due to a universityenforced policy. most of the module is not specific to moodle and should be easy to carry over to other learning content management systems or content management systems, such as drupal, plone or typo3. the main moodle-specific aspect is the connection to the user management and database, which has to rewritten for each target platform.



