restricting attention from arbitrary comonads to those arising from comodels of lawvere theories allows us to tap into the extant body of knowledge of the latter. in particular, we can speak of the sum and especially the tensor product of theories[9,10]. the sum yields the product of the induced comonads. and the tensor product of has the universal property



for further work, we should very much like to be able to characterise those comonads, at least on set, that arise from categories of comodels. but that looks like a very difficult problem. the best one can realistically seek are probably conditions on presentations, a few of which are implicit in section 2. we should also like to explore the example more, as one extends from global state/arrays to variants. and we hope to explore more the significance of constructions one can make on comonads by restricting to those generated by comodels.



let nat denote the full subcategory of set given by natural numbers. so, it contains one object n for each natural number, and the maps are all functions between such natural numbers. the category nat has finite coproducts given by the sum of natural numbers.



the leading example for us of a category of comodels is given by the notion of array, as investigated in section 4. so we shall not develop examples much here. but just to give an idea of what sort of comonads we cover here, we give two examples.



finally, in this section, we describe very briefly some theoretical value that derives from restriction from arbitrary comonads on set to those comonads generated by comodels. we regard the example of arrays as our best example, and we regard the relationship between global state and arrays as inherently interesting. but there is more we can say on an abstract, technical level.



observe that this involves taking models of l in the category comod(l', c) rather than in c. that lifting is not, in general, given by a distributive law of comonads: see[9,10] for analysis of the dual situation. so it seems to be a genuinely new construction in regard to comodels relative to the known work on coalgebra. we have not yet explored the significance of that.



