we introduce a semantic approach to the study of logics for access control and dependency analysis, based on game semantics. we use a variant of ajm games with explicit justification(but without pointers). based on this, we give a simple and intuitive model of the information flow constraints underlying access control. this is used to give strikingly simple proofs of non-interference theorems in robust, semantic versions.



the further contents of the paper are as follows. in section 2, we develop our variant of ajm games. in section 3, we describe the games model for access control. we give a semantic treatment of non-interference theorems in section 4. the relation to syntax is discussed briefly in section 5. finally, in section 6 we conclude with a discussion of directions for future work.



if we compare this definition to that of standard ajm games, the new component is the justification function ja. this allows a simpler statement of the well-bracketing condition. the new conditions on plays are linearity and justification. these hold automatically for the interpretation of ill types in ajm games as given in.



so we can regard stb, c as a play in b c. similarly, sta, b, where we erase all tags from c, can be regarded as a play in a b. finally, sta, c, where all tags from b are erased, so that(mb)c is replaced by mc, can be regarded as a play in a c. this last transformation, erasing tags in b, corresponds to the elision of justification pointers in the definition of composition for ho games.



the content of this constraint is essentially the same as that described at a more concrete level in. 5 what we have achieved here is to express this in a general, compositional form at the level of the semantic model. this allows general non-interference results to be proved, whereas the focus in is on static analysis of specific programs.



our primary emphasis in this paper is on a semantic approach to access control, and we have proved semantic versions of a number of non-interference results. a detailed analysis of how these relate to the results proved by syntactic and prooftheoretic means for calculi such as dcc would take us too far afield. however, we shall provide an illustrative example of how semantic non-interference results can be used to obtain results about syntactic calculi.



