reactive power optimization in the power system tends to maintain good voltage profile by improving the voltage quality other than decreasing the power loss. this paper presents an improved genetic algorithm(ga) approach for voltage stability enhancement. the proposed technique is based on the minimization of the maximum of l-indices of load buses. generator voltages, switchable var sources and transformer tap changers are used as control variables. a case study is made on all the optimization variables mentioned and the effect on generators reactive power output is analyzed. the comparison of two optimization techniques is explained in detail. the results obtained for the ieee-24 bus power system had indicated that the ga not only improves the voltage stability but also reduces the effect on generators for the reactive power.



the unmatched generation and transmission capacity expansion, voltage instability is troubling the power engineers to optimize power system operation, while maintaining system security and quality of supply to customers. under many disturbed conditions the operation of the power systems has to be restricted to design limits. it is turning complex to the power engineers to ensure the quality and reliability of supply to the customers by maintaining load bus voltages in their permissible limits. despite of all, overloading in existing power transmission systems, voltage collapse and voltage stability are concerned as the major problems, to power system planning and operation engineers, which has to be enhanced. voltage profile can be improved with reallocation of reactive power generations, by adjusting the controller parameters of transformer taps, generator exciters and switchable var compensator(svc) settings to its best optimal values. several have



a slow variation in the system operations, due to increase in loads results in the gradual decrease in the voltage magnitude. careful monitoring and control action has to be taken from the operator when the operating point approaches the voltage stability limit. recent literature presents many voltage stability and voltage collapse prediction methods. among them, l index method is adopted in this paper for the calculation of voltage stability which is described as follows.



for stability, the bound on the index lj must not be violated(maximum limit=1) for any of the nodes j. hence, the global indicator l describing the stability of the complete subsystem is given by l= max of lj for all j. an l-index value away from 1 and close to zero indicates an improved system security. for a given network, as the load/generation increases, the voltage magnitude and angles change, and for near maximum power transfer condition, the voltage stability index lj values for load buses tends to 1, indicating that the system is near to voltage collapse. the stability margin is obtained as the distance of l from a unit value i.e.(1-l).



