there are several systems related to geothms. some of them combine features of dgs and automated theorem provers, some of them have web interfaces, and some of them provide repositories of geometrical theorems. we are not aware of any system that, like geothms, gives full, web-based access to dgs, use theorem proving with human-readable proofs generated and provides open repository of geometrical constructions and conjectures. section 6 gives more details about related work.



section 2 describe geothms components; section 3 presents the structure of the web interface; section 4 is about communication and representation issues; section 5 presents geothms through some illustrated examples. section 6 discuss related work. section 7 discusses further work, and section 8 draws final conclusions.



gclcprover is an atp based on the area method[4,6,15]. it allows formal deductive reasoning about objects constructed within dgss. it produces proofs that are human-readable(in latex and xml formats), and with an explicit justification for every proof step. gclcprover is tightly integrated with gclc, so one can use the prover to reason about a gclc construction, without changing and adapting it for the deductive process, the users only need to add a conclusion they want to prove. the geometrical constructions made within gclc are internally transformed into primitive constructions of the area method, and in some cases, some auxiliary points are introduced. we have developed a tool euktogclcprover, that converts eukleides files to gclcprover files, allowing the prover to be used with geometric constructions described within eukleides.



only registered users have access to the second level. regular users can browse the data from the database and use the drawing/proof programs in an interactive way. a contributor also has privileges to insert new data and/or update the existing ones.



geother is an environment for manipulating and proving geometric theorems implemented in maple, with drawing routines and the interface in java. geother can work with a menu-driven graphic user interface and contains a collection of theorems in both elementary and differential geometry, with sample specifications that have been proved.[21,20].



geometriagon has a vast repository of problems in the area of classical constructive(ruler and compass only) euclidean geometry 9. a registered user can access/edit all problems and solutions. it does not provide an atp. the user can perform only valid steps in the construction, using only a limited set of tools, and in this way the system is capable to recognise whenever a user has reach a solution of a problem. no formal proofs are provided.



