in this paper, an improved image denoising method based on a nonlinear thresholding function with adaptive bayes threshold in nonsubsampled contourlet transform(nsct) domain. in overcoming the shortcomings of the same threshold, the noise deviation of the different sub-band are estimated based on the coefficients of different directional and level sub-bands in nsct domain, and the thresholds of every sub-band is estimated by bayesian threshold estimation method. after choosing the thresholds, a nonlinear thresholding function was chosen to overcome the shortcomings of the soft and the hard thresholding function. the simulation results show that the proposed method in this paper can remove gaussian white noise more effectively, and get a higher psnr value and keep image texture and detail information more clearly, which also has a better visual effect.



with the rise in the number of image sensors(or pixels) per unit area of a chip, modern image capturing devices are increasingly sensitive to noise. camera manufacturers, therefore, depend on image denoising algorithms to reduce the effects of such noise artifacts in the resultant image. recently proposed denoising methods use different approaches to address the problem. image denoising is used to remove the additive noise while retaining as much as possible the important signal features. denoising images corrupted by gaussian noise using wavelet techniques is very effective because of its ability to capture the energy of a signal in few energy transform values. wavelet transform is good at energy compaction, the small coefficient are more likely due to noise and large coefficient due to important signal feature. so, wavelet denoising is an important technique in the area of image noise reduction. over the last decade, it has been widely used in images denoising.[2-6]



in this paper, an improved image denoising method based on a nonlinear thresholding function with adaptive bayes threshold in nsct domain. in overcoming the shortcomings of the same threshold, the noise deviation of the different sub-band are estimated based on the coefficients of different directional and level sub-bands in nsct domain, and the thresholds of every sub-band is estimated by bayesian threshold estimation method. after choosing the thresholds, a nonlinear thresholding function was chosen to overcome the shortcomings of the soft and the hard thresholding function. the simulation results show that the proposed method in this paper can remove gaussian white noise more effectively, and get a higher psnr value and keep image texture and detail information more clearly, which also has a better visual effect.



the noisy images may contain additive noise and multiplicative noise, and the most common white gaussian noise is chosen as the noise model in this paper. nsct is linear transformation, so its coefficients are divided into two parts: coefficients of original image and coefficients of noise. the coefficients of original image is large and concentrated, while the coefficients of noise is small and dispersive. therefore, a proper threshold method can be set to deal with them. the image signal can be recovered after reconstruction with the new nsct coefficients. the basic principle of the shrinking threshold denoising algorithm in nsct domain is comparing nsct sub-band coefficients with the thresholds, the coefficient which is less than the threshold is set to zero, while the greater one retained or modified. so threshold denoising algorithm mainly involves two key problems: the estimation of thresholds and the choice of thresholding function. in this paper, the threshold is estimated by the adaptive bayesian threshold method, and a nonlinear thresholding function is chosen to deal with nsct sub-band coefficients.



coefficient of the original signal. in these methods, the nonimportant coefficients are set to zero. in hard thresholding, the important coefficients remain unchanged. in soft thresholding, the important coefficients are reduced by the absolute threshold value. however, there is deviation between the coefficients and the original ones. so, a nonlinear thresholding function is applied in the nsct domain for denoising in this paper. the thresholding function is as follows:



in this paper, an improved image denoising method based on a nonlinear thresholding function with adaptive bayes threshold in nsct domain. in overcoming the shortcomings of the same threshold, the noise deviation of the different sub-band are estimated based on the coefficients of different directional and level sub-bands in nsct domain, and the thresholds of every sub-band is estimated by bayesian threshold estimation method. after choosing the thresholds, a nonlinear thresholding function was chosen to overcome the shortcomings of the soft and the hard thresholding function. the simulation results show that the proposed method in this paper can remove gaussian white noise more effectively, and get a higher psnr value and keep image texture and detail information more clearly, which also has a better visual effect.



