disturbance tradeoffs and which, as we shall see, rules out classical theory, and the impossibility of instantaneous signaling between systems(which is built into the notion of composite system used in our version of the ordered linear spaces framework). we will also present some results on bit commitment in our framework, to the effect that all nonclassical theories that lack entanglement permit exponentially secure bit commitment, and some results on how the presence in a theory of certain kinds of entangled states can defeat the bit commitment protocol we used for the unentangled case. closely related states can permit teleportation, another information-processing task whose possibility helps distinguish between classes of nonclassical theories in our framework. we summarize some of our recent work with barrett and leifer on multipartite composite systems and teleportation in the ordered linear spaces framework. in particular, we report necessary and sufficient conditions for a composite of three systems to support a conclusive teleportation protocol, and interesting sufficient conditions for deterministic teleportation.



rather than building categories of processes from(categories of) abstract state spaces, one might start from the opposite direction, by treating categories of processes axiomatically. a natural starting point for such an effort would be to consider categories enriched over ordered linear spaces, or over abstract state spaces. this paper ends with a sketch of this idea. we envision such categorical formulations as a first step toward comparing the necessary and/or sufficient conditions for various information processing protocols or informational properties of theories, obtained in the convex framework, with properties such as compact closure, dagger compact closure, non-cartesianity and so forth that have been used in the literature on categorical descriptions of information processing. this section of the paper has benefited from discussions with abramsky, armstrong, coecke, and others and may be viewed as describing work early-in-progress in collaboration with at least some of them.



