the rest of this paper is organised as follows: in the next section we give a brief introduction to interaction nets. in section 3 we motivate our work through an example. we give the proposed extensions in section 4, followed by the compilation schemes in section 5. in section 6 we discuss some implementation issues. finally, we conclude the paper in section 7



in this section we present our framework inp that extends ordinary interaction rules(orn) so that we can perform rewritings between nested agents. the main difference from orn is that we allow the left hand side of a rule to contain more than two agents. the definition of agents and nets remain the same as for orn.



in this section we briefly discuss implementation issues of inp. there are two approaches to implement inp. one is to translate into orn rules then use existing evaluators of interaction nets. the other is to implement them directly. here we look at this second option, and show how the main tasks of performing computation in this framwork can be achieved. our aim here is to show that a direct implemention of inp can be done quite easily. we describe a simple method of achieving this.



computation for nets: bechet proposed computation for nets on interaction rules as abbreviations, where nets are captured as an agent and reductions of the agent are realized by the rules corresponding to the computation of the net. as an example of applying this method to nested pattern matching, we consider our example function lastelt. one solution is to define the agent lastelt by using other agents that have already been defined. it is not simple to find a good combination with those agents. as another solution, we introduce abbreviations for list structures:



we have shown how to extend interaction nets to facilitate nested pattern matching without introducing auxiliary rules. this provides a convenient and a more natural way of expressing interaction net programs. we see this extension as a positive step towards using interaction nets as a practical programming language.



