to every small category or topos one may associate its isotropy group, which is an algebraic invariant capturing information about the behaviour of automorphisms. we investigate this invariant in the particular situation of algebraic theories, thus obtaining a group-theoretic invariant of algebraic theories. this invariant encodes a notion of inner automorphism relative to the theory. our main technical result is a syntactic characterization of the isotropy group of an algebraic theory, and we illustrate the usefulness of this characterization by applying it to various concrete examples of algebraic theories.



the core of a category(if it exists), is a monoid which, informally speaking, represents the polymorphic unary operations present in that category. in the case of grothendieck toposes, freyd shows that the core always exists. moreover, it can be shown that the isotropy group is the group of invertible elements of the core, and hence that we can interpret the elements of the isotropy group as polymorphic automorphisms in the topos.



in this section we present the main result of the paper, namely a syntactic description of the isotropy group associated to an algebraic theory. towards this aim, we first fix some terminology and notation regarding term models and indeterminates. throughout, we are working with an arbitrary but fixed algebraic theory t.



in this section we will use the purely syntactic characterization of the isotropy group given in theorem 3.8 to compute the isotropy groups of several well-known algebraic theories. as is to be expected, in each of these examples we ultimately invoke information about the word problem for the theory in question.



remark 4.14 the above result can be seen as a special case of a coproduct of theories. another special case is that of freely adjoining a function symbol to a theory; it can be shown(proofs will appear in the forthcoming phd thesis of the second author) that this trivializes isotropy.



in the present work we have focused on algebraic theories. a natural next step is to consider other classes of theories, such as quasi-algebraic theories, regular theories, coherent theories, geometric theories, or theories of presheaf type(i.e., geometric theories whose classifying topos is a presheaf topos).



