texture is a property of image region. texture analysis is one of the significant functions in pattern recognition and computer vision. in spite of its significance, texture analysis still is a great challenge. in 1970s the first work on texture analysis by haralick is best known for co-occurrence matrix. random markov fields, a contemporary approach is used mainly for segmentation purposes. laws has recommended computing the energy of the image by using filters at the end of same decade. fractal geometry appeared as a powerful theory to obtain texture feature during the 1980s[4,5]. later contribution to texture feature extraction is made by lbp(local binary patterns). all the methods proposed are without considering the complementary information that cannot be expressed by the intensities of pixels, but only through particular operations over those pixels. some authors have made an effort to achieve this gap, and proposed the extraction of features from other domains, like wavelets, discrete cosine transform, hough transform, and others.



the coefficient weights of bilateral filter are determined according to both the variation in pixels intensities and the location of pixels in a certain neighbourhood. each pixel is replaced by a weighted average of the intensities in the window. the weighting function gives high weighting to those pixels that are both near the central pixel and similar to the central pixel. let xi;j be the current



step 4: texture features are normalized using max min normalization method because a wide range of numerical values are present in the texture features. for each normalized feature vector three most important statistics are evaluated. those are absolute mean(absm), mean square or energy(ms) and entropy, which are represented as textural parameters.



1 and second is with rr value at 0.4 and rd value at 1 for the mean energy filter. the third best classification accuracy of 96.47% is achieved at three different values of rang and domain parameters. first is with rr= 0.2 and rd= 0.5, second is rr= 0.3 and rd= 1 and



for this database, also it has been observed that classification accuracies are increased for absolute mean filter and standard deviation filter. for absolute mean filter, the highest classification accuracy of 94.87% is obtained with rr= 0.4 and rd= 0.5. the second best accuracy of 93.59% is obtained for the absolute mean filter with combination of rr= 0.1 and rd= 0.5. for many other combiof rr= 1 and rd= 0.5. the third best accuracy of 54.50% is obtained with combination of rr= 1 and rd= 8. also better accuracy of 53.50% is obtained with a combination of rr= 0.1 and rd= 0.5,



the salzburg texture image database(stex) is a large collection of 476 numbers of color texture image that have been captured around salzburg, austria. the images are used in texture retrieval experiments and are homogeneous. the web site for this database did not describe the acquisition conditions. inside the stex dataset, the great majority of texture images are stationary and have more chromatic richness than vistex. the third dataset= 0.4 and rd= 0.5. the third highest classification accuracy for standard deviation filter is of 65.50% and is obtained with combination of rr= 0.05 and rd= 0.5. for some other combinations of rr and rd higher classification accuracies are also achieved for the standard deviation filter.



absolute mean filter and 92.00% for standard deviation filter. for this database our proposed model provides better classification accuracy for the mean filter only. the best classification accuracy of 95.33% is achieved from a combination of rr= 0.1 and rd= 5 for mean filter. the second best accuracy of 94.83% is obtained with combination of rr= 0.1 and rd= 3 for the mean filter.



