bayesian networks are graphical models for efficiently organising probabilistic information[1,3,8,15,16,17]. these models can be used for probabilistic reasoning(inference), where the updated probability is inferred from certain evidence. these techniques are extremely useful, for instance in a medical setting, where symptoms and measurements can be used as evidence, and the inferred probability can help a doctor reach a decision.



e. this forms the e-part of what is called expectation-maximisation(em), see. in the m-part the channel e becomes a learning goal in itself. in expectationmaximisation these eand m-parts are alternated. but here we concentrate on the e-part only and assume that the channel e is given and remains fixed.



our second example from also claims to be an instance of expectationmaximisation. however, what happens there is completely different from expectation-maximisation as used in. a crucial point of this paper is that the difference can be explained in terms of m-learning versus c-learning along a channel.



we thus notice in these examples 5.3 and 5.4 that and perform completely different computations in their explanation of expectation-maximisation, using, respectively, in the terminology of our setting, m-learning and c-learning along a channel. it is unclear why they do different things and still use the same expectation-maximisation terminology.



we conclude this section with some general observations. the most interesting one is that c-learning along a channel is additively compositional. this means that it can handle additional data as it arrives, by performing another c-learning step. this is a clear advantage of c-learning over m-learning.



extending the channel-based analysis from the e-part of the em-algorithm to the whole of em. this involves, in the context of the diagram(10), not only learning the state, but also learning the channel(as m-part). the expectationmaximisation algorithm involves iterating these eand m-parts until some level of stability is reached. it will be described in an extended version of this paper.



