two high assurance systems currently under investigation by our group are cd, a cryptographic device for use in u. s. navy systems, and the fpe(fault protection engine), a safety-critical software component of nasa spacecraft. cd is a member of a family of software-based devices that will provide cryptographic processing of data stored on several different channels, each channel associated with a different host system. because data on different channels may have different security classifications, cd must enforce data separation, i.e., ensure that data on one channel cannot influence, nor be influenced by, data on a different channel. we are currently developing a plan for formally specifying and verifying that the cd software, which uses a separation kernel to mediate access to data, enforces data separation.



in many cases, using a tool, such as a model checker, to analyze a system specification for some critical property uncovers a violation of the property. given diagnostic information, such as a counterexample returned by the model checker, the developer may find a flaw in the specification or one or more missing assumptions. alternatively, the formulation of the property, rather than the specification, may be incorrect. in all of these cases, the result of analysis can be extremely valuable. reference how model checking was used to detect a safety property violation in a contractor specification of a weapons control system. recently, some researchers have begun using model



a static analysis tool can analyze a piece of software without executing it. such tools can automatically detect errors and vulnerabilities, such as uninitialized variables, erroneous pointers, and arithmetic and buffer overflows, in both source and assembler code. examples of tools that help detect errors of this class in c code include codesurfer and safer c, which finds dangerous vulnerabilities in code, such as those described in. bishop et al. describe how static analysis tools can help uncover vulnerabilities in the cots software used in many safety-critical systems.



