about 70% of the worldwide synthetic dyes consumed by dyeing industries are composed of azo dyes. a reactive azo dye has one or more azo groups(-n=n-), which act as chromophore in the molecular structure. in addition, the compounds containing the azo group, represent the largest group of synthetic dyes and are difficult to degrade even at low concentrations, because they are very resistant to light, heat, chemicals and microbial attacks. therefore, the removal of such synthetic dyes have become very important before the waste industrial effluents released to the environmental water. many attempts have been made for the removal of dyes from wastewaters using the commonly used processes including photocatalytic degradation, photo-fenton reaction, biodegradation, solvent extraction, coagulation, precipitation, membrane filtration and advanced oxidation process[11,12]. although good results were achieved with these methods, they were not free of shortcomings. the most important of which was the exhausting preparation of the materials and the difficult operation of the process. similarly, secondary pollutants such as various oxidative intermediates may produce during the photocatalytic degradation and oxidative processes, which are much toxic than their parent compounds. on the other hand, the adsorption techniques[13,14] are more simple and easy to conduct and can be applied on large scale. a number of adsorbents such as magnetite/pectin and magnetite/silica/pectin hybrid nanocomposites, activated carbon, anionic layer double hydroxide and nife2o4 magnetic nanoparticles have been applied for the removal of ebt from aqueous solutions. however, these adsorbents were expensive and difficult to synthesize. the scientists were therefore moved to produce cost-effective and eco-friendly adsorbents.



the mastl was characterized by fei quanta 200 feg sem at the energy of 15 kv. fourier transformed infrared spectroscopy(ft-ir) was measured on a nicolet magana-ir 750 spectrometer at room temperature. the brunauer-emmett-teller(bet) isotherm was achieved with an adsorption instrument(tristar, micromeritics company, usa). the phpzc value of mastl was determined according to a reported method.



