based optimization approaches are quite popular and efficient. the key features of swarm intelligence(si) based algorithms are self-organization and division of work to achieve a given task. for example, particle swarm optimization(pso) simulates biological behaviour of fish schooling and bird flocking, artificial bee colony(abc) optimization simulates collective foraging behaviour of honey bees, whale optimization algorithm(woa) follows behaviour of humpback whales, grasshopper optimization(goa) follows their unique swarming behaviour, spider monkey optimization(smo) mimics the fission-fusion social structure of spider monkeys, grey wolf optimizer(gwo) mimics the hunting behaviour and social leadership of grey wolf, tlbo models the effect of the influence of a teacher on the output of students in the classroom and many others.



this paper. the paper also presents weibull pdf model for the calculation of wind power. in order to validate the performance of ssa over maed problem, four cases with different dimensions and complexity levels which possess non-linear, multimodal, non-convex, discontinuous and probabilistic modal due to wind integration are evaluated. the obtained results using ssa are also compared with recently reported results in the



rest of the paper is organized as follows: formulation of the problem that combines the concept behind maed, wind power modeling and the related constraints are described in section 2. section 3 presents the concept behind the ssa, its foraging behavior using an analytical model and implementation procedure for the solution of maed problem. description of test cases, effect of control parameters, simulation results and their discussion are presented in section 4. finally, conclusions are drawn in section 5.



the key objective of maed problem is to minimize total operating cost in all areas in such a manner that it will satisfy all operational constraints associated with it, i.e. power balance, minimum and maximum power generation limits, rrl, poz and area wise capacity constraints of tie-line/transmission line.



salp swarm algorithm(ssa) is a recent bio-inspired optimization technique, inspired by navigation and foraging behaviour of salp chain, generally found in deep oceans. in its mathematical model, salp population is divided into two groups called leader and followers. the best salp(best solution) is considered as the food source to be followed by the salp chain. after every iteration, the leader salp changes its position with respect to the food sources. the leader explores and exploits the search space around the best solution and the follower salps move



the performance of ssa is evaluated and validated on four standard test cases of maed problems with different dimensions and complexity levels. ssa has been implemented in matlab13 environment and executed on 2.40ghz, i5 processor with 8gb ram and is simulated over 30 independent runs for all test cases. description of test cases and the outcome of simulation results obtained by ssa are presented below.



test case iv: it is a two area network with combined wind-thermal(wt) system having forty generating units. the wt system is constructed by replacing three thermal units of test case iii by the wind generators. these thermal units are 27, 28, and 29. the parameter used for wind generators are weibull scale and shape factor as c1= c2= c3= overestimation of stochastic wind power is considered as kp1= kp2= kp3= 5, and kr1= kr2= kr3= 5respectively. the cut-in speed(vin), cut out speed(v0), and rated wind speed(vr)are 5 m/s, 15 m/s, and 45 m/s similar to ref.. the rated wind power of three generators are considered as pwr1= pwr2= pwr3= 110mw. for the tll capacity of 1500mw, the best total cost solution obtained by ssa is 120857.2447



for large dimension problem(test case ii), the optimal generation schedule and statistical results in terms of costs are summarized in tables 3 and 4 respectively. by comparison of costs reported by other metaheuristics it is observed that ssa can acquire lowest cost 122471.666$/hr as compared to real coded genetic algorithms(rcga), differential evolution(de), evolutionary programming(ep), artificial bee colony optimization(abco), cuckoo search algorithm(csa) and flower pollination algorithm(fpa). also the mean cost 122507.5003$/hr obtained by ssa is found to be superior as compared to the best cost reported by other methods, which supports to claims the global search capability of ssa.



