chemicals employed in cosmetics, drugs, pesticides, household products, among others, need to be classified appropriately according to their potential ocular toxicity to ensure safety. eye irritation or corrosion are characterized by cell membrane lysis, coagulation, saponification, and chemical reactivity. all of these characteristics are mediated by contacts between a chemical and the eye surface(cornea and conjunctiva).



nams have been developed and made available for in vitro identification of ocular corrosives/severe irritants using alternative biological material including rabbit corneal cells(oecd test guideline 491), isolated bovine corneas(oecd test guideline 437), and a monolayer of madin-darby canine kidney(mdck) cells(oecd test guideline 460)[17,18]. other three-dimensional human tissue models such as the reconstructed human cornea-like epithelium(rhce) test(oecd test guideline 492) and the vitrigel-eye irritancy test(oecd test guideline 494) are approved for use in a bottom-up approach identifying substances not classified for ocular irritation. these tests provide varying coverage of the biology relevant to eye irritation and corrosion when compared to human ocular anatomy and physiology.



computational models provide a fast and low-cost solution to obtain reliable predictions for the endpoint of concern when generated on high-quality curated data and properly validated. a major computational approach, named quantitative structure-activity relationship(qsar) modeling, employs various statistical and artificial intelligence(ai) approaches, such as machine learning(ml) and deep learning(dl) to generate models that can accurately predict the outcome of testing new compounds in a specific assay, based on their molecular features. in recent years, the growth in publicly available data enabled the development of highly robust and predictive models[20,21]. however, modeling toxicity is a complex task as the underlying mechanisms are not always clear[3,21]. for this reason, qsar models are highly dependent on the quality and volume of the data in the training set, proper chemical and biological curation of primary data is critical[22,23], and failure to follow these practices question the trustworthiness of models.





the final(unbalanced) dataset was composed of 3,547 compounds, of which 2,401 were classified as non-irritant/non-corrosive, 937 were classified as irritant(categories 2a and 2b) of which 209 were classified as corrosive(category 1). the ghs classification for irritant/corrosive compounds was only available for 1,248 compounds of the dataset, where 209 compounds were classified as category 1 members, 166 were classified as category 2a, and 84 as category 2b, whereas 789 were classified as nc. these compounds classified under ghs system were used to generate multiclass models.



(ii) choose 469 non-irritants with the largest tanimoto similarity to the nearest irritant and 468 via random selection. such procedures allowed us to create the most challenging training set with structurally similar irritants and non-irritants to achieve the most rigorous model capable of separating these two classes from each other and including a fraction of more diverse non-irritants to provide broader chemical space coverage. the final dataset consisted of 1,874 compounds(937 irritants and 937 non-irritants). the same approach was performed to balance the data for the generation of qsar models to predict eye corrosion, i.e., the nc class of compounds was under-sampled using both structural similarity and random sampling, leading to a balanced data of 418 compounds(209 corrosive and 209 non-corrosive).



the compiled data was carefully curated and inspected according to protocols proposed by fourches et al.[42,57]. briefly, counter ions were stripped, mixtures and inorganics were removed, and specific chemotypes such as nitro groups and aromatic rings were standardized. duplicates were identified, carefully analyzed, and only one entry was kept if biological responses were similar. the curation steps were implemented



in knime, a collection of 117 different rdkit molecular descriptors were calculated for the dataset followed by the removal of invariant descriptors and descriptors with a correlation higher than 0.9. maccs structural keys are implemented in the rdkit module available in the knime platform, as well as morgan fingerprints. rdkit provides 166 publicly available structural keys to represent molecules, and, for the morgan fingerprint, it is possible to define the number of bits to encode the fingerprints as well as the radius, as the morgan fingerprint is a circular fingerprint similar to ecfp and fcfp fingerprints family. for this study, morgan fingerprints were generated using radius of 2 and 2048-bits length.



version 5.5 of dragon software(talete srl, milan, italy) was used to generate all the 0d, 1d, and 2d descriptors provided by the software, totaling 2489 descriptors. after the descriptors were calculated, invariant descriptors and descriptors with a correlation higher than 0.9 were also removed prior to the model generation step.



both rf and mudra algorithms were applied. rf is a wellknown ensemble decision tree learning algorithm, while mudra is an instance-based learning process. mudra does not build an underlying model to make its predictions but performs an instantaneous classification of known irritant/corrosive and non-irritant/non-corrosive compounds based on their similarity range and nearest neighborhood. an in-depth explanation of how the mudra method can be applied can be found elsewhere. both methods are implemented in the knime analytics platform; rf is a built-in node provided by different developers, while mudra is implemented through the integration between knime platform and python scripting language via built-in nodes for this purpose.



spective validation processes. as described above, the 5-fold external cross-validation procedure was chosen to validate the models in this study. hence, the statistical analysis is based on the collected results of predictions made in each fold of the cross-validation approach. for the multiclassification models, the same metrics were calculated, but considering the confusion matrix and comparing each class against all. the statistical metrics and the respective formulas are described below.





serious issues in human eyes. the compounds are glutaraldehyde, paraquat[71,72], and glyphosate. all three were correctly predicted as being irritants. this reinforces the predictive power of the mudra approach and its applicability to important toxicological endpoints such as eye irritation/corrosion.



as a further application of our models, we have retrieved and carefully curated 4780 compounds from the cosing database and predicted their effects on eye corrosion/ irritation using the mudra models; complete details of the results are available in the supplementary material. in summary, our prediction identified 2003 compounds with the potential to cause eye irritation. we also predicted the effects on eye irritation and corrosion of the inactive ingredients database(iid) containing 4673 inactive ingredients using mudra based model. the subset of compounds used in the ophthalmic route of administration had 181 entries consisting of 76 unique ingredients. among them, 24 were predicted as potential eye irritants and 12 as corrosive, where most of these are reported



bhhatarai b, wilson dm, parks ak, carney ew, spencer pj. evaluation of topkat, toxtree, and derek nexus in silico models for ocular irritation and development of a knowledge-based framework to improve the prediction of severe irritation. chem res toxicol 2016. doi:10.1021/acs.chemrestox.5b00531.



