encryption and signature schemes are fundamental cryptographic tools for providing privacy and authenticity, respectively, in the public-key setting. both privacy and authenticity are simultaneously needed in many applications on ad-hoc network where anyone can freely join or leave the network. this issue seems to be easily solved by composing a signature and encryption. however, it was noticed by that such multi-user setting opens a possibility for some subtle attacks, not presented in the settings of stand-alone signature and encryption. thus, a simple composition does not necessarily yield desired properties.



however, the security of signcryption tag-kem is defined for the previous definition for security of signcryption which restricts the adversary so that the adversary is allowed to access de-signcryption oracle(resp. signcryption oracle) for the attacked user but not signcryption oracle(resp. de-signcryption oracle) for the attacked user if the adversary attacks privacy(resp. authenticity). on the other hand, the modified definition[7,6] allows the adversary to access both oracles, irrespective of whether the adversary is attacking privacy or authenticity(such attack is called simultaneous attack). this means that the modified definition for security of signcryption becomes stronger than the previous one and the security of signcryption tag-kem in is not enough strong for yielding the modified security of signcryption.



when addressing the security, we deal with two issues: security goal and attack model. in, for privacy and authenticity, a common type of security goal and attack model is considered, called indistinguishability(ind)/strong existential unforgeability(abbreviated as suf, seuf, or sef) and chosen ciphertext attack(cca2)/chosen message attack(cma), respectively. we denote the resulting security notion by ind-cca2/suf-cma. the notation follows[2,7,3].



in step(iv), asc,cca is restricted not to ask(pks, sc) to de-signcryption oracle ov d,u, but can still use, for example,(pks', sc) for pks'/= pks. variable v is state information of the ad versary. asc,c ca is considered successful only if b= b'. we



the proof is almost the same as the one for the previous definition for security. we present here the proof for the ind-cca2 security. the ind-cca2 security of hybrid signcryption is proven in the same way as the ind-cca2 security of hybrid encryption in.



