integrating solar energy into the combined energy supply of surface water source heat pump systems is expected to reduce the electricity consumption and carbon emissions. in this paper, a solar-surface water source heat pump system model is established to maximize system performance and save economic cost. in order to find the optimal operation scheme, an improved arithmetic optimization algorithm(iaoa) is proposed. this algorithm integrates elite opposition-based and nonlinear acceleration functions to solve the model. the effectiveness of the proposed model and algorithm is verified by applying it to a swshp district energy system in the central area of xiangtan city. experimental results demonstrate that incorporating solar energy into the swshp district energy system can improve system performance and reduce operational costs. in comparison with several other optimization algorithms, this algorithm has a faster convergence speed and a higher convergence accuracy. therefore, it is considered an effective method for solving solar-surface water source heat pump district energy systems.



created a household gshp system that utilized waste heat from photovoltaic power to improve net power generation and maintain soil heat balance. scholars have also focused on the performance of solargshp systems. for instance, mi et al. developed a new hot water



hot water systems. liu et al. built a mathematical model of a directexpansion pvt heat pump system, which demonstrated that the coupled system can enhance the operation performance of heat pump systems. zhang et al. investigated an actual hybrid solar ground source heat pump(hsgshp) system. it was found to improve performance by nearly 25.8% when the solar space heating was added. wang et al.



in the aoa algorithm, maintaining harmonious relationship between the exploitation and exploration phases is crucial for achieving optimal results. the exploration phase seeks to explore a wide range of the search space, while the exploitation phase focuses on exploiting the most promising areas of the search space. the moa is an essential component of the aoa algorithm, which controls the balance between these two phases. however, moa is a linear control approach that increases linearly with the number of iterations and may not fully capture the der to validate its effectiveness. scenario 1 is the current operation scheme, and the units only have two states of full load or half load. in scenario 2, the system includes only water source heat pump units, providing cool and heat energy while purchasing electricity from the grid to meet cooling or heating demands. in scenario 3, the system incorporates heat pump units, photovoltaic solar thermal collectors, and



