salicylic acid(sa) is an endogenous plant growth regulator of phenolic nature. it plays some important roles in the regulation of plant growth development and enhances plant vigor under biotic and abiotic stresses. sa plays an essential role in controlling berry quality such as color, flavor, astringency and bitterness, and enhance berry size, weight and berry firmness. mainly, sa positively effects on reducing fruit respiration and ethylene biosynthesis weight loss, berry decay and softening rate during storage and shelf-life.



this investigation was carried out during two seasons 2014 and 2015. to study the effect of foliar salicylic acid(sa) application on physical and chemical quality attribute of berries of superior seedless grapes. samples were picked when the soluble solid content(ssc%) in berry juice at 17% in average. cluster samples(220 clusters) were divided into two main patches. the first patch was formed with 120 clusters, each treatment 24 clusters for measuring physical and chemical quality attitude analysis during shelflife for four days. the second cluster sample patch(100 clusters) for non-distractive measurements such as rachis browning index, water losses%, and berry shuttering%. samples were handled to pomology depart. fac. of agric. mansoura univ. and its stored at



quality elements were determined, berries were randomly removed from several cluster samples and were divided into three replicates to measure soluble solid content(ssc%) using carlzeiss hand refractometer, acidity as tartaric acid(ta) was determined by titration with 0.1n naoh, and ssc/ta ratio was calculated as defined maturity index. berry firmness and separation force were recorded using fruit texture effegi-penetrometer supplemented with a plunger 2 mm diameter penetrator. firmness and separation force of berries were expressed an n. weight losses percentage was measured. berry shattering percentage and rachis browning index. the color was recorded as described by. thereafter, all images were analyzed by using software imagej ver. 1.43u usa to get rgb signals to calculate hue angle of clusters according to.



rachis membrane electrolyte leakage was measured using a conductivity meter and the results were expressed as a percentage as described by. total phenols were determined by folinciocalteu method, based on colorimetric oxidation/reduction reaction of phenols. total carotenoids content was spectrophotometrically measured at wavelength 452.5 nm using spectrophotometer.



data for evaluation of parameters in time were analyzed using analysis of variance(anova) when shelf-life time and treatment factors are considered. the means were compared using the least significant differences(lsd) at p< 0.05 level of probability. the statistical software package genstat ver. 11(lawes agriculture trust, rothamsted experimental station, uk) was used.



rachis quality of bunches has been investigating extensively among producers and exporters because of its high impact on the cluster freshness that determines consumers. sa treatment 4 mm(rbi= 1.90 slight browning incidence) presented a significant reduction in rachis browning during shelf-life up to 4th day compared with 2 mm(rbi= 2.57), 1 mm(rbi= 3.43 moderate incidence) and 0 mm(rbi= 4 severe incidence). it is clear that sa treatment at 4 mm has a good potential beneficial against rachis browning of detached grape clusters by reducing water loss and suppression of polyphenol oxidase enzymes activity, it might also maintaining rachises healthy.



pared with 4 mm(ho= 98). the color(hue angle) changes in the clusters were also related to aging cluster tissue. moreover, the change in hue angle value is related to water loss during shelflife as reported to.



one of the common parameter during cold storage and shelf-life is increased membrane permeability which is used as an indicator of membrane damage. sa at 4 mm treated vine clusters presented a significantly lower mel at 1st day(1.33%) up to a 4th day(6.00%) of the shelf-life period compared to control(3.33% up to 22.33%) and other sa concentrations during shelf-life. sa treatment delayed the respiration, and also inhibited ethylene production.



and less il%. so, no breakdown of cluster rachis tissue occurred, therefore, browning incidence becomes less(moderate level; browning index) and lower rate water loss during the shelf-life. on the other hand, total phenol decreased slightly according to inhibit ppo by sa during ripening that reflects to increase fruit color quality(ho). completely, sa treatment can be easily and safe usage to delaying/shifting ripening processes of grape with improving cluster fruits quality during shelf-life.



