we construct a family of time-independent hamiltonians which are able to perform universally programmable quantum computation. the construction is obtained via direct translation of one-way computer assembly language code into a hamiltonian evolution. we also present how to evolve adiabatically to this hamiltonian. it is hoped that this approach contributes further into the study of the structural relationship between measurement-based and adiabatic models of quantum computing.



the central question that this paper aims to make a progress upon is the study of the structural relationship between mbqc and aqc. several methods for the adiabatic simulation of a given circuit have been already proposed[7,8]. these methods are essentially based on rewriting a circuit into rounds of computation with few gates in each round, which are then used to construct a corresponding local hamiltonian. in another approach adiabatic evolution has been exploited to make the mbqc computation more robust. our construction differs from the previously known results in presenting a programmable hamiltonian construction



one can count two of the main advantages of the one-way quantum computation as having an intrinsic parallel structure and a rich graph theoretical toolkits for algorithm design[15,16,17]. generally speaking, a model to have these properties beside the advantage of having a programmable and robust continuous-time evolution is the main goal of this paper. the first step is a translation of one-way pattern into hamiltonian evolution, which is presented next.



we finish this part with a comment on the parallelism. in our construction to achieve the same depth complexity of the one-way pattern, we could first dispose all the z dependency of the measurements using the signal shifting scheme introduced in and then parallelise the resulting controlled-gates using the techniques introduced in. however this will effect the dimension of the program register. the study of structural links between locality and parallelism is outside the scope of this paper and demands a further investigation.



