to illustrate the working of projections, we show how a common reduct of a(possibly infinite) reduction and a single step that makes part of it can be obtained via their respective projections. we show, by means of several examples, that the proposed definition yields the expected behavior also in cases beyond those covered by this result. finally, we discuss how the notion of limit is used in our definition of projection for infinite reduction.



we show that our definition behaves as expected in some cases that extend the scope of the proven property, by means of several examples. we remark that in many cases the computation of the(proof term representing the) projection uses the notion of limit only to obtain the source or target term of a proof term; limits are not needed in order to reason specifically about projections. this includes computations of the projection of an infinite reduction over a finite one, and conversely, of a finite reduction over an infinite one.



in section 2, we give the needed definitions about infinitary rewriting and the proof term model. after a preliminary discussion in section 3, we introduce the definition of projection in section 4, analyzing it through several examples, and we state and prove our partial confluence result in section 5. in section 6, we explore cases where the explicit mention of limits in the definition of projection cannot longer be avoided. finally, some preliminary conclusions of this work-in-progress, and possible directions for future research, are given in section 7. an extended version includes the omitted proofs, and also some additional material regarding the formal definition of projections.



as shown by the discussion at the beginning of section 5, the definitions given in section 4 allow to obtain proper projections for cases beyond the scope of lemma 5.6 and prop. 5.7. however, this is not always the case, even for projections involving an infinite and a finite reduction.



observe that in both cases, the partial results approximate the expected final results. a similar phenomenon occurs when applying our definition to obtain the projection of an infinite composition over another one. these observations suggest the need of incorporating the notion of limit in the proposed definition of projection, in order to cover the cases not currently considered.



in this article, we describe our work-in-progress about a possible characterisation, based on proof terms, of the projection of one reduction over another for infinitary, left-linear, first-order rewriting. we introduce this characterisation, show that it conveys the expected results in several cases, and prove a partial confluence property. we also discuss some limitations of the current form of the characterisation.



two obvious further directions of work are: to extend the proposed definition, in order to comprise all projections of an infinitary reduction over another one, and to extend the soundness property expressed in prop. 5.7 to all projections. additionally, it would be interesting to further delimit the scope of the current version, that is, to understand in which cases the development of a projection can be performed without explicit use of the notion of limit.



