using temporal logic[11,18](for instance, to establish the validity of security properties of protocols). however, it is well known that verifying a temporal logic formula against a model, in particular finding all the system states that verify the formula, is in general a hard problem. recall that in the case of finite states this problem is decidable both for ctl* and for the simpler case of ctl. the complexity of this problem is pspace complete for ctl* and linear running time for ctl. model checking is usually applied to programs that consist of several concurrent processes; the number of states representing the whole program behaviour may grow exponentially in the number of such processes. this problem(known as state explosion problem) and the huge complexity for verifying temporal formulae against a model, especially for ctl*, are limiting factors that have to be tackled for any practical use of this technique.



temporal logic appears appropriate for describing the time-varying behaviour of reactive systems, e.g. universal properties(properties that have to hold along all executions of a program) and existential properties(properties that have to hold along some executions), as well as safety properties(nothing bad may happen) and liveness properties(something good has to happen)[18,19].



example 4.6 by considering the example in section 3 and by abstracting c with signv we obtain the model a. on the contrary, if we consider the example 5.6 we note that the model computed with sign is less precise than a because the z element is not join irreducible.



the relevance of compression with respect to disjunction relies upon theorem 4.5 above. in this case it is natural to state the following question: is it possible to minimize the disjunctive information in domains in such a way the abstract model be minimal with respect to this information? in the following we consider the notion of least disjunctive bases introduced in. this



note that if the cells to be sorted by the linear sorting array algorithm are n then the number of abstract states is 2n+1, while the number of concrete states is infinite or 2rn, considering a range r of integer number(e.g. r' 2maxint).



