huang and gao stated that location-based services(lbs) are mobile applications that provide users with information depending on their location. according to mohammadi et al. pull or push lbs can be used depending on information to be communicated with user.



according to yassin et al. the most used technology for outdoor lbs is gps which uses localization techniques such as global system for mobile communications to perform time, angle or power measurements to estimate user position. ahlawat et al.



simulation is done to simulate the designed model using matlab whereby a number of scenarios are simulated. rift valley region is selected for this research since the main highway linking nairobi to western region and uganda passes through rift valley and the region most often records fatal accidents. according to kenya police website(2019) there are a total of 78 black spots in kenya of which 12 are from rift valley region but statistics from other sources such as standard digital newspaper in 2015, indicates that there are around 160 black spots while ntsa new mapping exercise revealed 273 black spots in kenya as reported by standard digital newspaper in 2018. due to this conflicting statistics in the country a dataset of 15 blackspots was selected for the study.



two scenarios were tested with an aim of determining the effectiveness of the proposed model through simulation. in both scenarios a total of 15 black spots are considered and one vehicle moves across the 15 black spots. during the movement the vehicle receives an alert as it draws towards a black spot enabling the driver to lower driving speed and avoid any form of recklessness that could result to accidents. in some cases the vehicle fails to get an alert. this is attributed to factors that affect performance of either rfid or gps.



according to sauro, one of the ways of calculating usability is by determining effectiveness of a system. effectiveness of a system is therefore dependent on its successful performance given a number of tasks. failure to successfully perform certain tasks constitutes error rate which affects the level of effectiveness. this can therefore be done by determining task completion rate. i.e. percentage of tasks completed successfully against total number of tasks.



the proposed framework utilized the capabilities of both gps and rfid in location based service to achieve effectiveness by registering low alert error rate which is very key on critical road locations. application of gps or rfid alone in lbs had high error rate due to limitations like line of sight for gps and interferences or faultiness in the case of rfid. high error rate is an indicator of ineffectiveness in providing lbs for critical purposes. the in-vehicle sound system audio alerts was preferred as compared to visual signs that needs interpretation resulting to visual overload and high resource demands as observed by spence and ho(2008), spence and ho(2009), sivak(1996).



the main objective of the research was to design a framework for preventing road accidents at black spots. the design and simulation of the whole concept attests that high availability of alerts is very key for the effectiveness of location based services on black spots. it was observed through analysis of death statistics that human factor is the main cause of road accident related deaths. since lbs is aimed at providing relevant information to motorists with an objective of sound decision making it was observed that the information pushed to drivers could cause them to act appropriately hence prevent human errors that account for most fatal



my acknowledgement goes to the school of computing and informatics, jomo kenyatta university of agriculture and technology for the support. i sincerely appreciate the tireless efforts and very rich guidance i obtained from my supervisors dr. okeyo and prof. cheruiyot and all staff. in all this thanks to god.



qiao f., yu l., fatholahzadeh r., yuan x.(2012, april). smart guide signing system using rfid as an intelligent sensor. 2012. proceedings of the 13th asce aerospace division conference on engineering, construction, and operations in challenging environments and the 5th nasa/asce workshop on granular materials in space exploration. isbn: 978-0-7844-1219-0.



