complex systems, consisting of several components that interact, arise in a natural way in a wide range of applications. the components may be complex themselves(they may e.g. contain a database; may have their specific internal logic and an appropriate inference mechanism; a planning mechanism, etc.), or may be simplebut even then their composition can complicated because of the necessity to take into account the interaction between the single components. one of the main problems that arise in the verification of such complex systems is the state explosion problem: the state space can grow exponentially with the number of components. symbolic representations of states and symbolic model checking have greatly increased the size of the systems that can be verified. however, many realistic systems are still too large to be handled. it is therefore important to find techniques that can be used to further extend the size of the systems that can be verified. one possibility is to check properties in a modular way(i.e. verify them for the individual components, infer that they also hold in the system obtained by the interconnection of the individual components, and then use them to deduce additional properties of the system). not all properties are preserved by interconnection: for instance deadlocks might occur when interconnecting deadlock free systems. the main goal of this paper is to offer an answer to an important question in verification:



example 2.6 we consider a variant of example 2.2, in which we assume that there is no control unit, but all trains have access to all information about the positions of all trains. the trains report all together and move all together. the actions are



we provide interpretations for properties of systems(i.e. statements about states, actions, behavior) both concretely(in the category of sets) and in a category of sheaves, and establish links between the set-theoretical(both for individual systems and for their interconnections) and the sheaf-theoretical interpretation. these links are then used to prove preservation of truth when interconnecting systems.



we showed that a family insys of interacting systems closed under pullbacks can be endowed with a topology which models the way these systems interact. states, parallel actions, transitions, and behavior can be described as sheaves on this topological space. we then used geometric logic to determine which kind of properties of systems in insys are preserved when interconnecting these systems. the main advantage of our approach is that it enables us to verify properties of complex systems in a modular way. we illustrated the ideas by means of a running example, involving systems of trains controlled by interacting controllers. in future work we plan to look at other applications, including geographically distributed systems, controlled by geographically fixed controllers, whose domains overlap.



