we introduce briefly the basic principle of the standardized coding/decoding h.264/avc. we have analyzed and studied in detail the core technology of h.264/avc standard, including motion estimation and motion compensation, forecasts in a frame and between the frames, integer transform and quantization analysis, entropy coding methods, deblock filter, new photographic image type, aspect-oriented ip and wireless environment, etc. the h.264/avc standard has solved the contradiction between the image quality and the coding efficiency, its effect is obvious, but many advantages acquired exchange for the sacrifice of computing complexity, therefore, to achieve greater coding efficiency will be the next studying emphasis at the same time of reducing the computing complexity.



in the output bit stream of the encoder, the basic unit of data is the sentence element. each sentence element consists of several bits, it represents a particular physical meaning, for example, macroblock type, quantitative parameters, etc. the syntax represents the structure of syntax element, the semantic illustrates the specific meaning of semantic element. all the video encoder standards formulate the work flow of encoder/decoder by defining the syntax and semantic.



takes advantage of the relevance of time domain. the relevance of time domain lies in those continuous image blocks, which makes it need to encode those differentials in coding time. generally we take advantage of the relevance of time domain through motion estimation and motion compensation. a pixel block derives motion vectors from a preceding frame encoded or a few of preceding frame in search of the relevant pixels, but the motion vectors in encoding/decoding end are used to forecast the current pixel block.



makes use of the airspace redundancy of residual error. after motion estimation, the encoding end only needs the encoding residual error, namely encodes the difference between the current block and corresponding forecasting block. the encoding process includes the following steps: transformation, quantization, scanning output and entropy encoding.



other techniques. besides those we have just described, h.264/avc also includes: oversampling relationship between traditional chromaticity data and luminous intensity data of 4:2:0; block motion vector; motion vector surpassing the image edge; size partition of transformation block; graded quantization; i, p and b image type, etc.



the preceding video encoder standards all adopted the inter prediction method, however only the intra encoding image was called i image. the i image transforms the numerical value of pixel block directly, the treatment results will have a large number of redundant information contained in i image to low compressing efficiency. h.264/avc adopted a new intra prediction model employing the correlation of adjacent pixel based on the same nature possibly owned by the adjacent pixel.



where z is quantizing value, y is input coefficient value, qstep is quantifying step. the quantifying step has 52 kinds, the quantitative parameter(qp) decides the quantifying step of each macro block. qp increases 1, accordingly the quantifying step increases 12.5%, in the preceding standards qstep increases a constant every time. sometimes the quantization of luminous intensity coefficient is very rough, however the chromatic aberration signals in the quantization process adopted a more delicate quantifying step, the fidelity of chromatic aberration signals became better than the luminous intensity coefficient. due to putting the transformation and quantifying together, the operations of compressing the code were reduced effectively.



one of the encoding characteristics based on block lies in its block structure. the quantization errors of pixel value of block boundary form the block effect which affects the subjective quality of image due to the block reconstruction. in order to eliminate the block effect and improve the subjective and objective quality of decoding image and to provide better reference image, the deblock effect filter based on content is introduced. when the difference between the images at the block boundary is little, the filter is used to smooth this difference, if the image characteristics at the boundary are obvious, the filter is not used. therefore, it can weaken the influence of block effect and avoid straining off the image contents, and at the same time the bit rate in the same subjective quality is reduced 5%~10%.



after the code stream contains sp slice and si slice, the decoder can transfer quickly between the code streams which have similar contents but different code rate, at the same time supports the random access and quick playback model. sp slice uses the inter prediction method to realize the transformation between the image streams of different code rate by changing the size of quantizing values. si slice is a best slice similar to sp when si slice can not uses the inter prediction method due to transmission errors.



the inter image refresh is used to complete the time synchronization of h.264/avc video flow in order to resist transmitting errors, the slice structured coding supports the space synchronization. the video data in a picture provides some resynchronization point after error code.



in addition, the inter macro block refresh and multi-reference macro block permission encoder can not only consider the encoding efficiency but also be adapted to the characteristics of different transmitting channels. besides it is adapted to the channel code rate utilizing the change of quantization pace, h.264/avc deals with the change of channel code rate utilizing the data partitioning method.



in wireless communications applications, we can support the maximum bit rate change of wireless channel by change the quantization precision or space/time resolution of each frame. however, in the situation of multi-broadcasting, it is impossible to demand the encoder in response to all kinds of changing bit rates. therefore, h.264/avc adopted the sp frame of stream switching to take the place of hierarchical encoding, other than the fine granular scalability approach employed by mpeg-4(low efficiency).



due to the results of using a lot of new technologies, the h.264/avc standards in all aspects such as system structure and efficiency are superior to the preceding video encoding standards. in the same image quality, the h.264/avc algorithm saves 50% or so code rate in terms of preceding standards such as h.263 or mpeg-4. at the same time, it has a strong error resilience property to adapt itself to the video transmission of wireless channel with a high packet loss rate and serious disturbance. so h.264/avc supports the hierarchical encoding transmission in different network resources, achieves a steady image quality and can be adapted to the video transmission between different networks.



in the video application domain, the image quality and encoding efficiency always are a dilemma. the encoding efficiency of h.264/avc standards is improved because its entropy coding technology adopted the encoding of cavlc and cabac, successes to solve the problem. but the price of the superior performance of h.264/avc is that the computing complexity increased greatly. it is estimated that the computing complexity of encoding is about three times as large as h.263, the computing complexity of encoding is about two times as large as h.263. at the same time of reducing the complexity, to achieve greater efficiency of encoding will be the next priority of study.



