8-aminoquinoline. acenaphthaquinone thiosemicarbazone reacted with fe(iii), ni(ii), cu(ii) and zn(ii) chlorides or acetates leads to formation of complexes that have been characterized by spectroscopic studies. also, the free ligand showed high activity of cell proliferation inhibition and induced differentiation on friend erythroleukemia cells(flc).



delta2 spectrometer(500 mhz)(jeol usa inc., peabody, ma 01960, usa). the mass spectrum of apth was measured by thermo dsq ii spectrometer(thermo fisher scientific inc., waltham, ma, usa). the faas measurements were carried out using a perkin elmer analyst 800 atomic absorption spectrometer(perkin elmer inc., waltham, ma 02451, usa) with a longitudinal zeeman background correction furnished with a at carrier gas flow rate of 1000 ml/min and slit width 0.7 nm. the ph of the solution was adjusted using hanna instrument model 8519 digital ph meter(hanna instruments, rhode island, woonsocket, ri 02895, usa). the temperature of the cell compartment was kept constant by circulating water from a thermostatic water bath at the desired temperature, which was used for the cpe experiments(memmert gmbh co. kg, d-91126 schwabach, germany). a centrifuge was used to accelerate the phase separation process employing centrifuge hematocrit mikro set(alkeslabindo, kota depok, indonesia).



100 ml distilled water in a measuring flask. the non-ionic surfactant, triton x-114, was used without further purification. the stock solution 1% w/v was prepared by dissolving 1 g of triton x-114 in 100 ml distilled water. hexamine buffer solutions 0.5 m,



moreover, the 1h-nmr spectrum of cd(ii) complex in dmsod6, in comparison to that of the ligand, shows the aromatic protons at more or less the same positions in addition to singlet signals at 12.83 and 10.84 ppm attributed to the n2h and n4h protons, respectively. the appearance of the n4h at the same can be extracted efficiently at ph 7 after which the complexation and/or extraction of the metal ion decreased. the hg(ii) shows higher stability than cd(ii), which has a sharp decrease. hence, ph 7 was chosen as the working ph.



