in order to realize the intelligent of computer based training system, this paper puts forward a knowledge form retrieval method based on information entropy. through analyze the inner link which existing between the knowledge forms, we can build knowledge base, and can find the knowledge forms which cause the failure of training through information entropy calculation. use information entropy and combination entropy calculation formula, we can retrieval and construction the knowledge chains which cause training failure, and regroup into learners training knowledge base. overall, this paper puts forward the algorithm of knowledge base secondary organization, this algorithm can automatic ruled out the training knowledge which the leaner has mastered, and we can improve the efficiency of cbt system through the strengthening training..



the intelligent organization of knowledge base is based with the people's cognitive research. the professor chen qing-quan who is academician of chinese academy of engineering summarize the current age with binc, binc namely biological technology, information technology, nano technology and cognitive technology. cognitive science is interdisciplinary combination with philosophy, psychology, linguistics, anthropology, and neuroscience and computer science. yu sheng-quan has pointed out that the third time digital learning has already"from transmission and behavioral paradigm to the constructiveness cognitive paradigm, and then turned to the situation cognitive paradigm".



in the 1960s, the united states cybernetics scholars l.a.zadeh put forward and development the fuzzy mathematics method; in the 1980s, the polish mathematician z.p awlak put forward the rough set theory; in addition, there is gray system, and so on. though these methods showed very good performance in uncertainty, indeterminacy and imprecision for processing information, and have made great achievements in intelligent information processing, but in the perspective of cbt system knowledge reasoning, it's difficult to connect them with the retrieval of knowledge element, it is mainly because of the complexity of the joined knowledge network which make the relationship of relevant knowledge element are unlikely to quantitative description. however, claude elwood shannon put forward the information entropy which shows the huge potential in this problem.



shannon puts forward the concept of information entropy in a mathematical theory of communication in 1948, which is regarded as the foundation of modern information theory. entropy theory establishes the mathematical model for the communication process. shannon's entropy theory is limited to the mathematical theory of communication system, so it is called narrow sense information theory. however, the application of information theory far more than communication theory, it has cross with physics(statistical mechanics), mathematics(probability theory), electronic engineering(communication theory) and computer science(algorithm complexity).



provided amount of information is called of x0 self-information, record as i(x0), it is the measurement values of uncertainty of signal x0. in the knowledge element searching, the probability of knowledge element x0 which affect some training failure is recorded as p(x0). for x, the greater the probability x, the greater the chance of the occurrence, and the smaller the value uncertainty i(x).



the key of secondary intelligent organization for cbt training is to look for the knowledge base which leads to the failure of training. this paper start from the perspective of cognitive science, puts forward the concept of knowledge base information entropy, and built the knowledge element search algorithm which can realize the intelligence of cbt system; it has important meaning for improving availability and efficiency of the cbt system. as the specific application test, we have developed the intelligent computer based aircraft maintenance training system which proved the feasibility of this algorithm. now, in the aspect of the system perfection, there are some details problem(such as the division of the knowledge element particle size and weight coefficient between knowledge elements) need to be solve in the next work.



