to deal with the problem of low efficiency and low convergence speed in searching the global optimum, niche genetic algorithm was used in reliability optimization of software system. linear programming works with multi-variable and multi-constraint were solved successfully. and also, the searching performance of the genetic algorithms was improved by introducing the stochastic tournament model, the uniform schema crossover operator and the non-uniform mutation in the genetic algorithm. the simulation results show that the niche genetic algorithm can resolve the multi-module complex software system's reliability allocation effectively, which can improve the computing speed and the resolution quality effectively.



software system, which is also called reliability allocation problem of software system, is to find an optimal reliability allocation scheme of software system under the conditions of a certain resource constraints. it makes the system obtain the highest reliability. generally speaking, there are a large number of local extreme points. it is difficult to solve the global optimal solution accurately. many scholars have achieved good results in solving the combinatorial optimization problem with intelligent optimization algorithms. but it is still rare to see the research on reliability allocation problem of software system with niche genetic algorithm.



in the formula, stands for the reliability target of the software system with n modules and m operations. that is a combinatorial optimization problem with a linear function and multiple constraints. so niche genetic algorithm is imported to solve the engineering problem.



the genetic algorithm which simulates biological niche genetic is produced by using the concept of niche genetic. the purpose of the algorithm is to form and maintain a variety of sub-populations and do parallel search in the search space. it is often used to solve multimodal function, multi-objective optimization and simulation of complex systems. niche genetic algorithm simulates the fittest principle of biological evolution by maintaining a group of individuals. repeated selection, crossover and mutation of the individuals are carried out until the global optimal solution is obtained.



the primary task of an algorithm is the encoding method. it affects not only the design method of crossover operator, mutation operator, but also the convergence speed of the algorithm. the genetic algorithm which is based on real-coded is the actual description of the continuous parameter optimization problem. there is no binary encoding and decoding process which can greatly increase the efficiency of the algorithm.



stochastic tournament model is selected in this paper. the winners become the next generation of individuals by the method of competing. in each generation of groups, k individuals are selected to constitute a small group randomly. and then, the fittest individuals are copied to next generation among the k individuals. the copy of the individual still returns to the parent groups and participate in the next random selection. this kind of selection will repeat m times and produce m next generation of individuals. in the method, we usually set k= 2.



uniform schema crossover operator is used in this paper. a random template is produced before the crossover operating. the crossover operating will carried out if the gene position of individual is 1. compared to the single point crossover in traditional genetic algorithm, it has greater variation of the area and random mutation probability. and thus the search space is more effective and the local search ability is improved.



mutation operation in genetic algorithm means the gene value of certain genes in the individual is replaced by other gene value. the local search ability of genetic algorithm is improved by mutation operation. the diversity is maintained and the premature phenomenon is prevented.



a nun-uniform mutation is used in this paper. it refers to a random perturbation of the original genetic value. the new gene value is the result of the disturbance. a slight change in the solution space is made for each mutation operation.



linear programming works with multi-variable and multi-constraint were solved successfully by using niche genetic algorithm in multi-module software system. at the same time, the search ability of genetic algorithm was improved by using stochastic tournament model, uniform schema crossover operator and non-uniform mutation. the simulation results show that niche genetic algorithm in solving the multiple modules of complex software systems reliability allocation problem was efficient and effective. the next step, we will do some research on improving encoding, genetic operators and selection strategies. in short, the reliability of software systems based on genetic algorithm optimization problem worthy of further research.



