we introduce the generalized dependency constrained spanning tree problem(g-dcst), where an edge can be chosen only if the number of edges chosen from its dependency set lies in a certain interval. the dependency relations between the edges of the input graph g are described by the input digraph d, whose vertices are the edges of g. the in-neighbors of a vertex of d form its dependency set. we show that g-dcst unifies and generalizes some known spanning tree problems that apply conflict constraints over edges or lower and upper bounds on vertex degrees. we show that the feasibility version of g-dcst is np-complete even under strong restrictions on the structures of g and d as well as on the functions that define the minimum or maximum number of dependencies to be satisfied. we also show that this problem keeps an ln n inapproximability threshold under tight assumptions over g and d. on the other hand, we spot a polynomial case via a matroid intersection argument.



the next sections develop results concerning g-dcst and g-dcmst. section 2 establishes relations between the present problems and generalized versions of spanning tree problems found in the literature. section 3 exposes complexity results for g-dcmst(g, d, l, u, w), parameterized either by g and d or mainly by l and u. finally, section 4 ends the paper with comments and directions of future work.



this section exposes relations between g-dcst and other spanning tree problems. we show that it unifies and generalizes a number of known problems. as of particular interest, we establish a relation between g-dcst and the conflict constrained spanning tree problem, which could be seen as its counterpart where the digraph d is replaced by an undirected graph.



in this subsection, we analyse the complexity of g-dcst(g, d, l, u) and g-dcmst(g, d, l, u) as a function of the input graphs g and d. we show npcompleteness results for g-dcst. also, we establish an inapproximability threshold for g-dcmst.



it is remarkable that, since g-dcst is np-complete, g-dcmst is inapproximable. the same holds for l-dcmst and a-dcmst. actually, in we prove that l-dcmst and a-dcmst keep an ln(n) inapproximability threshold for very restricting assumptions. this result is presented here in the following theorem.



in this subsection, g-dcmst(g, d, l, u, w) is examined by mainly focusing on the functions l and u. by following this approach, we attempt to obtain a deeper understanding on the hardness of g-dcmst and spot cases where this problem could be treated in a reasonable amount of time. in particular, a polynomial case for g-dcmst is identified via matroid intersection.



in, the problem of finding a maximum weight common independent set of two weighted matroids m1 and m2 is shown to be solvable in polynomial time. since a solution t for g-dcmst(g, d, l, u, w) corresponds to a basis of the graphic matroid of g, say m1, and also to an independent set of a partition matroid related to d and u, say m2, t corresponds to a common independent set of m1 and m2. as both m1 and m2 can be weighted according to wj, this leads to the following theorem.



we believe that g-dcmst(g, d, l, u, w) under l= 0 is a promising particular case to explore. it generalizes ccmst, which is a recently studied problem, and we have the impression that some results of ccmst can be generalized to this particular case of g-dcmst. we intend to tackle g-dcmst via integer linear programming and develop a polyhedral study of the dependency constraints. we also plan to use defective coloring results to obtain heuristic methods and approximation results for g-dcmst(g, d, l, u, w) under l= 0.



