the remainder of this paper is organized as follows: section 2 reviews the relevant literature. section 3 introduces the wavelet methodology, effective price correlation, and causation measures. sections 4 and 5 describe the data set and report the empirical results, respectively. section 6 discusses the theoretical and methodological contributions and practical implications for academics, policymakers, and practitioners. section 7 concludes.



many studies have examined the price-discovery mechanisms of futures contracts for the same underlying commodities on different exchanges. the consensus is that markets with higher liquidity tend to attract more trading activity, but traders sometimes trade liquidity to ensure hedging effectiveness(silber, 1981). to investigate whether and how information is transmitted from one market to another, granger causality(granger, 1969) is often used to test the direction of information flow. further, cointegration methods(granger, 1981) have become the most popular tools for studying the joint relationships among multiple price series. an error correction model was also developed to formalize the data-generating processes of cointegration relationships(engle and granger, 1987). these methods are well suited for exploring price discovery in multiple areas of agricultural commodities. the economic intuition behind the cointegration relationship is the law of one price(ardeni, 1989).



note: us, cn, and diff denote the returns of us soybean futures and chinese soybean futures and their price differences, respectively. d1, d2, d3, d4, d5, and d6 refer to 2-4, 4-8, 8-16, 16-32, 32-64, and 64128 observations, respectively. each trading day contains two observations.



both united states and chinese soybean markets are more likely to be positively correlated with price differences. thus, our results imply that an increase(decrease) in soybean prices, irrespective of whether it occurs in u.s. or chinese quotes, would increase(reduce) the spread between u.s. and chinese prices due to inherent linkages between the three series. this result further suggests that relative price levels play a crucial role in driving u.s. soybean futures returns, and vice versa.



moreover, united states soybean market was less likely to be influenced by price differences during the post-tariff and post-trade agreement periods. intuitively, as united states soybean inventory significantly increased during the trade war, the price sensitivity of united states soybean market decreased. due to a shortage in chinese soybean demand, the chinese soybean price became more closely correlated with the price difference. as a result, an increase in chinese soybean prices would not necessarily cause an increase in u.s. soybean prices, widening the price gap between the two.



this study makes several methodological contributions to the literature on commodity market data. first, it demonstrated the advantages of using wavelet analysis to characterize complex cyclical relationships and time-varying correlations missed in typical cointegration and causality approaches. second, the analysis established intercountry price differences as a key factor in soybean futures price discovery, based on theoretical notions of market integration. third, examining the impacts of major exogenous events, such as political events, as represented by trade wars, and public health, as represented by pandemics, revealed a new application of the wavelet approach in data science. therefore, this study expands the theoretical understanding of the evolution of soybean futures price dynamics between major soybean producers and consumers. the methodological innovation of applying wavelets in this context provides a



this study used the wavelet method to analyze the dynamic relationship between u.s. and chinese soybean futures. recently, china has dramatically increased its soybean imports, and the soybean futures market in china has witnessed increasing trading volumes. both developments have implications for soybean price discovery in united states and china. this study adds to the extant literature in the following three ways, helping to understand the price discovery dynamics between united states and china in the globally indispensable soybean market.



christofoletti, m. a. m., silva, r. m. d.,& mattos, f., 2012. the increasing participation of china in the world soybean market and its impact on price linkages in futures markets. in proceedings of the nccc-134 conference on applied commodity price analysis, forecasting, and market risk management.



