critical patients, the treatments of patients with various acute diseases and the task in public health emergencies. at present, the defect of the community health care system, the lack of clinical statistical data and the high mobility of patients make it impossible to track the clinical data and the disease outcome after the patients leave the emergency room. and this is the main defect in emergency department in china, which formed the gap between emergency department and some other specialized departments.



the collection, preservation and statistical analysis of the clinical data are carried out by hospital information system(his), based on the management method of establishing the hospital computer networking, which already have some perfect mature examples in other countries1. our hospital began to use his since 2008. the related clinical data of the patients during the treatment process can be got by using the real-name registration system, computer inputting and a series of management methods. this study want to analyzed the data of the patients in emergency department, to know the spectrum of disease and help us to manage the clinical work in the future.



as a window department of the hospital, emergency department is a important place to rescue the critical ill, and would face lots of urgent and complicated situation. in these days, the informatization was rapidly developed in the hospital. and how to use it to improve the advantage of the discipline and the quality of medical care, is the keystone for the development of emergency department. the data of patients who went to emergency department from july 2010 to june 2011 had been analyzed after the emergency doctor workstation was used in the clinical work in our hospital.



there is a significant rise of digestive disease incidence in december, january and february, which might be related to two factors. first, the statistics exclude patients with uncomplicated diarrhea, and the exclusion criteria lead to the decrease of the statistical number in the summer and autumn of infectious diarrhea patients. second, during the period from december to next february, the chinese intake more high-fat high fever diet. and some patients suffered from digestive disease, often because of uncontrolled diet, and the incidence of cholecystitis, pancreatitis was significantly higher than in other months.



based on the statistics, we found that there were 19 sudden death patients who were sent to the emergency in one year. reviewing the clinical data, it took the ambulance more than 10 minutes to get to the hospital, and none of these patients received cardiopulmonary resuscitation on the ambulance. all 19 patients were dead when they arrived the hospital. although the crp guidelines of the american heart association emphasized the importance of the pre-hospital emergency treatment, the clinical data showed that the mortality of arrest occurred out of the hospital was higher that those happened in the hospital, and the patients received less treatment before the professional arrived.



