in the last few years, evolutions have been trying an increasing interest in using the internet and communication technologies tool(ict). wide groups of applications and technologies were generated to support communication to others anytime and everywhere. presently, the internet has become be a necessity for the world community. all people can reach all the information without any limitation, on time and place. also, in the learning procedure, communication can be one of the determinant factors to gain success in the learning process. the use of ict also can be given good impacts for learning process as well as to provide learning efficiency in order to help sound substance that they have created a relationship with others to an arrangement of accessible substance, begin or join subgroups of successive concern gatherings. concede. social networks are an approach to impart online that can be utilized to connecting, share data and group up to other. internet-based life can be like sites and applications.



we conclude by reviewing aspects of business impacts using social media. therefore, we note in the first question here that the use of social media for this purpose varies between use sometimes and non-use. in the second question, there is no interest and follow-up to the business groups. in the third question, we find that there is not much time spent on business use through social media. in the fourth question, the majority see their use being for sale and purchase together. in the fifth question, about normal shopping methods and compensation through e-shopping on social media. in the sixth question, we find that there is also great dissatisfaction with the clear majority of commercial ad. in the seventh question, it is sometimes thought that the promotion of products through these means is effective, or in the eighth question, we also have confidence in the process of shopping and



in our study, we found that there is a generally positive impression among students about social media. there is also a great interest and increasing use of these social media for academic use. many of them do not want to use it for business purposes and do not see the possibility of adopting e-shopping as an alternative to regular shopping. in the political aspects, with their conviction of the extent of the influence of social media in the possibility of changing political events and maybe a dangerous factor in this area, but they also have no desire to participate and follow up the use of social media, for this reason, we should focus on the academic aspect and the range to which students respond to the utilization of social media in their scope and academic studies. this is very encouraging by focusing on making these platforms a reliable educational platform, for example, academic and activate this aspect and focus on it through the recommendations of stakeholders in the academic field we must not overlook negative aspects such as impact it is necessary to note the negative effects on health, especially addiction and the use of social media. it is noteworthy that facebook is the most common and the most popular and most common among all these means social communication, which was presented in the questionnaire with a clear and noticeable advancement of youtube in the academic field only, which enhances the possibility of using it for academic purposes reliably by academic institutions. in future, we can expand this study through by taking other societies and countries and achieve a comparative study among them. we also can do a survey for other stakeholders sides like faculty staff members and employers to improve the performance of our future studies.



