task of automatic reconstruction of three-dimensional objects by drawing views presented. the algorithm based on a boundary representation of three-dimensional models. the algorithm consists of the following steps: automatic separation of the drawing per the views, determination of three-dimensional coordinates of vertices, definition and marking of wire model primitives, reconstruction of model faces and model elements. the fundamental concept of the algorithm is to find the structural elements of three-dimensional model with usage of pre-specified patterns. the templates are described by means of matrices. matching algorithm uses invariants: the number of vertices, type of edges.



the analysis has shown that existing approaches are generally designed for the objects with sufficiently simple geometry. these algorithms often do not allow performing of reconstruction of polygonal surfaces, fillets, slots, holes. in this paper the algorithm, which allows recognizing these structural elements on the basis of predetermined patterns, is presented.



presented algorithm is developed on the basis of b-rep-representation that provides the significant opportunities as to the description of the complex shape geometry. the fundamental concept of the algorithm is to find the structural elements of three-dimensional model with usage of pre-specified patterns. the templates are described by means of matrices. on the basis of the patterns, such elements as holes, slots, chamfers, etc. are described.



step 2. automatic separation of the drawing per the views. the algorithm operates for the drawings, consisting of three views: front view, top view and view from the left. in this case, the location of the drawing primitives in reference to horizontally and vertically moving straight lines shall be checked. for example, the process of the drawing separation into the main view and the view from the left is finished when there are the



step 5. definition and construction of reconstructed object model faces. the face is constructed on the basis of the closed loop of primitives, belonging to the same plane. the closed loop must consist of as low as practicable number of primitives.



step. 6. definition and construction of structural components of the model on the basis of patterns. each typical element can be determined on the basis of the adjacency of three-dimensional primitives(segments of straight lines, circles and arcs), extracted from the drawing. we will assume the primitives that have the common vertex as incidence ones.



