in this note we present some ideas on the use of algebraic topology finalized to the understanding of mathematical structures modeling concurrency, finitary coherent domains and event structures. these ideas are part of a larger investigation of the finite labelling problem for event structures. the purpose of the note is to show how many natural geometrical questions arise from this working context.



of the restriction to an antichain of the graph of an event structure of degree 2. we develop this idea for event structures of higher degree an discover a family of graphs that are avoided on antichains. these graphs have a geometrical flavor as they are iteratively constructed by cones and suspensions. this is among the reasons to move from a graph theoretic perspective and to consider instead the clique complex of the graph of an event structure. for degree 3, we show that one dimensional spheres, that is cycles, cannot occur on antichains, unless they are boundaries. this lead to an explicit computation of the homology groups(of antichains of event structure of degree 3) that are shown to be trivial in all the dimension greater than zero.



the usual definition of event structures already suggests these are sort of ordered simplicial complexes. the collection of results we present here might be thought as witnessing the value of such an elementary connection between topology and concurrency. yet, in our knowledge, we lack a comprehensive clarification of how this approach, grounded on the notion of ordered simplicial complex, compares to other topological analysis of concurrent computation[6,5]. this might be the object of future researches.



the note is structured as follows. we present in the first section the background for our remarks. this comprises domains and event structures, elements from trace theory, and the nice labelling problem. the reader shall find the definition of the graph of an event structure and the reasons that induce us to study these graphs with fixed clique number. in the second section we shall exhibit some graphs that are avoided on antichains of this class of graphs. in the third section we use the previous considerations to determine the homology groups of the clique complexes of graphs with clique number 3. in the final section we formally define the homology of an event structure, and sketch some conjectures and directions for future researches.



this diagram is asserting two implications. the implication from left to right is read as follows: if qac= qca and qabc= qacb= qcab= qcba, then qab= qba, qbc= qcb, and qbac= qbca. we leave the reader to make explicit the implication from right to left. we say that r is coherent if and only if the implication be more interesting. however, it is a trivial observation that every graph can be realized as the concurrency graph of some event structure. on the other hand, not every graph is of the form g(e): many are the constraints on=, for example minimal elements form a clique w.r.t.=. again, motived by nice labelling problem, it can be shown that some well known graphs with clique number 3 and increasing coloring number do not occur as subgraphs of some graph of the form g(e).



