nevertheless, as the example of on-line banking illustrates, there often occur situations in which secret data need to be transmitted via protected channels between trustworthy communication partners, and moreover the critical data must not become disclosed to a third party. the running example of this paper will be concerned with access keys to a private network, e.g. the intranet of some banking institute. obviously, in this scenario, it is important that such access keys do not become publicly available.



taking a more abstract point of view, given an arbitrary state of a system, then part of of this state is open to public access(while at the same time other parts are still secret). in the process calculus world, the open part corresponds to the free names of a process. in graph transformations systems using the borrowed context approach, the open part is singled out by a sub-graph of the graph which models the whole system state.



so far we have not elaborated on the concept of graph we have actually used in this encoding. as a starting point, we will work with suitably labelled graphs.to emphasize that the set of public nodes is actually a fully fledged sub-graph of the graph which represents the whole process, we will later use marked graphs instead; the latter are pairs of a graph an a marked sub-graph(see definition 3.2). the use of marked graphs is motivated by the fact that the notion of sub-graph allows for a straightforward categorical generalization, viz. sub-object, whereas this is not the case for labels. in the end, marking of objects might be thought of as an abstract labelling mechanism.



having introduced the protected links calculus to motivate the notion of marked graph, we now set out to lift the latter notion to an abstract level, namely the so-called categories of reflected monos. this is followed by suggestions for the description of secrecy related concepts using category theoretical language. finally we discuss possibilities to verify secrecy properties on this abstract level.



thus we have laid the foundations for discussing the notions of secret and secrecy on an abstract level. to illustrate the idea, we turn back to example 2.4, and the discussion of secrecy holes in systems that are modelled using the pl-calculus.



based on the recently proposed reflected monos-construction of, we have discussed possibilities for abstract, formal counterparts of secrecy related notions, that allow to reason about secret keeping in systems that are faithfully modelled by transformation systems in categories of reflected monos. to ensure that transformation systems in categories of reflected monos can be given in terms of double pushout rewriting, we have established that the reflected monos construction preserves weak adhesivity in the sense of. finally, we have sketched how the results of the latter work might eventually lead to automatic verification of secrecy properties, working on the abstract level of weakly adhesive categories.



