specification patterns are a repository with the intent of collecting patterns that commonly occur in the property specification of concurrent and reactive systems. a specification pattern has a scope that defines the range in which the pattern must hold. by recasting the notion of scope in our context, five basic kinds of scopes are distinguished: global(the entire program execution), before(the execution up to a given message), after(the execution after a given message), between(any part of the execution from one given message to another one) and after-until(like between but the designated part of the execution continues even if the second message does not occur).



one way to classify the patterns is based on the kinds of system behaviors they describe. a first classification splits the patterns into two main categories: occurrence patterns and order patterns. occurrence patterns are further partitioned in absence, universality, existence, and bounded existence. order patterns are further partitioned in precedence, response, chain precedence, and chain response. for the sake of readability we do not go through a detailed description of the classification but we refer to for it.



features) or trying to find an already existent elegant solution(i.e., a pattern). by a series of interactive images, specific text, field and structured dialog boxes, a set of specific sentences are arranged in a dialog window tree and a set of window paths can be identified from the root to each leaf. dynamically, according to user decisions, a path is generated and the unique desired psc scenario is produced.



the approach described in[8,10] is able to translate ocl specifications into natural language by a multilingual syntax-directed editor. even though foundations and design principles might be inherited, in a contrary manner from our approach, they guide the user to transit in the opposite way. in other words, once formal ocl specifications have been produced, they can be translated into natural language descriptions that can be understood by people who do not know ocl.



