the meta modeling approach to syntax definition of visual modeling techniques has gained wide acceptance, especially by using it for the definition of uml. since meta-modeling is non-constructive, it does not provide a systematic way to generate all possible meta model instances. in our approach, an instance-generating graph grammar is automatically created from a given meta model. this graph grammar ensures correct typing and cardinality constraints, but ocl constraints for the meta model are not supported yet. to satisfy also the given ocl constraints, well-formedness checks have to be done in addition. we present a restricted form of ocl constraints that can be translated to graph constraints which can be checked during the instance generation process.



we first introduce meta models with ocl constraints in section 2. section 3 presents the main concepts for automatic generation of instances from meta models using the graph grammar approach. the generation process is illustrated at a simplified statechart meta model. we use graph transformation with node type inheritance as underlying approach. in section 4 we explain how restricted ocl constraints can be translated into graph constraints. we conclude by a discussion of related and future work.



visual languages such as the uml are commonly defined using a meta modeling approach. in this approach, a visual language is defined using a meta model to describe the abstract syntax of the language. a meta model can be considered as a class diagram on the meta level, i. e. it contains meta classes, meta associations and cardinality constraints. further features include special kinds of associations such as aggregation, composition and inheritance as well as abstract meta classes which cannot be instantiated.



first, we will get a create rule for each non-abstract class within the meta model, allowing us to create an arbitrary number of instances of all non-abstract classes. the rules of layer 1 are applied arbitrarily often, meaning that layer 1 does not terminate and has to be interrupted by user interaction or after a random time period. for the sample meta model we get the rules createstatemachine, createcompositestate, createsimplestate, createfinalstate, createinitialstate, createtransition, createevent, and createaction in layer 1.



graph constraints are properties on graphs which have to be fulfilled. they are used to express contextual conditions like the existence or non-existence of certain nodes and edges or certain subgraphs in a given graph. application conditions for rules were first introduced in. they restrict the capability of rules, e.g. a rule can be applied if certain nodes and edges or certain subgraphs in the given graph exist or do not exist.



definition 4.2[complex navigation expressions] atomic navigation expressions are complex navigation expressions. given complex navigation expressions a, b and c, expressions not(a), a and b, a or b, a implies b, and if a then b else c are complex navigation expressions.



