the principle of open science has been used to build many of the current chemoinformatics applications and developments, including teaching aids and research tools. undoubtedly, the democratization of science would increase global connections between research teams and students of all academic levels. it would be easier to make connections between various geographical zones when you are aware of the study that has been done in various worldwide places. to this goal, in 2018 we presented a viewpoint on chemical informatics from a latin american group.



putational studies beyond chemoinformatics e.g., tools associated with pharmacoinformatics in general, molecular dynamics, and biophysics. within chemoinformatics, the web servers and tools are mostly tuned for drug discovery and development of lead candidates but also can be used for other research areas, as discussed in section 2.1.



quest the macroscopic pka of compounds, but rather the pka of various microstates to predict the experimental observable and hence the predictive techniques based on in machine learning approaches did not participate due to the impossibility of having experimental values of microstates. in fact, the submissions received were all from the physical category based on first-principles methods, even though some of these submissions did the conformational analysis using the open chemoinformatics tool such as open babel. interestingly, the participation of latin american groups obtained excellent performances, among which was obtained the second best-ranked submission.



versity research hotbeds with groups are already well established. in any case, face-to-face(or hybrid) meetings that are also beneficial can be conducted and financed through collaborations within latin america. these interactions lead us to the generation of conglomerates that can develop multi-center projects in the latin american region.



this will favor the interests of financing agencies(public or private) in financing collaborative projects. the above, together with the advantages of online and live conferences and webinars, make it increasingly easier to hold meetings or conferences that have the advantage of saving time and reducing the cost of organization and attendance. it is also beneficial to have the continued convenience of being involved in editorial boards of peer-reviewed publications. currently, several latin americans are taking an active part in the editorial boards of journals such as the journal of chemoinformatics, journal of chemical information and modeling, elife, to name a few examples. also, a current trend of some scientific publishers is to include early career researchers in the review board, e.g., protein science, which opens opportunities for scientists in latin america to take part in editorial boards where our representation is underrepresented.



