a lot of research has been done on task computation and resource allocation in ec today, aiming to formulate the computational problem as an optimization model to minimize objectives such as total delay, total energy consumption, and total cost[11,12]. however, most of them consider one optimization objective, explore the optimal solution in a one-dimensional decision space, or consider multiple objectives but weigh them to reduce the dimensionality, but this way of weighting with subjective preferences may lead to errors in the results. in the actual task computation process, in the face of different user requirements, it is necessary to comprehensively consider the trade-offs between multiple objectives.



the rest of the paper is organized as follows. in section 2, related work is presented. in section 3, the i-maowmue model is constructed. in section 4, mi-maoea is proposed to solve the i-maowmue model. in section 5, simulation experiments are performed and the results are summarised and analyzed. in section 6, the paper is summarised and conclusions are drawn.



in this paper, we consider a computational migration scenario where the user location changes, in which multiple mds are located in the overlapping region of multiple bss. when there is a user location change, the unexecuted tasks need to be migrated to multiple servers within the coverage area based on the system state. in addition, this paper considers the dependent task computation problem in uncertain environments, such as network bandwidth and server computing power, and models it as the i-maowmue model to optimize the four objectives of migration delay, maximum completion time, energy consumption, and load balancing. meanwhile, a real-time priority scheduling strategy is formulated for workflow characteristics to achieve reasonable resource allocation and fast task response. to solve the i-maowmue model, mi-maoea is designed in this paper, which solves the uncertainty-troubling problem and ensures the convergence and diversity of the solution.



