





Editorial
Array 9 (2021) 100054







When I was asked in 2018 to take over the editorship of a new gold open access multidisciplinary journal covering the entire field of Com- puter Science, I accepted with enthusiasm. We started by dividing the field into subfields and building a strong and diverse editorial board. The inaugural volume appeared in April 2019. As of today, we have published 44 papers in 8 volumes, and Array is now indexed in the Directory of Open Access Journals. As my other professional activities, including the responsibility of another journal, demand more time, it is my pleasure to announce that Professor Jianxin Li, a well-known researcher in database systems and data mining, will replace me as the new Editor-in-Chief of Array from January 1st, 2021. I am confident that the journal will continue to grow and gain increasing recognition under Professor Li's guidance. I also wish to thank the publisher Catherine Carnovale, the managing editor Ashley Freeland, the Journal Manager Suganya S. Dorai, the publishing content specialist Jacqueline Zhou, the transfer manager Shaina Raza, and all the associate and area editors for their support, their dedication and their valuable contributions to the creation of this new journal.
Thierry Denoeux
As newly appointed Editor-in-Chief, I would like to follow the suc- cessful path that Array is on, and continuously strengthen the role of Array as a scientific forum for knowledge sharing and communication of both theoretical foundations and real-world applications in all computer science areas, particularly focusing on interdisciplinary research activ- ities. With the fast development of computer science and emerging de- mand of the information technology industry, it is timely to investigate the enabling technologies and address domain bottleneck issues by innovating cross-topic research. For instance, traditional structural health monitoring research heavily relies on sensor networks, machine learning, and deep learning. But nowadays, it is desirable for us to exploit the capability of artificial intelligence, big data, data science, and
knowledge discovery. As another application example, digital adver- tisement and online recommendation mix the usage of multiple topics, such as deep learning, computer vision, knowledge bases, intelligent computing, and cyber security. In order to train models over big and quickly evolving datasets, we may need to develop innovative method- ologies for integrating the powerful operability of hardware-based high- performance computing into the learning process. Therefore, Array will play an increasingly important role in disseminating these promising multi-disciplinary research results within the computer science commu- nity at large.
To reflect the growing diversity of the field, the Editorial Board has been formed by worldwide reputable scholars with their wide range of research expertise. The field of computer science has been divided into 11 subfields, including cybersecurity; wireless networks; pattern recognition, deep learning & machine learning; web intelligence, information systems & information retrieval; data mining & decision making; blockchain technologies and access control; data engineering & data science; Health & medical data analytics; software engineering, edge computing & IoT systems; uncertainty management and reasoning; and computer vision & image processing. Each subfield will be covered by two joint area editors. The role of the area editors will be crucial for maintaining the high scientific standard of the journal. The editorial board has also been extended to include a greater number of associate editors; whose role is to assist in the refereeing process of papers covering topics for which they are recognized experts. I hope that the readers of Array will continue to enjoy reading the journal, and I thank them in advance for continuing to submit their
valuable work to Array.
Jianxin Li Jianxin Li Thierry Denoeux





















https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2021.100054


2590-0056/© 2021 Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
