Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 58–73











Implementation of artificial intelligence in agriculture for optimisation of irrigation and application of pesticides and herbicides
Tanha Talaviya a, Dhara Shah a, Nivedita Patel b, Hiteshri Yagnik c, Manan Shah d,⁎
a Department of Computer Engineering, Indus University Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
b Department of Computer Engineering, Nirma University Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
c Gujarat Info Petro Limited (GIPL), Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India
d Department of Chemical Engineering School of Technology, Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India



a r t i c l e	i n f o 


Article history:
Received 25 August 2019
Received in revised form 10 April 2020
Accepted 11 April 2020
Available online 22 April 2020


Keywords:
Artificial intelligence Herbicide
Pesticide Automation Irrigation
a b s t r a c t 

Agriculture plays a significant role in the economic sector. The automation in agriculture is the main concern and the emerging subject across the world. The population is increasing tremendously and with this increase the de- mand of food and employment is also increasing. The traditional methods which were used by the farmers, were not sufficient enough to fulfill these requirements. Thus, new automated methods were introduced. These new methods satisfied the food requirements and also provided employment opportunities to billions of people. Ar- tificial Intelligence in agriculture has brought an agriculture revolution. This technology has protected the crop yield from various factors like the climate changes, population growth, employment issues and the food security problems. This main concern of this paper is to audit the various applications of Artificial intelligence in agricul- ture such as for irrigation, weeding, spraying with the help of sensors and other means embedded in robots and drones. These technologies saves the excess use of water, pesticides, herbicides, maintains the fertility of the soil, also helps in the efficient use of man power and elevate the productivity and improve the quality. This paper sur- veys the work of many researchers to get a brief overview about the current implementation of automation in agriculture, the weeding systems through the robots and drones. The various soil water sensing methods are discussed along with two automated weeding techniques. The implementation of drones is discussed, the various methods used by drones for spraying and crop-monitoring is also discussed in this paper.
© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).




Contents
Introduction	59
Impact of AI on agriculture	59
Image recognition and perception	60
Skills and workforce	60
Maximize the output	60
Chatbots for farmers	60
Robots in agriculture	60
Irrigation	60
Dielectric method	61
Neutron moderation	61
Weeding	62
Chemical based	63
Pulse high voltage discharge method	64
Drones in agriculture	64
Crop spraying	64
Hydraulic energy sprayer	65
Gaseous energy sprayer	66
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: manan.shah@spt.pdpu.ac.in (M. Shah).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2020.04.002
2589-7217/© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Centrifugal energy sprayer	66
Kinetic energy sprayer	66
Crop monitoring	66
Yield mapping and monitoring	67
Programming of the software	68
Yield calculation and calibration	68
Processing yield maps	69
Challenges and future scope	69
Conclusion	70
Authors contribution	70
Acknowledgment	70
References	70





Introduction

The world's population is assumed to be nearly 10 billion by 2050, boosting agricultural order-in a situation of humble financial devel- opment by somewhere in the range of 50% contrasted with 2013 (FAO, 2017). At present, about 37.7% of total land surface is used for crop production. From employment generation to contribution to National Income, agriculture is important. It is contributing a sig- nificant portion in the economic prosperity of the developed nations and is playing an active part in the economy of the developing coun- tries as well. The augmentation of agriculture has resulted in a signif- icant increase in the per-capita income of the rural community. Thus, placing a greater emphasis on agricultural sector will be rational and apposite. For countries, like India, the agricultural sector accounts for 18% of GDP and provides employment to 50% of the country's work- force. Development in the agricultural sector will boost the rural de- velopment, further leading toward rural transformation and eventually resulting in the structural transformation (Mogili and Deepak, 2018; Shah et al., 2019).
With the advent of technology, there has been observed a dramatic transformation in many of the industries across the globe (Kakkad et al., 2019). Surprisingly, agriculture, though being the least digitized, has seen momentum for the development and commercialization of ag- ricultural technologies. Artificial Intelligence (AI) has begun to play a major role in daily lives, extending our perceptions and ability to modify the environment around us (Kundalia et al., 2020; Gandhi et al., 2020; Ahir et al., 2020). Plessen (2019) gave a method for harvest planning based on the coupling of crop assignment with vehicle routing is pre- sented. With this emerging technologies the workforce which were re- stricted to only a minimal industrial sectors are now contributing to numerous sectors. AI is based on the vast domains like Biology, Linguis- tics, Computer Science, Mathematics, Psychology and engineering. Jha et al. (2019) a brief overview of the current implementation of agricul- tural automation. The paper also addresses a proposed system for flower and leaf identification and watering using IOT to be implemented in the botanical farm (Patel et al., 2020; Albaji et al., 2010). The basic concept of AI to develop a technology which functions like a human brain (Parekh et al., 2020; Jani et al., 2019) This technology is perpe- trated by studying how human brain thinks, how humans learn, make decisions, and work while solving a problem, and on this ground intel- ligent software and systems are developed. These softwares are fed with training data and further these intelligent devices provide us with desired output for every valid input, just like the human brain. Vast domains including Machine Learning and Deep learning are core part of AI (Patel et al., 2020a, 2020b; Pandya et al., 2019; Sukhadia et al., 2020). While AI is the science of making intelligent machines and programs, ML is the ability to learn something without being explic- itly programmed and DL is the learning of deep neural networks (Kodali and Sahu, 2016; Kulkarni and Deshmukh, 2013). The main subjective of AI is to make problem solving facile which may include the use of ANN (Shah et al., 2020a, 2020b).




ANN is a processing algorithm or a hardware whose functioning is inspired by the design and functioning of a human brain (Shah et al., 2020a, 2020b). Neural networks have a remarkable ability of self- organization, and adaptive learning. It has replaced many traditional methods in numerous fields like Computer Science, Mathematics, Phys- ics, Engineering image/signal processing, Economic/ Finance, Philoso- phy, Linguistics, Neurology. ANN undergoes the process of learning. Learning is the process of adapting the change in itself as and when there is a change in environment. There are two learning techniques, su- pervised learning and unsupervised learning. The work of Jha et al., 2019, encloses the connected relations between the various embedded systems and the AI technology coherent with the agricultural field, it gave a brief about the various applications of neural networks, ML in this sector for precision farming (Yang et al., 2007).
AI is an emerging technology in the field of agriculture. AI-based equipment and machines, has taken today's agriculture system to a dif- ferent level. This technology has enhanced crop production and im- proved real-time monitoring, harvesting, processing and marketing (Yanh et al., 2007). The latest technologies of automated systems using agricultural robots and drones have made a tremendous contribu- tion in the agro-based sector. Various hi-tech computer based systems are designed to determine various important parameters like weed de- tection, yield detection and crop quality and many other techniques (Liakos et al., 2018). This paper encompasses the technologies used for the automated irrigation, weeding and spraying to enhance the produc- tivity and reduce the work load on the farmers. Various automated soil sensing techniques are discussed (Wall and King, 2004). Hemalatha and Sujatha (2015) brought together temperature and moisture sensors to close the loop holes of the vehicle predictions. The robots used in sens- ing were localized by GPS modules and the location of these robots was tracked using the google maps. The data from the robots was fetched through Zigbee wireless protocol. The readings were displayed on the 16 × 2 LCD display which was integrated to the LPC2148 microcontrol- ler. The latest automated weeding techniques are discussed and the im- plementation of drones for the purpose of spraying in the fields is discussed followed by the types of sprayers utilized on UAVs. Further speaking about drones, yield mapping and monitoring is discussed be- ginning with the an outline of the yield mapping processs followed by the programming of the software and briefing about the calculation as well as calibration process. Finally the processing of these yield maps is illuminated.

Impact of AI on agriculture

The technologies which are AI-based help to improve efficiency in all the fields and also manage the challenges faced by various industries in- cluding the various fields in the agricultural sector like the crop yield, ir- rigation, soil content sensing, crop- monitoring, weeding, crop establishment (Kim et al., 2008). Agricultural robots are built in order to deliver high valued application of AI in the mentioned sector. With the global population soaring, the agricultural sector is facing a crisis,



but AI has the potential to deliver much-needed solution. AI- based technological solutions has enabled the farmers to produce more output with less input and even improved the quality of output, also ensuring faster go-to- market for the yielded crops. By 2020, farmers will be using 75 million connected devices. By 2050, the average farm is ex- pected to generate an average of 4.1 million data pointsevery day. The various ways in which AI has contributed in the agricultural sector are as follows:

Image recognition and perception

Lee et al. (2017) said that in recent years, an increasing interest has been seen in autonomous UAVs and their applications including recog- nition and surveillance, human body detection and geolocalization, search and rescue, forest fire detection (Bhaskaranand and Gibson, 2011; Doherty and Rudol, 2007; Tomic et al., 2012; Merino et al., 2006). Because of their versatility as well as amazing imaging technol- ogy which covers from delivery to photography, the ability to be piloted with a remote controller and the devices being dexterous in air which enables us to do a lot with these devices, drones or UAVs are becoming increasingly popular to reach great heights and distances and carrying out several applications.

Skills and workforce

Panpatte (2018) said that artificial intelligence makes it possible for farmers to assemble large amount of data from government as well as public websites, analyze all of it and provide farmers with solutions to many ambiguous issues as well as it provides us with a smarter way of irrigation which results in higher yield to the farmers. Due to artificial intelligence, farming will be found to be a mix of technological as well as biological skills in the near future which will not only serve as a better outcome in the matter of quality for all the farmers but also minimize their losses and workloads. UN states that, by 2050, 2/3rd of world's population will be living in urban areas which arises a need to lessen the burden on the farmers. AI in agriculture can be applied which would automate several processes, reduce risks and provide farmers with a comparatively easy and efficient farming.

Maximize the output

Ferguson et al. (1991) said in his wok that Variety selection and seed quality set the maximum performance level for all plants. The emerging technologies have helped the best selection of the crops and even have improved the selection of hybrid seed choices which are best suited for farmer's needs. It has implemented by understanding how the seeds react to various weather conditions, different soil types. By collecting this information, the chances of plant diseases are reduced. Now we are able to meet the market trends, yearly outcomes, consumer needs, thus farmers are efficiently able to maximize the return on crops.

Chatbots for farmers

Chatbots are nothing but the conversational virtual assistants who automate interactions with end users. Artificial intelligence powered chatbots, along with machine learning techniques has enabled us to un- derstand natural language and interact with users in away more person- alized way. They are mainly equipped for retail, travel, media, and agriculture has used this facility by assisting the farmers to receive an- swers to their unanswered questions, for giving advice to them and pro- viding various recommendations also.

Robots in agriculture

Robotics and Autonomous Systems (RAS) are introduced in large sectors of the economy with relatively low productivity such as Agri-
Food. According to UK-RAS White papers (2018) the UK Agri-Food chain, from primary farming through to retail, generates over £108bn p.a., and with 3.7 m employees in a truly international industry yielding
£20bn of exports in 2016. Robotics has played a substantial role in the agricultural production and management. The researchers have now started emphasizing on technologies to design autonomous agricultural tools as the conventional farming machineries lacked in efficiency (Dursun and Ozden, 2011). The main purpose of coming up with this technology is to replace human labor and produce effective benefits on small as well as large scale productions (Manivannan and Priyadharshini, 2016). In this sector, the room for robotic technologies has amplified productivity immensely (Pedersen et al., 2008). The ro- bots are performing various agricultural operations autonomously such as weeding, irrigation, guarding the farms for delivering effective reports, ensuring that the adverse environmental conditions do not af- fect the production, increase precision, and manage individual plants in various unfamiliar ways.
The idea of coming up with such a technology came with the intro- duction of a machine called Eli Whitney's cotton gin. It was invented in 1794 by U.S. - born inventor Eli Whitney (1765–1825), a device which revolutionized cotton production by significantly accelerating the pro- cess of extracting seed from cotton fiber.It created 50 pounds of cotton in one day. Thus this gave birth to the autonomous agricultural robots. A basic automated model was introduced to determine the actual posi- tion of seeds (Griepentrog et al., 2005). Ultra high precision placement of seed was also established. Mechanisms that ensure that the seeds planted has zero ground velocity (Griepentrog et al., 2005). This is im- portant as it ensures that the seed does not bounce from its actual posi- tion after the soil impact. The status or the development of plant was recorded by automated machines. Various biosensors were established to monitor the plant growth and also to detect plant diseases (Tothill, 2001).The process of manual weeding was replaced by the laser weeding technology, where a mobile focused infra-red light disrupts the cells of the weeds, this beam was controlled by computers (Griepentrog et al., 2006). For the effective use of water, automated irri- gation systems were also established.

Irrigation

The agriculture sector consumes 85% of the available freshwater re- sources across the world. And this percentage is increasing rapidly with the population growth and with the increase in food demand. This leaves us with the need to come up with more efficient technologies in order to ensure proper use of water resources in irrigation. The man- ual irrigation which was based on soil water measurement was replaced by automatic irrigation scheduling techniques. The plant evapotranspi- ration which was dependent on various atmospheric parameters such as humidity, the wind speed, solar radiations and even the crop factors such as the stage of growth, plant density, the soil properties, and pest was taken into consideration while implementing autonomous irriga- tion machines.
Kumar (2014) discusses about the different irrigation methods with the primary motive of developing a system with reduced resource usage and increased efficiency. Devices like fertility meter and PH meter are set up on the field to determine the fertility of the soil by detecting the percentage of the primary ingredients of the soil like potassium, phosphorous, nitrogen. Automatic plant irrigators are planted on the field through wireless technology for drip irrigation. This method en- sures the fertility of the soil and ensures the effective use of water resource.
The technology of smart irrigation is developed to increase the pro- duction without the involvement of large number of man power by de- tecting the level of water, temperature of the soil, nutrient content and weather forecasting. The actuation is performed according to the micro- controller by turning ON/OF the irrigator pump. The M2M that is, Ma- chine to Machine technology is been developed to ease the



communication and data sharing among each other and to the server or the cloud through the main network between all the nodes of the agri- cultural field (Shekhar et al., 2017). They (2017) developed an auto- mated robotic model for the detection of the moisture content and temperature of the Arduino and Raspberry pi3. The data is sensed at regular intervals and is sent to the microcontroller of Arduino (which has an edge level hardware connected to it), it further converts the input analog to digital. The signal is sent to the Raspberry pi3 (embed- ded with KNN algorithm) and it sends the signal to Arduino to start the water source for irrigation. The water will be supplied by the re- source according to the requirement and it will also update and store the sensor values. Jha et al. (2019) also developed an automated irriga- tion system with the technology of Arduino for reducing the man power and time consumption in the process of irrigation.
Savitha and UmaMaheshwari (2018) also developed the idea of effi- cient and automated irrigation system by developing remote sensors using the technology of Arduino which can increase the production up to 40%.
Another system for automated irrigation was given by Varatharajalu and Ramprabu (2018). In this approach different sensors were built for different purposes like the soil moisture sensor to detect the moisture content in the soil, the temperature sensor to detect the temperature, the pressure regulator sensor to maintain pressure and the molecular sensor for better crop growth. The installation of digital cameras. The output of all these devices is converted to digital signal and it is sent to the multiplexer through wireless network such as Zigbee and hotspot.
The first technique was the subsurface drip irrigation process, which minimized the amount of water loss due to evaporation and runoff as it is directly buried beneath the crop. Later researchers came with differ- ent sensors which were used to detect the need of water supply to the fields as soil moisture sensor and rain drop sensor, which were instructed through wireless broadband network and powered by solar panels. The rain drop sensor and soil moisture sensor informs the farmer about the moisture content in the soil through SMS in their cell phone using GSM module. Accordingly the farmer can give commands using SMS to ON and OFF the water supply. Thus we can consider that this system will detect part or area in the fields which required more water and could hold off the farmer from watering when it's raining.
Soil moisture sensors use one of the several technologies used to measure the soil moisture content. It is buried near the root zones of the crops (Dukes et al., 2009). The sensors help in accurately determin- ing the moisture level and transmit this reading to the controller for ir- rigation. Soil moisture sensors also help in significantly conserving water (Quails et al., 2001). One technique of moisture sensors is the water on demand irrigation in which we set the threshold according to the soil's field capacity and these sensors permits your controller to water only when required. When the scheduled time arrives, the sensor reads the moisture content or level for that particular zone, and watering will be allowed in that zone only if the moisture content is below the threshold. The other was the suspended cycle irrigation which requires irrigation duration unlike the water on demand irriga- tion. It requires the start time and the duration for each zone (Yong et al., 2018).

Dielectric method
The moisture in the soil is calculated by the sensors which basically evaluate the moisture content in the soil based on the dielectric con- stant (soil mass permittivity) of the soil. The amount of irrigation needed can also be determined on the basis of the dielectric constant (Gebregiorgis and Savage, 2006). Kuyper and Balendonck (2001) pro- poses an automated system that uses dielectric soil moisture sensors for real time irrigation control. The measurement method based on the dielectric properties is considered to be the most potential one (Zhen et al., 2010). Hanson et al. (2000) gave the information regarding how soil types affect the accuracy to dielectric moisture sensors. The
dielectric steady is only the capacity of soil to transfer power or electric- ity. The soil is comprised of various parts like minerals, air and water, subsequently the estimation of its dielectric consistent is determined by the general commitment of every one of these segments. Since the estimation of the dielectric value of water (Kaw = 81) is a lot bigger than the estimation of this consistent for the other soil parts, the esti- mated value of permittivity is primarily represented by the nearness of moisture in the soil. One method to calculate the relationship be- tween the dielectric constant (Kab) and volumetric soil moisture (VWC) is the equation of Topp et al.:

VWC = −5.3 × 10−2 + 2.29 × 10−2Kab−5.5 × 10−4Ka 2 + 4.3
× 10−6Ka 3	(1)

The other method used for determining the dielectric constant is the by the Time Domain Reflectometry (TDR). It is determined on the basis of the time taken by an electromagnetic wave to propagate along a transmission line that is surrounded by the soil. As we probably are aware, the propagation velocity (V) is an element of the dielectric con- stant (Kab), therefore it is legitimately corresponding to the square of the transmission time (t in a flash) down and back along the transmis- sion line:
Kab = (c/v)2 = ((ct)/(2L))2	(2)

where c is the speed of electromagnetic waves in a vacuum (3·108 m/s or 186,282 mile/s) and L is the length of the TL in the soil (in m or ft).

Neutron moderation
This is another technique for deciding the moisture content in the soil. In this strategy fast neutrons are launched out from a decomposing radio dynamic source like 241Am/9Be (Long and French, 1967) and when these neutrons slam into particles having a similar mass as theirs(protons, H+), they drastically slow down, making a “cloud” of “thermalized” neutrons. As we already know that water is the primary wellspring of hydrogen in soil, the thickness of thermalized neutrons around the test is about corresponding to the division of water present in the soil. The arrangement of the test is as a long and limited chamber, comprising of a source and a finder. The estimations are taken in this test by bringing the test into an entrance tube, which is as of now pre- sented in the soil. One can decide soil amount of moisture in the soil at various profundities by balancing the test in the cylinder at various profundities. The moisture substance is gotten with the assistance of this gadget dependent on a direct alignment between the check pace of thermalized neutrons read from the test, and the soil moisture sub- stance got from adjacent field tests.
The installation of sensors plays an important role in the efficient im- plementation of irrigation robotics. One can use a single sensor to con- trol the irrigation of multiple zones in the fields. And one can also set multiple sensors to irrigate individual zones. In the first case where one sensor is utilized for irrigating multiple zones, the sensor is places in the zone which is the driest of all or we can say the zone which re- quires maximum irrigation in order to ensure adequate irrigation in the whole field. The placement of the sensors should be in the root zone of the crops (ensuring that there are no air gaps around the sensor) from where the crops extract water. This will ensure the adequate sup- ply of water to the crops. Later, we need to connect the SMS controller with the sensor. The controller will control the working after the sensor responds. After making this connection the soil water threshold needs to be selected. Then water is applied to the area where the sensor is bur- ied and it is left as it is for a day. The water content now is the threshold for the sensor for scheduled irrigation as described earlier.
After fetching the data through the sensors the microcontrollers come into work. It is the major component of the entire automated irri- gation process. The whole circuit is supplied with power up to 5 V with the help of transformer, a bridge rectifier circuit (which is a part of



electronic power supplies which rectifies AC input to DC output) and voltage regulator. Then the microcontroller is programmed. The micro- controller receives the signals from the sensors. The OP-AMP acts as an interface between the sensors and the microcontroller for transferring the sensed soil conditions. The irrigator pumps thus operates on the in- formation of the soil properties at run time (Fig. 1).The irrigation pro- cess can therefore be automated with the help of moisture sensors and microcontrollers (Rajpal et al., 2011). (See Table 1.)

Weeding

Zimdahl (2010) in his report on “A History of Weed Science in the United States” stated about Thomas K. Pavlychenko, a pioneer weed ex- perimentalist, who did a study on the competition among plants. After his detailed research on the same, he came concluded that the competi- tion among the plants for water begins when their roots in the soil over- lap to absorb water and nutrients and weeds were the strongest competitors for water. The water requirement for the aerial parts of the plant is the number of pounds of water used to produce a pound of dry matter. The wild mustard plant (Brassica kaber var. pinnatifida) requires four times as much water as a well-developed oat plant, and the common ragweed plant (Ambrosia artemisiifol ia) requires three times as much water as a corn plant to reach maturity. One can calculate the water requirement per acre is determined by multiplying the pro- duction of the plant in pounds of dry matter per acre times the plant's water requirement. Light is also an essential component for the growth of the plants. Weeds which grow tall, generally blocks the way of light to the plants. Sometimes weeds like green foxtail and redroot pigweed are intolerant of shade but may times weeds like field bindweed, common milkweed spotted spuroe, and Arkansas rose are shade tolerant. Accord- ing to a study by researchers of the Indian Council for Agricultural Re- search, the country India, loses agricultural produce worth over $11 billion — more than the Centre's budgetary allocation for agriculture for 2017–18 annually due to weeds. So to remove these weeds from the fields is of great importance otherwise it will not only occupy the
land space but will also adversely affect the growth of other plants (Bak and Jakobsen, 2003).
Lie Tang et al. (2000) brought up a vision based weed detection tech- nology in natural lighting. It was created utilizing hereditary calculation distinguishing a locale in Hue-Saturation-Intensity (HSI) shading space (GAHSI) for open air field weed detecting. It utilizes outrageous condi- tions like radiant and shady and these lightning conditions were mosaicked to discover the likelihood of utilizing GAHSI to find the locale or zones in the field in shading space when these two boundaries are displayed at the same time. They came about given by the GAHSI gave proof to the presence and severability of such a locale. The GAHSI execu- tion was estimated by contrasting the GAHSI-portioned picture and a comparing hand sectioned reference picture. In this, the GAHSI achieved equivalent performance.
Before developing a weed control automated system we need to dif- ferentiate between the crop seedlings and the weeds (Bhagyalaxmi et al., 2016; Chang and Lin, 2018). A method was applied for recognition of carrot seedlings from those of ryegrass. Aitkenhead et al. (2003) im- plemented this method by the simple morphological characteristic measurement of leaf shape. This method has varying effectiveness mostly between 52 and 75% for discriminating between the plants and weeds, by determining the variation in size of the leaf. Another method for weeding was implemented using digital imaging. This idea involved a self-organizing neural network. But this method did not give appropri- ate results which were expected for commercial purposes, it was found that a NN based technology already existed which allows one to find the differences between species with an accuracy exceeding 75%.
In the contemporary world many automated systems are developed (See Table 2.) but earlier various physical methods were used which re- lied on the physical interaction with the weeds. Nørremark and Griepentrog (2004) proposed that weeding depends on the position and the number of weeds. Classical spring or duck foot tines were used to perform intra row weeding by breaking the soil and the inter- face of roots by tillage and thus promote the witling of the weeds. But this is not advisable method as tillage can destruct the interface




Fig. 1. (a) Soil Water Balance Components for Evapotranspiration Model Source: University of Minnesota (b) Flowchart for Evapotranspiration Reference (Jha et al., 2019) (c) FAO Penman- Monteith method.


Table 1
Summary of Irrigation Automation Using Various Artificial Intelligence Technologies.



between the crop and the soil. Thus, further no contact methods like the laser treatments (Heisel et al., 2001) and micro spraying, which do not affect the contact between the roots and the soil was developed. Nakai and Yamada (2014) explained the method of the use of agricultural ro- bots for the suppression of weeds and developing methods of control- ling the postures of robots in case of uneven fields in the rice cultivation. It used the method of Laser Range Fielder (LRF) for sup- pressing the weeds and controlling robot's posture. Åstrand and Baerveldt (2002) presented a robotic weed control system. The robot was embedded with different vision systems. One was the gray- level vision which was used in developing a row structure in order to guide the robot along the rows and the other vision was color-based which was most important and used to differentiate a single among the weeds. The row recognition system was developed with a novel algo- rithm with an accuracy of ±2 cm. The first trial of this system was im- plemented in a greenhouse for weed control within a row of crops. The same technology was mentioned in the research done by Fennimore et al. (2016). The vision based technologies which were used to guide the robots along the row structure to remove weeds and to differentiate the single crop among the weed plants. The various weeding systems are:

Chemical based
In this technology, the system consisted of 8 nozzles at the back which were used for spraying herbicides. The whole system divided
the images captured in 8 × 18 small rectangles or we can say blocks, each of these blocks covered an area of 8128 sq. mm. Later, each row which consisted of these blocks corresponding to number of nozzles was examined and processed one after the other. After examining the blocks, each box containing weeds are sprayed.
On can also divide the images into 16 × 40 blocks, in this case each blocks covers an area of approximately 8768 sq. mm. Thus, in this case we need 16 nozzles instead of 8. The further processing, that is, the task of spraying was done on the basis of the conditions mentioned. The conditions are:
1 If the block examined consisting of weed pixels exceeding 10% of the total area of the block, then it is categorized into a weed block.
2 All the blocks examined are sprayed with herbicides.
3 Then after these two conditions, the weeds whose area equal to or more than 30% is sprayed are supposed to be destroyed.
4 The herbicide which is sprayed in this method is a selective herbi- cide, which destroys only the weeds and not the other plants.

The first two conditions mentioned above defines the where the herbicides are to be sprayed, that is, defines the areas which requires spraying. The first condition mentioned reduces the areas which contains very small amount of weeds and which does not require spraying. This is an important part of weeding. To destroy weeds, all the parts of the weeds does not require



Table 2
Summary of applications of AI in weeding operations.




spraying, but only spraying enough areas is important as when spraying is done on one part of weeds it is absorbed by different parts of the weeds ultimately destroying the weeds. But one needs to take care that enough areas in a weed are sprayed be- cause if the sprayed areas are too small then, in that case the weeds may not destroy. Thus we define a minimum spraying area in the condition 3.The defined condition 4 is there to calculate the reduction in the amount of herbicides used as compared with the spraying in the overall area. The evaluation of this weeding method requires the calculation of the destroyed weed rate, the correct spray rate, the false spray rate and the herbicide reduction rate. The following data is to be calculated as follows:
Destroyed weed rate = (NK/NW) × 100 Correct spray rate = (NCSR/NSNWB) × 100 False spray rate = (NFSB/NSB) × 100
Herbicide reduction rate = (1−NSB/NB) × 100

Here NK is the number of weeds killed, NW is the total number of weeds in the block, NCSB is the number of sprayed weed blocks, NFSB is the number of sprayed non-weed blocks, NSB is the total number of sprayed blocks and NB is the total number of blocks examined.

Pulse high voltage discharge method
There is an increase in the desire to implement non-chemical weeding methods as the pressure to reduce chemical costs on the en- vironment and farming increases. The interest in organic farming has also led to the rise in interest of non-chemical weed management (Bond and Grundy, 2001). Non-chemical weed control methods were studied (Parish, 1990) and include mechanical, electrical, and biological methods. The pulse high voltage discharge method is one such non- chemical weed control method that was implemented mainly to destroy small weeds. These small weeds (of an approxi- mate size of about 5 cm tall and stem diameter of about 2 mm) can be destroyed with just one spark with energy of 153 mJ and a 15 kV. Whereas the large weeds (which vary in size from about 80 cm to 120 cm tall and a stem diameter of about 10–15 mm) can be destroyed with a charge of 20 Hz. Because of these spark charges, the stem and the roots of the weeds gets adversely affected, thus leading to a disruption in the transportation of waiter to the various parts of the weeds. Thus, the weeds wilt within a few days after the spark. In this weeding method, spark discharging devices are set up on the system in place of the nozzles in the previous chemical based method. Here the system is designed to apply spark only on the areas where weeds are detected. Once the sites having weeds are detected, the selection of weed points is done by the system for spark discharge, these weed points represent the weed areas. Like the above discussed chemical method, in this method also some con- ditions are defined. The conditions are as follows:
The average of all the coordinates of the pixels in the images is calcu- lated and it is defined as the center of that region.
The spark discharge applied for weeding is applied at this center.
If a weed receives the spark discharge, then that particular weed is considered as destroyed.

The first two conditions are established in order to select the spar discharging points in the fields and the third condition is for setting the potential of weed destruction. In this method some more factors are evaluated along with the three factors calculated in the previous method, the correct spark rate and the false spark rate.

Correct spark rate = (NCSK/NSK) × 100
False spark rate = (NFSK/NSK) × 100


Here NCSK is the number of sparked weed pixels, NFSK is the number of sparked non-weed pixels and NSK is the total number of sparked points.

Drones in agriculture

Unmanned aeronautical vehicles (UAVs) or unmanned ethereal frameworks (UAS), otherwise called automatons, in a mechanical set- ting are unmanned aircrafts that can be remotely controlled (Mogli and Deepak, 2018). They work in confluence with the GPS and others sensors mounted on them. Drones are being implemented in agriculture for crop health monitoring, irrigation equipment monitoring, weed identification, herd and wildlife monitoring, and disaster management (Veroustraete, 2015; Ahirwar et al., 2019; Natu and Kulkarni, 2016). Re- mote Sensing with the use of UAVs for image capturing, processing, and analysis is making a huge impact on agriculture. (Abdullahi et al., 2015). The rural business appears to have grasped ramble innovation with great enthusiasm, utilizing these propelled instruments to change cur- rent agricultural methods (Pederi and Cheporniuk, 2015). The complete addressable estimation of automation fueled arrangements in every sin- gle relevant industry is critical – more than USD 127 billion, as indicated by an ongoing PwC analysis. They can be contrasted with a normal sim- ple to use camera for unmistakable pictures, yet while a standard cam- era can give some data about plant development, inclusion and different things, a multispectral sensor extends the utility of the procedure and enables farmers to see things that can't be found in the noticeable range, for example, moisture content in the soil, plant health monitor- ing. These could help defeat the different restrictions that obstruct agrarian production. The development of the UAS is incorporated with Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN). The data recovered by the WSN en- ables the UAS to advance their utilization for instance to restrict its spraying of synthetic compounds to carefully assigned regions. Since there are abrupt and continuous changes in ecological conditions the control circle must almost certainly respond as fast as could reasonably be expected. The reconciliation with WSN can help toward that path (Costa et al., 2012). In precision agriculture, UAVs are mainly applicable for agriculture operations such as soil and field analysis (Primicerio et al., 2012), crop monitoring (Bendig et al., 2012), crop height estima- tions (Anthony et al., 2014), pesticide Spraying (Faiçal et al., 2017; Faiçal et al., 2014a, b, c; Huang et al., 2009). (See Table 4.) However, their hard- ware implementations (Maurya, 2015) are purely adherent on critical aspects like weight, range of flight, payload, configuration and their costs. A research involving technologies, methods, systems and limita- tions of UAVs are examined (Huang et al., 2013). About more than 250 models are analyzed as well as summarized in order to choose an appropriate UAV in agriculture (S.R. Kurkute et al., 2018) (See Table 3.). The agricultural drone market is expected to grow over 38% in coming years. It is believed that the need for efficient agriculture is only going to become more important due to increasing population levels and changing climate patterns (Puri et al., 2017).

Crop spraying

The UAVS, otherwise called drones, are chiefly established on the in- novations of sensors and microcontrollers which are grown especially with an expectation to make up for the nonattendance of the pilot and accordingly empower the trip of unmanned vehicles and their indepen- dent conduct (Spoorthi et al., 2017). These drones have been utilized as substance sprayers by farmers since numerous years now and they are considered as effective and of great importance in the situations of cloudy climate and has also solved the problem of inaccessibility to a field of tall crops, for example, maize (Sugiura et al., 2005; Simelli and Tsagaris, 2015). Additionally, they are likewise accepted to have a


Table 4
Summary of various applications of drones in agriculture.



solid favorable position contrasted with satellite airborne sensors of high picture resolution (Jannoura et al., 2015; Simelli and Tsagaris, 2015). Giles et al., 1987 retrofitted an air-carrier plantation sprayer with a microcomputer based sprayer control framework. A foliage vol- ume estimation framework, in view of ultrasonic range transducers was interfaced to a PC which controlled the 3-nozzle manifolds on each side of the sprayer by the utilization of control calculations depen- dent on the amount of spray deposited. Kale et al. (2015) utilized drones for spraying synthetic substances on the yield where the drones are joined to actualize a control circle for horticulture applications. These drones were implemented with sensors conveyed on the crops in the field known as remote sensor networks (WSN) which controlled the way toward applying the synthetic compounds. The data recovered by these remote sensors limited drones to spray the synthetic substances only into the assigned regions. Huang and Reddy (2015) built up a low volume sprayer for an unmanned helicopter. The helicopter utilized in this investigation has a principle rotor distance across of 3 m and a most extreme payload of 22.7 kg. For like 45 min one gallon of gas was involved. This technique and the systematic outcomes from this methodology gives a precursor that could be utilized in creating UAV flying application frameworks for higher yields which has a higher tar- get rate and bigger VMD droplet size.
Xue et al. (2016) built up an unmanned airborne vehicle based pro- grammed flying praying framework. The framework utilized a pro- foundly coordinated and ultra-low power MSP430 single-chip miniaturized scale PC with a free practical module. This permitted course was programmed to coordinate the UAV for spraying at the

Table 3
Classification of Drones for Agricultural Application.

UAV	ROTARY WINGS	FIXED WINGS


Flight duration	Fly upto 20 min	Fly up to an hour
required or the desired areas on the fields. The spray consistency for these UAV tests was better than the Standard Requirement for ultra- low volume spraying variety coefficient. Zhu et al. (2010) developed a PWM Precision Spraying Controller for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles. This paper shows another Pulse Width Modulation (PWM) controller for Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) accuracy sprayer for farming utiliz- ing a TL494 fixed-recurrence beat width modulator together with an in- formation obtaining board and created programming. A UAV can be remotely controlled or automated by pre-modified flight plans. There- fore to this examination, PWM controller develops as a high exactness system for the spraying applications. Zhang et al. (2015) assessed pow- erful swath width and bead circulation of aeronautical showering frameworks on M-18B and Thrush 510G planes. In this examination they assessed the powerful swath width and consistency of the droplet dispersion of two agrarian planes, M-18B and Thrush 510G, which flew at 5 m and 4 m tallness, individually. The consequence of this examina- tion expresses that the flight stature prompts the distinction in swath width for both the farming planes.
The sprayer is the one which crumbles the sprayed liquid which is
possibly a suspension, an emulsion or an answer into tiny drops and launch it with negligible power for circulating it appropriately (Nørremark et al., 2008). It is additionally in charge of the guideline of the measure of pesticide in order to maintain a strategic distance from extreme application. Intemperate use of pesticides may demonstrate in- efficient or harmful to the dirt too the yield. Likewise, the residue defi- nitions of pesticides are disseminated with the assistance of dusters. Based on vitality required to atomize and to toss out the shower liquid, sprayers are arranged into four categories namely: The hydraulic energy sprayer, the gaseous energy sprayer, the centrifugal energy sprayer and the kinetic energy sprayer (Fig. 2).

Hydraulic energy sprayer
In Hydraulic Energy Sprayer, the material to be sprayed is pressur-

Wind pressure	Can be flown from in winds
gusting from 20 to 50 mph
Fly in and out of the wind for satisfactory images
ized up to 40–1000 psi in any of the two potential ways. Either straight- forwardly by utilizing a positive uprooting siphon or by utilizing a

Flexibility in
changing direction
Allow new direction during
flight for re-direction
Allow new direction upload
during flight for re-direction
vacuum apparatus which will make the gaseous tension over the shower material noticeable all around tight holder. This pressurized ma-

Price range	$500 to $100,000	$500 to $100,000
terial is shot out through the splash spout. Here, the siphon supplies the

Deployable option
Highly deployable	Highly deployable
vitality which conveys the material to the plant foliage. Water driven Sprayers produce a splash with most beads in the 200–400 μm width




Fig. 2. Types of agricultural drones.
Source: modern agriculture drones (Unpaprom et al., 2018).


extend. As the beads framed are very little the structure a fog or haze which results in uniform inclusion and better contact with the bug or ill- ness. In spite of the fact that, if the beads are little, they will in general vanish immediately when the mugginess is low and probably won't ar- rive at the objective. A water driven sprayer contains the accompanying parts: tank, siphon with instigator, weight measure, controlling valve, help valve, control valves, funneling and spouts, control source and bol- ster outline.

Gaseous energy sprayer
In Gaseous Energy Sprayer a blower produces a high speed air stream. This air stream is coordinated through the pipe toward the fin- ish of which spray liquid will be available which will be permitted to be streamed by the activity of gravity through a diffuser plate. A fluid or residue is sustained into air stream to be conveyed to the objective.

Centrifugal energy sprayer
The Centrifugal Energy Sprayer consists of a fast turning devise, for example, level, a concave or a convex plate, a wire mesh cage or a bucket, a puncture strainer or chamber or a brush. At the focal point of this gadget, the shower liquid is nourished under low weight which is additionally atomized by diffusive power as it leaves the outskirts of the atomizer. The droplets are conveyed by the air stream created by the blower of the sprayer or by the common breeze, if the sprayer isn't furnished with a fan.

Kinetic energy sprayer
In Kinetic Energy Sprayer the spray liquid streams by gravity to a vi- brating or swaying spout which delivers a coarse fan like spray design. This is explicitly utilized for the spraying of herbicides.
The spray effectiveness of any of the above utilized showers can be determined by utilizing the equation given underneath:


Spray proficiency (%) = Minimum spray volume required × 100%

The plant foliage which is tainted by a pest or weed or any other rea- son has to be sprayed. The region which is required to be sprayed differs with separation between the lines of plants, separation between the plants in a similar line just as the development of the harvest. In addi- tion, it is important to complete sprayer alignment practice before
embraced real spraying work to guarantee uniform use of pesticides on the yields. We can process the spraying volume by utilizing the formula:


Application Rate in Liter per Acre or Hecter
= (Constant fig.495 or 600 British Matric
* Nozzle Discharge Rate in Liter every Minute)
/(Effective Swath Width in Feet or Meters
*Spraying speed in Mile or Kilometer every hour)

Pesticides are for the most part connected on the objective of the sprayed droplets which comprises of both, fine and coarse drops. They are characterized in term of their distance across and thickness on the objective. In fact, now and again the objective leaf area which is required to be secured might be a lot more prominent than the ground region. The Leaf Area Index (LAI) is the proportion of Leaf Area to Ground Area. LAI tents to shift with various yields and only from time to time surpasses around 6–7. Henceforth this is the reason behind per section of land requirement of water in a sprayer changing from harvest to yield contingent on the complete leaf territory to be secured. However nu- merous advances are being made in the sprayers which are to be uti- lized alongside the UAVs which give high inclusion also is effective spraying.

Crop monitoring

The advanced sensors and imaging capabilities have provided the farmers with many new ways to increase yields and reduce crop dam- age (See Table 5.). Unmanned airplanes which are used for practical purposes in recent years have taken a bizarre flight. New sensors mounted on UAV, with high-tech cameras being the eyes of the client on the ground and optimal procedures for survey, data acquisition and analysis are continuously developed and tested. As a matter of fact, the use of aerial surveys is not new to the agricultural world. Satellites have been used for a decade to inspect large croplands and forestry but a new level of precision and flexibility has been obtained with the use of UAVs. To carry out UAV flights, one does not need to depend on the position of the satellite or having the correct weather conditions and as UAV pictures are taken 400–500 ft. from the ground level, they result in better quality and provide precision.


Table 5
Summary of the literature of the weeding, soil moisture detection, spraying and crop yield monitoring.



ER Hunt et al. (2005) evaluated Digital Photography from Model Air- craft for Remote Sensing of Crop Biomass and Nitrogen Status. In their examination, they advanced an aerobatic model airplane for capturing images utilizing a buyer arranged computerized camera and the hued canvases were utilized to adjust the images. They watched huge con- trasts in computerized number (DN) for a similar reflectance and that was a result of contrasts in the introduction settings chosen by the ad- vanced camera. Further they utilized Normalized Green–Red Difference Index (NGRDI) and directly related it to the standardized contrast of the green and red reflectances, individually. The aftereffects of this investi- gation mirrored that for soybeans, horse feed and corn, dry biomass from zero to 120 g·m−2 was straightly corresponded to NGRDI, how- ever for biomass more noteworthy than 150 g·m−2 in corn and soy- bean, NGRDI did not increment further. Sun et al. (2010) demonstrated the achievability of utilizing a continuous kinematic (RTK) worldwide situating framework (GPS) to consequently delineate area of transplanted column crops. They utilized a positive-situation vegetable harvest transplanter retrofitted with a RTK GPS recipient, plant, tendency, and odometry sensors, and an on-board ongoing infor- mation lumberjack for transplant mapping in the field during planting. Field test outcomes demonstrated that the mean blunder between the plant map areas anticipated by the planting information and the over viewed areas in the wake of planting was 2 cm, with 95% of the antici- pated plant areas being inside 5.1 cm of their real areas. Sonaa et al. (2016) showed UAV multi spectral overview to guide soil and harvest for exactness cultivating applications. Multi spectral and multi temporal orthomosaics were delivered over a test field, which was a 100 m × 200 m plot inside a maize field, to delineate and soil files, just as yield statures, with reasonable ground goals.
A low cost multispectral imaging system was designed and devel- oped for application to crop monitoring (De Oca et al., 2018). It consists of a microcontroller along with two cameras embedded into the drone. One camera is sensitive to Infrared radiation while the other is a com- mon RGB camera. This system provides images and information which are used by a software to compute the NDVI and subsequently the health status of a crop.
Reinecke and Prinsloo (2017a, 2017b) studied the benefits of drones in agriculture, and their limitations, illustrating from examples how drones operate on farms. They discussed different features of deones and specifically how they assist farmers in maximizing their harvest by detecting problems early, and managing the crops by using specific cameras to detect pests and water shortages. (S. Nema et al., 2018) per- formed a detailed study on Spatial Crop Mapping and Accuracy Assess- ment Using Remote Sensing and GIS in Tawa Command. They did special crop mapping using satellite Landsat * data for Hoshangabad dis- trict of Madhya Pradesh and also carried out a Satellite data classifica- tion accuracy which resulted in overall accuracy as 87.60%.

Yield mapping and monitoring
One of the key segments of the unprecedenting progressions in ex- actness cultivating frameworks, yield mapping, enables the farmer to see spatial variety over the field perceiving zone for future activities and outcome of the past sessions, management. It alludes for the most part to the way toward gathering geo-referenced information on har- vest yield and qualities, for example, showing in-field fluctuation, and the soil moisture content of the yield giving a benchmarking apparatus, when the yield is being harvested. In combination with soil examining data, yield maps empowers the arrangement of variable compost



maps which considers soil supplement levels just as the supplement which was expelled in the collected harvest. Last result of yield mapping is typically a tonal or shaded guide showing scopes of yield inside a field. Fundamental segments of grain yield mapping framework incorporate grain fow sensor (determines grain volume gathered), grain moisture content sensor (remunerates for grain moisture variability), GPS an- tenna (receives satellite sign), Yield screen show with a GPS receiver (geo-reference and records information), header position sensor(distin- guishes estimations logged during turns), travel speed sensor (deter- mines the separation the join goes during a specific logging interim) (Fig. 3).

Programming of the software
For yield mapping, there are basically 5 errands which are to be managed; information procurement, information preparing, LCD displaying b contact screen info and information sparing. The details of each one of them can be alluded from the Fig. 4:
These 5 undertakings inside and out, structures in performing vari- ous tasks sometimes bring about clashes. Predominantly these conten- tions are identified with the time arrangement. To conquer these
contentions and to mull over every one of the undertakings we utilize four interfere with wellsprings of P80C592 in the framework, which are the clock intrude on source, the outer intrude on source, the ADC end-of-transformation intrude on source and the UART sequential I/O port intrude on source.

Yield calculation and calibration
Yield is characterized as harvest weight (lbs for cotton) or volume (bu for grains) reaped per unit region, which is in a roundabout way es- timated by the yield sensor stream rate/(speed x swath width). Yield stream rate is commonly determined each 1–2 s during collecting. The begin and end times for each line pass are balanced relying upon the measure of time the harvest takes to travel through sifting, isolating, and cleaning to the area of the yield sensor. The deferrals for beginning of-pass and end-of-pass will rely upon the yield and speed of the consol- idate. Scientific interjection systems have been utilized to expel com- motion because of blunders and regular spikes in the crude sensor and area information (Searcy et al., 1989; Birrell et al., 1996).
Yield is by implication estimated as a mass power or volume estima- tion by the yield sensors. Presently the yield count needs to join an




Fig. 3. Yield mapping devices - (a) diagram (b) (Plant et al., 2000) (c) yield mapping harvester equipped to do both tasks (Kormann et al., 1998).




Fig. 4. Yield Mapping (a) Sensing for yield (Source: Utah State University) and (b) example of raw yield map versus interpolated yield map using GIS (Source: Cillis et al., 2018).


adjustment factor because of the way that the yield figuring that changes over to weight relies upon the harvest. To acquire an exact yield information a legitimate sensor alignment is imperative. Contrast- ing the scale loads of four with five burdens with the determined yield decides an alignment bend. Yield sensors ought to be recalibrated as fac- tors change, for example, dampness substance or half breed. However, utilizing the Yield Sense screen evacuates the requirement for recalibra- tion after the underlying alignment toward the start of the period (Pre- cision Planting).

Processing yield maps
With the utilization of a Geographic Information System (GIS) pro- gramming, the yield determined at each field area can be shown. The raw log document, contains focuses which are recorded during turns and as the grain move through a consolidate is a deferred process (un- less ongoing amendment is connected), the sensor estimations neglect to compare to the careful gather areas. To dispense with these conspic- uous mistakes, the crude information is moved to make up for the join- ing delay. Increasingly finished, the focuses which compare to the header up position are evacuated. Settings for grain stream postpone- ment are join and some of the time even harvest explicit, yet run of the mill esteems for grain yields extend from around 10 to 12 s.
Typically a couple of focuses toward the start and toward the finish of a pass ought to be expelled too. These focuses are alluded to as begin and end-pass delays. Begin pass postponements happen when the grain stream has not balanced out in light of the fact that the lift is bit by bit topping off yet the consolidate begins gathering the yield. Thus, end-pass deferrals happen when the join moves out of the yield and grain stream progressively decreases to zero when the lift is totally exhausted. Moving of raw information to address for grain stream
postponement and exclusion of focuses that speak to header status up and begin and end-pass deferrals is the essential information separating method incorporated with programming provided with yield mapping frameworks.

Challenges and future scope

Agriculture has been tackling significant difficulties like absence of irrigation system, change in temperature, density of groundwater, food scarcity and wastage and substantially more. The fate of cultivating depends to a great extent on reception of various cognitive solutions. While large scale research is still in progress and some applications are already available in the market, the industry is still highly under- served (Shobila and Mood, 2014). When it comes to handling realistic challenges faced by farmers and using autonomous decision making and predictive solutions to solve them, farming is still at a nascent stage. In order to explore the enormous scope of AI in agriculture, appli- cations need to be more robust (Slaughter et al., 2008). Only then will it be able to handle frequent changes in external conditions, facilitate real- time decision making and make use of appropriate framework/platform for collecting contextual data in an efficient manner. Another important aspect is the exorbitant cost of different cognitive solutions available in the market for farming. The solutions need to become more affordable to ensure that the technology reaches the masses. An open source plat- form would make the solutions more affordable, resulting in rapid adoption and higher penetration among the farmers. The technology will be useful in helping farmers in high yielding and having a better seasonal crop at regular interval. Many countries, including India, the farmers are dependent on monsoon for their cultivation. They mainly depend on the predictions from various departments over the weather



conditions, especially for rain-fed cultivation. The AI technology will be useful to predict the weather and other conditions related to agriculture like land quality, groundwater, crop cycle, and pest attack, etc. The accu- rate projection or prediction with the help of the AI technology will re- duce most of the concerns of the farmers. AI-driven sensors are very useful to extract important data related to agriculture. The data will be useful in enhancing production. In agriculture, there is a huge scope for these sensors. Agriculture scientist can derive data like quality of the soil, weather and groundwater level, etc.; these will be useful to im- prove the cultivation process. AI empowered sensors can also be installed in the robotic harvesting equipment in order to get the data. It is speculated that AI-based advisories would be useful to increase pro- duction by 30%. The biggest challenge to farming is the crop damage due to any kind of disasters including the pest attack. Most of the time due to lack of the proper information farmers lose their crops. In this cyber age, the technology would be useful for the farmers to protect their cultiva- tion from any kind of attacks. AI-enabled image recognition will be use- ful in this direction. Many companies have implemented drones to monitor the production and to identify any kind of pest attacks. Such ac- tivities have been successful many times, which gives the inspiration to have a system to monitor and protect crops. A robotic lens zooms in on the yellow flower of a tomato seedling. Images of the plant flow into an artificial intelligence algorithm that predicts precisely how long it will take for the blossom to become a ripe tomato ready for picking, packing, and the produce section of a grocery store. The technology is being de- veloped and researched at NatureFresh Farms, a 20-year-old company growing vegetables on 185 acres between Ontario and Ohio. Knowing exactly how many tomatoes will be available to sell in the future makes the job of the sales team easier and directly benefits the bottom line, said Keith Bradley, IT Manager for NatureFresh Farms. It's only one example of AI transforming agriculture, an emerging trend that will help spur an agricultural revolution. From detecting pests to predicting what crops will deliver the best returns, artificial intelligence can help humanity confront one of its biggest challenges: feeding an additional 2 billion people by 2050, even as climate change disrupts growing sea- sons, turns arable land into deserts, and floods once-fertile deltas with seawater. The United Nations estimates we will need to increase food production 50% by the middle of the century. Agricultural production tripled between 1960 and 2015 as the world's population grew from 3 billion people to 7 billion. While technology played a role in the form of pesticides, fertilizers, and machines, much of the gains can be attrib- uted to simply plowing more land—cutting forests and diverting fresh water to fields, orchards, and rice paddies. We will have to be more re- sourceful this time around. AI is likely to transform agriculture and the market in the next few years. The technology has been useful for the farmers to understand various types of hybrid cultivations which would yield them more income within the limited time frame. The proper implementation of AI in agriculture will help the cultivation pro- cess and to create an ambiance for the market. As per the data with lead- ing institutions, there is a huge wastage of the food across the world and using the right algorithms, this problem can also be addressed which will not only save the time and money but it will lead to sustainable de- velopment. There are better prospects for digital transformation in agri- culture backed by leveraging technologies like AI. But, it all depends on the huge data which is quite difficult to gather because of the produc- tion process which happens once or twice in a year. However, the farmers cope up with changing scenario to bring digital transformation in the agriculture by implementing AI. It's only one example of AI transforming agriculture, an emerging trend that will help spur an agri- cultural revolution. We will have to be more resourceful this time around.

Conclusion

The agricultural industry faces various challenges such as lack of ef- fective irrigation systems, weeds, issues with plant monitoring due to
crop height and extreme weather conditions. But the performance can be increased with the aid of technology and thus these problems can be solved. It can be improved with different AI driven techniques like re- mote sensors for soil moisture content detection and automated irriga- tion with the help of GPS. The problem faced by farmers was that precision weeding techniques overcome the large amount of crops being lost during the weeding process. Not only do these autonomous robots improve efficiency, they also reduce the need for unnecessary pesticides and herbicides. Besides this, farmers can spray pesticides and herbicides effectively in their farms with the aid of drones, and plant monitoring is also no longer a burden. For starters, shortages of re- sources and jobs can be understood with the aid of man-made brain power in agribusiness issues. In conventional strategies huge amount of labor was required for getting crop characteristics like plant height, soil texture and content, in this manner manual testing occurred which was tedious. With the assistance of various systems examined, quick and non-damaging high throughput phenotyping would occur with the upside of adaptable and advantageous activity, on-request ac- cess to information and spatial goals.

Authors contribution

All the authors make substantial contribution in this manuscript. TT, DS NP HY and MS participated in drafting the manuscript. TT, DS, NP and HY wrote the main manuscript, all the authors discussed the results and implication on the manuscript at all stages.

Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to Department of Computer Engineering, Nirma University, Indus University, Gujarat Info Petro Limited (GIPL) and Department of Chemical Engineering, School of Technology, Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University for the permission to publish this research.

Availability of data and material

All relevant data and material are presented in the main paper.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influ- ence the work reported in this paper.

Funding

Not applicable.

Consent for publication

Not applicable.

Ethics approval and consent to participate

Not applicable.

References
Abdullahi, H.S., Mahieddine, F., Sheriff, R.E., 2015. Technology Impact on Agricultural Pro- ductivity: A Review of Precision Agriculture Using Unmanned Aerial Vehicles. Lecture Notes of the Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunica- tions Engineering, pp. 388–400.
Ahir, K., Govani, K., Gajera, R., Shah, M., 2020. Application on virtual reality for enhanced education learning, military training and sports. Augmented Human Research (2020) 5:7.
Ahirwar, S., Swarnkar, R., Bhukya, S., Namwade, G., 2019. Application of drone in agricul- ture. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. App. Sci. 8 (1), 2500–2505.



Aitkenhead, M.J., McDonald, A.J.S., Dawson, J.J., Couper, G., Smart, R.P., Billett, M., Hope, D., Palmer, S., 2003. A novel method for training neural networks for time-series predic- tion in environmental systems. Ecol. Model. 162 (1–2), 87–95.
Al-Ali, A.R., Qasaimeh, M., Al-Mardini, M., Radder, S., Zualkernan, I.A., 2015. ZigBee-based irrigation system for home gardens. 2015 International Conference on Communica- tions, Signal Processing, and Their Applications (ICCSPA’15). https://doi.org/ 10.1109/iccspa.2015.7081305.
Albaji, M., Shahnazari, A., Behzad, M., Naseri, A., BoroomandNasab, S., Golabi, M., 2010. Comparison of different irrigation methods based on the parametric evaluation ap- proach in Dosalegh plain: Iran. Agric. Water Manag. 97 (7), 1093–1098.
Anand, K., Jayakumar, C., Muthu, M., Amirneni, S., 2015. Automatic drip irrigation system using fuzzy logic and mobile technology. 2015 IEEE Technological Innovation in ICT for Agriculture and Rural Development (TIAR). https://doi.org/10.1109/ tiar.2015.7358531.
Anthony, D., Elbaum, S., Lorenz, A., Detweiler, C., 2014. On crop height estimation with UAVs. 2014 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems. https://doi.org/10.1109/iros.2014.6943245.
Arvind, G., Athira, V.G., Haripriya, H., Rani, R.A., Aravind, S., 2017. Automated irrigation with advanced seed germination and pest control. 2017 IEEE Technological Innova- tions in ICT for Agriculture and Rural Development (TIAR). https://doi.org/10.1109/ tiar.2017.8273687.
Åstrand, B., Baerveldt, A.-J., 2002. Auton. Robot. 13 (1), 21–35.
Bak, T., Jakobsen, H., 2003. Agricultural robotic platform with four wheel steering for weed detection. Biosyst. Eng. 87, 2125–2136.
Bakker, T., van Asselt, K., Bontsema, J., Müller, J., van Straten, G., 2006. An autonomous weeding robot for organic farming. Field and Service Robotics 579–590.
Bendig, J., Bolten, A., Bareth, G., 2012. INTRODUCING A LOW-COST MINI-UAV FOR THERMAL- AND MULTISPECTRAL-IMAGING. XXII ISPRS Congress 345–349.
Bhagyalaxmi, K., Jagtap, K.K, Nikam N.S., Nikam K.K, Sutar S.S., 2016. “Agricultural robot” (Ir- rigation system, weeding, monitoring of field, disease detection). International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer and Communication Engineering. 4(3), 4403–4409.
Bhaskaranand, M., Gibson, J.D., 2011. Low-complexity video encoding for UAV reconnais- sance and surveillance. Proc. IEEE Military Communications Conference (MILCOM),
pp. 1633–1638.
Birrell, S.J., Sudduth, K.A., Borgelt, S.C., 1996. Comparison of sensors and techniques for crop yield mapping. Comput. Electron. Agric. 14 (2-3), 215–233.
Blasco, J., Aleixos, N., Roger, J.M., Rabatel, G., Molto, E., 2002. Robotic weed control using machine vision. Biosyst. Eng. 83 (2), 149–157.
Bond, W., Grundy, A.C., 2001. Non-chemical weed management in organic farming sys- tems. Weed Res. 41 (5), 383–405.
Buchanan, R.A., 1989. Bush Regeneration: Recovering Australian Landscapes. The Open Training and Education Network, Redfern, pp. 242–246.
Chang, C.-L., Lin, K.-M., 2018. Smart agricultural machine with a computer vision-based weeding and variable-rate irrigation scheme. Robotics 7, 38. https://doi.org/ 10.3390/robotics7030038.
Choudhary, S., Gaurav, V., Singh, A., Agarwal, S., 2019. Autonomous crop irrigation system using artificial intelligence. International Journal of Engineering and Advanced Tech- nology. 8 (5S), 46–51.
Chung, S., Choi, M., Lee, K., Kim, Y., Hong, S., Li, M., 2016. Sensing Technologies for Grain Crop Yield Monitoring Systems: a review. Journal of Biosystems Engineering 2016 41 (4), 408–417.
Cillis, D., Pezzuolo, A., Marinello, F., Sartori, L., 2018. Field-scale electrical resistivity profil- ing mapping for delineating soil condition in a nitrate vulnerable zone. Appl. Soil Ecol. 123, 780–786.
Costa, F.G., Ueyama, J., Braun, T., Pessin, G., Osorio, F.S., Vargas, P.A., 2012. The use of un- manned aerial vehicles and wireless sensor network in agricultural applications. 2012 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium. https://doi. org/10.1109/igarss.2012.6352477.
De Oca, A.M., Arreola, L., Flores, A., Sanchez, J., Flores, G., 2018. Low-cost multispectral im- aging system for crop monitoring. 2018 International Conference on Unmanned Air- craft Systems (ICUAS). https://doi.org/10.1109/icuas.2018.8453426.
Dela Cruz, J.R., Baldovino, R.G., Bandala, A.A., Dadios, E.P., 2017. Water usage optimization of smart farm automated irrigation system using artificial neural network. 2017 5th International Conference on Information and Communication Technology (ICoIC7). https://doi.org/10.1109/icoict.2017.8074668.
Doherty, P., Rudol, P., 2007. A UAV Search and Rescue Scenario with Human Body Detec- tion and Geolocalization. In: Orgun, M.A., Thornton, J. (Eds.), AI 2007: Advances in Ar- tificial Intelligence. AI 2007. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol 4830. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-76928-6_1.
Dukes, Michael D., Shedd, M., Cardenas-Lailhacar, B., 2009. Smart irrigation controllers: how do soil moisture sensor (SMS) irrigation controllers work? IFAS Extension 1–5. Dursun, M., Ozden, S., 2011. A wireless application of drip irrigation automation sup-
ported by soil moisture sensors. Sci. Res. Essays 6 (7), 1573–1582.
Faiçal, B.S., Costa, F.G., Pessin, G., Ueyama, J., Freitas, H., Colombo, A., Braun, T., 2014a. The use of unmanned aerial vehicles and wireless sensor networks for spraying pesti- cides. J. Syst. Archit. 60 (4), 393–404.
Faiçal, B.S., Costa, F.G., Pessin, G., Ueyama, J., Freitas, H., Colombo, A., Fini, P.H., Villas, L., Osório, F.S., Vargas, P.A., Braun, T., 2014b. The use of unmanned aerial vehicles and wireless sensor networks for spraying pesticides. J. Syst. Archit. 60, 393–404.
Faiçal, B.S., Costa, F.G., Pessin, G., Ueyama, J., Freitas, H., Colombo, A., Braun, T., Fini, P.H., Villas, L., Osório, F.S., Vargas, P.A., 2014c. The use of unmanned aerial vehicles and wireless sensor networks for spraying pesticides. J. Syst. Archit. 60 (4), 393–404. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sysarc.2014.01.004.
Faiçal, B.S., Freitas, H., Gomes, P.H., Mano, L.Y., Pessin, G., de Carvalho, A.C.P.L.F., Krishnamachar, B., Ueyama, J., 2017. An adaptive approach for UAV-based pesticide spraying in dynamic environments. Comput. Electron. Agric. 138, 210–223.
FAO. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2017, 2017. THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE LEVERAGING FOOD SYSTEMS FOR INCLUSIVE RURAL TRANSFORMATION. 978-92-5-109873-8pp. 1–181.
Fennimore, S.A., Slaughter, D.C., Siemens, M.C., Leon, R.G., Saber, M.N., 2016. Technology for Automation of Weed Control in Specialty Crops. Weed Technol. 30 (04), 823–837. Ferguson, R.B., Shapiro, C.A., Hergert, G.W., Kranz, W.L., Klocke, N.L., Krull, D.H., 1991. Ni- trogen and Irrigation Management Practices to Minimize Nitrate Leaching from Irri-
gated Corn. Jpa 4 (2), 186. https://doi.org/10.2134/jpa1991.0186.
Gandhi, M., Kamdar, J., Shah, M., 2020. Preprocessing of non-symmetrical images forEdge detection. Augment Hum Res 5, 10. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41133-019-0030-5.
Garre, P., Harish, A., 2018. Autonomous Agricultural Pesticide Spraying UAV. IOP Confer- ence Series: Materials Science and Engineering 455, 012030. https://doi.org/ 10.1088/1757-899x/455/1/012030.
Gebregiorgis, M.J., Savage, M.F., 2006. Soil-plant-atmosphere continuum research unit, School of Environmental Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal. South African Journal of Plant and Soil 23 (3), 145–151.
Giles, D.K., Delwiche, M.J., Dodd, R.B., 1987. Control of orchard spraying based on elec- tronic sensing of target characteristics. Trans. ASAE 1987 (30), 1624–1630 (1636).
Griepentrog, H.W., Nørremark, M., Nielsen, H., Blackmore, B.S., 2005. Seed Mapping of Sugar Beet. Precision Agriculture Journal 6, 2157–2165.
Griepentrog, H.W., Nørremark, M., Nielsen, J., Soriano, J.F., 2006. Close-to-crop thermal weed control using a CO2 laser. Proc. Proceedings of CIGR World Congress, 3-7 Sep- tember. EurAgEng, CIGR, Bonn Germany.
Hanson, B., Peters, D., Orloff, S., 2000. Effectiveness of tensiometers and electrical resis- tance sensors varies with soil conditions. Calif. Agric. 54 (3), 47–50.
Hanson, B., Orloff, S., Sanden, B., 2007. Monitoring Soil Moisture for Irrigation Water Man- agement. Regents of the University of California, p. 21.
Heisel, T., Schou, J., Christensen, S., Andreasen, C., 2001. Cutting weeds with a CO2 laser.
Weed Res. 41 (1), 19–29.
Hemalatha, T., Sujatha, B., 2015. Sensor based autonomous field monitoring agriculture robot providing data acquisition & wireless transmission. International Journal of In- novative Research in Computer and Communication Engineering. 3 (8), 7651–7657. Huang, Y., Reddy, K.N., 2015. Unmanned aerial vehicles: a unique platform for low- altitude remote sensing for crop management. Pages 185–192 in Rao AN. In: Yaduraju, N.T. (Ed.), Weed Science for Sustainable Agriculture, Environment and Bio- diversity: Proceedings of the Plenary and Lead Papers of the 25th Asian-Pacific Weed Science Society Conference. Indian Society of Weed Science, Madhya Pradesh, India.
Huang, Y., Hoffmann, W.C., Lan, Y., Wu, W., Fritz, B.K., 2009. Development of a Spray Sys- tem for an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Platform. Appl. Eng. Agric. 25 (6), 803–809.
Huang, Y., Thomson, S.J., Hoffmann, W.C., Lan, Y., Fritz, B.K., 2013. Development and pros- pect of unmanned aerial vehicle technologies for agricultural production manage- ment. International Journal of Agricultural and Biological Engineering 6 (3), 1–10.
Hunt, E.R., Cavigelli, M., Daughtry, C.S.T., Mcmurtrey, J., Walthall, C.L., 2005. Evaluation of digital photography from model aircraft for remote sensing of crop biomass and ni- trogen status. Precis. Agric. 6, 359–378.
Jani, K., Chaudhuri, M., Patel, H., Shah, M., 2019. Machine learning in films: an approach towards automation in film censoring. J. Data. Inf. Manag. 2019. https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s42488-019-00016-9.
Jannoura, R., Brinkmann, K., Uteau, D., Bruns, C., Joergensen, R.G., 2015. Monitoring of crop biomass using true colour aerial photographs taken from a remote controlled hexacopter. Biosyst. Eng. 129, 341–351.
Jha, K., Doshi, A., Patel, P., Shah, M., 2019. A comprehensive review on automation in ag- riculture using artificial intelligence. Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture. 2, 1–12.
Kakkad, V., Patel, M., Shah, M., 2019. Biometric authentication and image encryption for image security in cloud framework. Multiscale and Multidiscip. Model. Exp. and Des., 1–16 https://doi.org/10.1007/s41939-019-00049-y.
Kale, S.D., Khandagale, S.V., Gaikwad, S.S., Narve, S.S., Gangal, P.V., 2015. Agriculture drone for spraying fertilizer and pesticides. International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science and Software Engineering. 5 (12), 804–807.
Karasekreter, N., Başçiftçi, F., Fidan, U., 2013. A new suggestion for an irrigation schedule with an artificial neural network. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial In- telligence 25 (1), 93–104.
Kia, P.J., Far, A.T., Omid, M., Alimardani, R., Naderloo, L., 2009. Intelligent control based fuzzy logic for automation of greenhouse irrigation system and evaluation in relation to conventional systems. World Appl. Sci. J. 6 (1), 16–23.
Kim, Y.J., Evans, R.G., Iversen, W.M., 2008. Remote sensing and control of an irrigation sys- tem using a distributed wireless sensor network. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 57 (7), 1379–1387.
Kodali, R.K., Sahu, A., 2016. An IoT based soil moisture monitoring on Losant platform. 2nd International Conference on Contemporary Computing and Informatics. IEEE,
pp. 764–768.
Kormann, G., Demmel, M., Auernhammer, H., 1998. Testing stand for yield measurement systems in combine harvesters. ASAE Paper No. 983102. 1998. ASAE, St. Joseph, MI. Kulkarni, V.A., Deshmukh, A.G., 2013. Advanced agriculture robotic weed control system. International Journal of Advanced Research in Electrical, Electronics and Instrumenta-
tion Engineering. 2 (10), 5073–5081.
Kumar, G., 2014. Research paper on water irrigation by using wireless sensor network. In- ternational Journal of Scientific Engineering and Technology, IEERT conference Paper,
pp. 123–125.
Kundalia, K., Patel, Y., Shah, M., 2020. Multi-label movie genre detection from aMovie poster using knowledge transfer learning. Augment Hum Res 5 (2020), 11. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s41133-019-0029-y.
Kurkute, S.R., Deore, B.D., Kasar, Payal, Bhamare, Megha, Sahane, Mayuri, 2018. Drones for Smart Agriculture: A Technical Report. Retrieved from: International Journal for Re- search in Applied Science & Engineering Technology (IJRASET). IC Value: 45.98; SJ Im- pact Factor: 6.887. 2321-9653 6 Issue IV, April 2018- Available at. www.ijraset.com.





Kuyper, M.C., Balendonck, J., 2001. Application of dielectric soil moisture sensors for real- time automated irrigation control. Acta Hortic. 562, 71–79.
Lamm, R.D., Slaughter, D.C., Giles, D.K., 2002. Precision weed control system for cotton.
Trans. ASAE 45 (1), 231–238.
Lee, J., Wang, J., Crandall, D., Sabanovic, S., & Fox, G. (2017). Real-time, cloud-based object detection for unmanned aerial vehicles. 2017 First IEEE International Conference on Robotic Computing (IRC). doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/irc.2017.77.
Liakos, K., Busato, P., Moshou, D., Pearson, S., Bochtis, D., 2018. Machine Learning in Agri- culture: A Review. Sensors 18 (8), 2674. https://doi.org/10.3390/s18082674.
Long, I.F., French, B.K., 1967. Measurement of soil moisture in the field by neutron mod- eration. J. Soil Sci. 18 (1), 149–166.
Manivannan, L., Priyadharshini, M.S., 2016. Agricultural robot. International Journal of Ad- vanced Research in Electrical, Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering 153–156. Maruyama, A., Naruse, K., 2014. Development of small weeding robots for rice fields. 2014 IEEE/SICE International Symposium on System Integration. https://doi.org/10.1109/
sii.2014.7028019.
Merino, L., Caballero, F., Martínez-de Dios, J.R., Ferruz, J., Ollero, A., 2006. A cooperative perception system for multiple UAVs: application to automatic detection of forest fires. Journal of Field Robotics 23 (3–4), 165–184.
Mogili, U.M.R., Deepak, B.B.V.L., 2018. Review on application of drone systems in precision agriculture. International Conference on Robotics and Smart Manufacturing. Procedia Computer Science 133, pp. 502–509.
Murugan, D., Garg, A., Singh, D., 2017. Development of an adaptive approach for precision agriculture monitoring with drone and satellite data. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing 10 (12), 5322–5328.
Maurya, P., 2015. IIT Kanpur. Hardware implementation of a flight control system for an un- manned aerial vehicle . Kanpur, Kanpur, India. Retrieved 06 01, 2015, from Computer science and engineering. http://www.cse.iitk.ac.in/users/moona/students/Y2258.pdf.
Nakai, S., Yamada, Y., 2014. Development of a Weed Suppression Robot for Rice Cultiva- tion: Weed Suppression and Posture Control. International Journal of Electrical, Com- puter, Electronics and Communication Engineering. 8 (12), 1658–1662.
Nakamura, K., Kimura, M., Anazawa, T., Takahashi, T., Naruse, K., 2016. Investigation of weeding ability and plant damage for rice field weeding robots. 2016 IEEE/SICE Inter- national Symposium on System Integration (SII). https://doi.org/10.1109/ sii.2016.7844114.
Nanda, A., Reddy, S., 2018. Autonomous Weed Removal Robot. https://www.hackster.io/ amitash-nanda/autonomous-weed-removal-robot-8c7189.
Natu, A.S., Kulkarni, S.C., 2016. Adoption and utilization of drones for advanced precision farming: a review. International Journal on Recent and Innovation Trends in Comput- ing and Communication. 4 (5), 563–565.
Nema, S., Awasthi, M.K., Nema, R.K., 2018. Spatial crop mapping and accuracy assessment using remote sensing and GIS in Tawa command. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. App. Sci. 7 (5), 3011–3018 2018.
Ngo, H.C., Hashim, U.R., Sek, Y.W., Kumar, Y.J., Ke, W.S., 2019. Weeds detection in agricul- tural fields using convolutional neural network. International Journal of Innovative Technology and Exploring Engineering. 8 (11), 292–296.
Nørremark, M., Griepentrog, H.W., 2004. Analysis and definition of the close-to-crop area in relation to robotic weeding. 6th EWRS Workshop on Physical and Cultural Weed Control, pp. 127–140.
Nørremark, M., Griepentrog, H.W., Nielsen, J., Søgaard, H.T., 2008. The development and assessment of the accuracy of an autonomous GPS-based system for intra-row me- chanical weed control in row crops. Biosyst. Eng. 101 (4), 396–410.
Pandya, R., Nadiadwala, S., Shah, R., Shah, M., 2019. Buildout of Methodology for Meticu- lous Diagnosis of K-Complex in EEG for Aiding the Detection of Alzheimer's by Arti- ficial Intelligence. Augmented Human Research. https://link.springer.com/article/ 10.1007/s41133-019-0021-6.
Panpatte, D.G., 2018. Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture: An Emerging Era of Research.
Intutional Science, CANADA, pp. 1–8.
Parekh, V., Shah, D., Shah, M., 2020. Fatigue detection using artificial intelligence frame- work. Augmented Human Research 2020 (5), 5.
Parish, S., 1990. A review of non-chemical weed control techniques. Biol. Agric. Hortic. 7 (2), 117–137.
Partel, V., Charan Kakarla, S., Ampatzidis, Y., 2019. Development and evaluation of a low- cost and smart technology for precision weed management utilizing artificial intelli- gence. Comput. Electron. Agric. 157, 339–350.
Patel, D., Shah, D., Shah, M., 2020a. The Intertwine of Brain and Body: A Quantitative Anal- ysis on How Big Data Influences the System of Sports. Annals of Data Science. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s40745-019-00239-y.
Patel, D., Shah, Y., Thakkar, N., Shah, K., Shah, M., 2020b. Implementation ofArtificial intel- ligence techniques for Cancer detection. Augmented HumanResearch 5 (1). https:// doi.org/10.1007/s41133-019-0024-3.
Pederi, Y.A., Cheporniuk, H.S., 2015. Unmanned aerial vehicles and new technological methods of monitoring and crop protection in precision agriculture. 2015 IEEE Inter- national Conference Actual Problems of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles Developments (APUAVD). https://doi.org/10.1109/apuavd.2015.7346625.
Pedersen, S.M., Fountas, S., Blackmore, S., 2008. Agricultural robots – applications and eco-
nomic perspectives. Service Robot Applications. 369–382.
Pharne, I.D., Kanase, S., Patwegar, S., Patil, P., Pore, A., Kadam, Y., 2018. Agriculture drone sprayer. International Journal of Recent Trends in Engineering & Research 4 (3), 181–185.
Plant, R., Pettygrove, G., Reinert, W., 2000. Precision agriculture can increase profits and limit environmental impacts. Calif. Agric. 54 (4), 66–71. https://doi.org/10.3733/ca. v054n04p66.
Plessen, M.G., 2019. Freeform Path Fitting for the Minimisation of the Number of Transi- tions between Headland Path and Interior Lanes within Agricultural Fields. Arxiv 1910.12034v1, 1–7.
Primicerio, J., Di Gennaro, S.F., Fiorillo, E., Genesio, L., Lugato, E., Matese, A., Vaccari, F.P., 2012. A flexible unmanned aerial vehicle for precision agriculture. Precis. Agric. 13 (4), 517–523.
Psirofonia, P., Samaritakis, V., Eliopoulos, P., Potamitis, I., 2017. Use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles for Agricultural Applications with Emphasis on Crop Protection: Three Novel Case-studies. International Journal of Agricultural Science and Technology. 5 (1), 30–39.
Puri, V., Nayyar, A., Raja, L., 2017. Agriculture drones: a modern breakthrough in precision agriculture. Journal of Statistics and Management Systems 20 (4), 507–518.
Quails, R.J., Scott, J.M., DeOreo, W.B., 2001. Soil moisture sensors for urban landscape irri- gation: effectiveness and reliability. J. Am. Water Resour. Assoc. 37 (3), 547–559.
Rajpal, A., Jain, S., Khare, N., Shukla, A.K., 2011. Proc. of the International Conference on Science and Engineering. pp. 94–96.
Reinecke, M., Prinsloo, T., 2017a. The influence of drone monitoring on crop health and harvest size. 2017 1st International Conference on Next Generation Computing Appli- cations (NextComp). https://doi.org/10.1109/nextcomp.2017.8016168.
Reinecke, M., Prinsloo, T., 2017b. The influence of drone monitoring on crop health and harvest size. IEEE 1st International Conference in Next Generation Computing Appli- cations (NextComp), pp. 5–10.
Savitha, M., UmaMaheshwari, O.P., 2018. Smart crop field irrigation in IOT architecture using sensors. Int. J. Adv. Res. Comput. Sci. 9 (1), 302–306.
Searcy, S.W., Schueller, J.K., Bae, Y.H., Borgelt, S.C., Stout, B.A., 1989. Mapping of spatially variable yield during grain combining. Trans. ASAE 32 (3), 826–829.
Senthilnath, J., Dokania, A., Kandukuri, M., K.N., R., Anand, G., & Omkar, S. N., 2016. Detec- tion of tomatoes using spectral-spatial methods in remotely sensed RGB images cap- tured by UAV. Biosyst. Eng. 146, 16–32.
Shah, D., Dixit, R., Shah, A., Shah, P., Shah, M., 2020a. A comprehensive analysis regarding several breakthroughs based on computer intelligence targeting various syndromes. Augment Hum Res 5, 14 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s41133-020-00033-z.
Shah, G., Shah, A., Shah, M., 2019. Panacea of challenges in real-world application of big data analytics in healthcare sector. Data Inf. Manag., 1–10 https://doi.org/10.1007/ s42488-019-00010-1.
Shah, K., Patel, H., Sanghvi, D., Shah, M., 2020b. A comparative analysis of logistic regres- sion, random Forest and KNN models for the text classification. Augment Hum Res 5, 12 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s41133-020-00032-0.
Shang, Q.Q., Zhang, Y.Q., Sun, Z.W., Zheng, J.D., Zhao, B.G., Pan, Y.C., 2004. Study on Droplet Deposition and Penetrability in Tree Crown by the Wind Tunnel. Journal of Nanjing Forestry University 28 (5), 45–48.
Shekhar, Y., Dagur, E., Mishra, S., Tom, R.J., Veeramanikandan, M., Sankaranarayanan, S., 2017. Intelligent IoT based automated irrigation system. Int. J. Appl. Eng. Res. 12 (18), 7306–7320.
Shobila, P., Mood, V., 2014. Automated irrigation system using robotics and sensors. Int.
J. Sci. Eng. Res. 3 (8), 9–13.
Simelli, I., Tsagaris, A., 2015. The use of unmanned aerial systems (UAS) in agriculture. 7th International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies. In Agri- culture. 730-736.
Slaughter, D.C., Giles, D.K., Downey, D., 2008. Autonomous robotic weed control systems: a review. Comput. Electron. Agric. 61 (1), 63–78.
Sonaa, G., Passonia, D., Pintoa, L., Pagliaria, D., Masseroni, D., Ortuani, B., Facchib, A., 2016. UAV multispectral survey to map soil and crop for precision farming applications. The international archives of the photogrammetry, remote sensing and spatial informa- tion sciences. 1023-1029.
Spoorthi, S., Shadaksharappa, B., Suraj, S., Manasa, V.K., 2017. Freyr drone: pesticide/fertil- izers spraying drone - an agricultural approach. 2017 2nd International Conference on Computing and Communications Technologies (ICCCT). https://doi.org/10.1109/ iccct2.2017.7972289.
Sugiura, R., Noguchi, N., Ishii, K., 2005. Remote - sensing technology for vegetation mon- itoring using an unmanned helicopter. Biosyst. Eng. 90 (4), 369–379.
Sujaritha, M., Annadurai, S., Satheeshkumar, J., Kowshik Sharan, S., Mahesh, L., 2017. Weed detecting robot in sugarcane fields using fuzzy real time classifier. Comput. Electron. Agric. 134, 160–171.
Sukhadia, A., Upadhyay, K., Gundeti, M., Shah, S., Shah, M., 2020. Optimization of smart traffic governance system using artificial intelligence. Augment Hum Res 5, 13 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s41133-020-00035-x.
Sun, H., Slaughter, D.C., Ruiz, M.P., Gliever, C., Upadhyaya, S.K., Smith, R.F., 2010. RTK GPS mapping of transplanted row crops. Comput. Electron. Agric. 71 (1), 32–37.
Tang, L., Tian, L., Steward, B.L., 2000. Color image segmentation with genetic algorithm for in-field weed sensing. Transactions of the ASAE - American Society of Agricultural En- gineers 43, 41019–41028.
Tomic, T., Schmid, K., Lutz, P., Domel, A., Kassecker, M., Mair, E., Grixa, I.L., Ruess, F., Suppa, M., Burschka, D., 2012. Toward a fully autonomous UAV: research platform for indoor and outdoor urban search and rescue. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine 19 (3), 46–56. https://doi.org/10.1109/mra.2012.2206473.
Tothill, I.E., 2001. Biosensors Developments and Potential Applications in the Agricultural Diagnosis Sector. Comput. Electron. Agric. 30, 205–218.
UK-RAS White papers, 2018. Agricultural Robotics: The Future of Robotic Agriculture. Ag- ricultural Robotics 1–36.
Umair, S.M., Usman, R., 2010. Automation of irrigation system using ANN based control- ler. International Journal of Electrical & Computer Sciences. 10 (2), 45–51.
Unpaprom, Yuwalee, Dussadeeb, Natthawud, Ramaraj, Rameshprabu, 2018. Modern Ag- riculture Drones The Development of Smart Farmers. p. 2018.
Varatharajalu, K., Ramprabu, J., 2018. Wireless Irrigation System via Phone Call & SMS. In- ternational Journal of Engineering and Advanced Technology. 8 (2S), 397–401.
Vega, F.A., Ramírez, F.C., Saiz, M.P., Rosúa, F.O., 2015. Multi-temporal imaging using an un- manned aerial vehicle for monitoring a sunflower crop. Biosyst. Eng. 132, 19–27.
Veroustraete, F., 2015. The rise of the drones in agriculture. Ecronicon 2 (2), 1–3.



Wall, R.W., King, B.A., 2004. Incorporating plug and play technology into measurement and control systems for irrigation. Management, 2004, Ottawa, Canada August 1–4.
Xiang, H., Tian, L., 2011. Development of a low-cost agricultural remote sensing system based on an autonomous unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV). Biosyst. Eng. 108 (2), 174–190.
Xue, X., Lan, Y., Sun, Z., Chang, C., Hoffmann, W.C., 2016. Develop an unmanned aerial ve- hicle based automatic aerial spraying system. Comput. Electron. Agric. 128, 58–66.
Yallappa, D., Veerangouda, M., Maski, D., Palled, V., Bheemanna, M., 2017. Development and evaluation of drone mounted sprayer for pesticide applications to crops. 2017 IEEE Global Humanitarian Technology Conference (GHTC). https://doi.org/10.1109/ ghtc.2017.8239330.
Yang, H., Liusheng, W., Junmin, X. Hongli, Jan. 2007. Wireless Sensor Networks for Inten- sive Irrigated Agriculture, Consumer Communications and Networking Conference, 2007. CCNC 2007. 4th IEEE. pp. 197–201 Las Vegas, Nevada.
Yong, W., Shuaishuai, L., Li, L., Minzan, L., Arvanitis, K.G., Georgieva, C., Sigrimis, N., 2018. Smart sensors from ground to cloud and web intelligence. IFAC-Papers OnLine 51 (17), 31–38.
Zhang, D., Chen, L., Zhang, R., Hoffmann, W.C., Xu, G., Lan, Y., Wang, X., Xu, M., 2015. Eval- uating effective swath width and droplet distribution of aerial spraying systems on M-18B and Thrush 510G airplanes. nt J Agric & Biol Eng. 8 (2), 21–30.
Zhen, X., Wengang, Z., Changjun, S., Qing, Y., Gang, S., 2010. The measurement of soil water content using the dielectric method. World Automation Congress, Kobe 2010, 241–245.
Zheng, H., Zhou, X., Cheng, T., Yao, X., Tian, Y., Cao, W., Zhu, Y., 2016. Evaluation of a UAV- based hyperspectral frame camera for monitoring the leaf nitrogen concentration in rice. 2016 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS). https://doi.org/10.1109/igarss.2016.7730917.
Zhenyu, Chen, Quanmin, Ye, Meixiang, Zhao, et al., 1996. The Elementary Study of Spraying Droplets with Filter Paper Ratio-Assured Methods. Journal of Shanxi Agri- cultural University 16 (4), 422–425.
Zhu, H., Lan, Y., Wu, W., Hoffmann, W.C., Huang, Y., Xue, X., Fritz, B., 2010. Development of a PWM precision spraying controller for unmanned aerial vehicles. Journal of Bionic Engineering 7 (3), 276–283.
Zimdahl, R.L., 2010. Ethics for weed science. Pak. J. Weed Sci. Res. 16 (2), 109–121.
