Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 1 (2021) 100001

		


Editorial
Introducing artificial intelligence in the life sciences





Artificial Intelligence (AI) is playing an increasingly import role in science, business, and everyday life. In science, AI has significantly im- pacted a number of fields including, among others, image analysis or natural language processing and is spreading out to different areas be- yond informatics including the life and biomedical sciences. Notably, AI is not a new discipline. The term was coined in 1956 and since then, AI evolved as a part of computer science and went through cycles of in- creasing and decreasing popularity. One of its sub-disciplines is machine learning (ML), which has a long history in the natural sciences (for at least three decades). A variant of machine learning termed deep learning (DL), which employs multi-layered (deep) neural network architectures, is largely responsible for the recent popularity of AI across different fields, spurred on by the increasing availability of “big data” in various areas, from which DL benefits. This is exemplified by the data deluge in online marketing, finance, or social networks. However, the life sciences and drug discovery are also becoming increasingly data-rich. Therefore, it is not surprising that ML and DL are currently receiving much atten- tion in the life science arena for the extraction of knowledge from data and for a variety of predictions. Of note, the terms AI, ML, and DL are often synonymously used, but the AI spectrum encompasses much more than ML/DL such as expert systems, fuzzy logic, or robotics, which also provide opportunities for interdisciplinary research and applications in different areas.
In this context, "Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences" (AILSCI) has
been conceptualized as a forum for rapid open access publication of AI approaches and applications in the greater life science arena including chemical and biomedical sciences as well as drug discovery. Given its intended broad coverage and interdisciplinary focus, AILSCI is designed to fill a void. Striving for high scientific quality and for evolving into a leading role in communicating AI-driven interdisciplinary research are central aspects of its mission. To these ends, a high-caliber Editorial Board plays a key role in supporting and shaping the Journal moving forward.
AILSCI provides a variety of article types (as further specified be- low). For Research Articles and Communications, primary data not resid- ing in the public domain should be made available as an open access deposition upon acceptance to ensure reproducibility of the work. The Journal also offers the “Data in Brief” option for accompanying publi- cation of data sets. Furthermore, custom code will play an important role in many AI studies. Similar to primary data, custom code should be made publicly available as a part of any research investigation where its use is essential for the main findings, hence ensuring reproducibil- ity. During review, code should be made accessible and any restrictions to access should be specified. AILSCI partners with Software X, which
makes it possible to separately publish code originating from AI stud- ies. New computational algorithms may be presented without code in Methods articles, as long as suﬃcient details (such as pseudo code) are provided to enable custom implementation. Such articles will be indi- vidually considered by the editors and flexibly handled.
By design, AILSCI aims to provide opportunities for communication of scientific work from academia, industry, and partnerships between commercial enterprises and academic institutions, which is another im- portant part of its mission. While AILSCI promotes open science and data sharing, intellectual property and proprietary data constraint within the industry are well recognized. Such restrictions should, however, not pre- clude publication of interesting science from industrial environments. Therefore, the Journal also offers off-the-beaten path article types such Perspectives, Conceptual Analysis, Controversial Views, Methods, and Opin- ion pieces that provide different formats for communication of new scientific developments, case studies, or thought-provoking approaches (even if preliminary), without the need for full data disclosure.
Such contributions are generally encouraged to broaden the spec- trum of scientific publishing, reflect on the status of the field, and com- municate science that departs from the mainstream. For example, for the further development of scientific approaches that are currently viewed as "revolutionary" and associated with hype, which certainly applies to AI, studies conclusively showing that complex methodologies do not of- fer advantages over simpler ones in specific application scenarios are of critical relevance, just as much as new breakthroughs are. It is also emphasized that the scope of AILSCI is not limited to computational studies, but includes reports of AI-driven experimental work, which are highly encouraged.
As another characteristic feature, AILSCI aims for short editorial han- dling and review times. Peer reviews will be limited to two or three per submission and referees will be asked to consider potential scien- tific merits of a study as presented, without calling for excessive and time-consuming revisions. If those are required to render a manuscript publishable, a timely Reject & Resubmit decision is typically beneficial to authors and provides several alternatives. Furthermore, “Your Paper Your Way” option alleviates formatting constraints until a paper is ac- cepted. Taken together, these criteria aim to streamline the review and publication process.
Going forward, AILSCI will be indexed in Scopus, the Emerging Sources Citation Index (ESCI), CiteScore, and the Scientific Citation In- dex (SCI).
The editors and publisher are excited to launch "Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences" and sincerely hope that our authors will enjoy pub- lishing their work in this new forum for AI-driven research.



https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ailsci.2021.100001  Received 28 January 2021; Accepted 29 January 2021
Available online 6 March 2021
2667-3185/© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)

Editorial	Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 1 (2021) 100001


Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.


Mingyue Zheng State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Rd. Zuchongzhi, Shanghai,
China
Carolina Horta Andrade Faculty of Pharmacy, Universidade Federal de Goiás, Rua 240, Qd. 87, Setor Leste Universitário, Goiânia - GO, 74605-170, Brazil
Jürgen Bajorath∗
Department of Life Science Informatics and Data Science, B-IT, LIMES
Program Unit Chemical Biology and Medicinal Chemistry, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität, Friedrich-Hirzebruch-Allee 6, D-53115
Bonn, Germany.
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: bajorath@bit.uni-bonn.de (J. Bajorath)




















































































2
