Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect

AASRI Procedia 8 (2014) 1


Preface

2014 AASRI Conference on  ports Engineering and Computer Scie ce (SECS 2014) held on June 21-22,
2014, London, UK, will be the most comprehensive conference focused on the various aspects of advances in Sports Engineering and Computer Science.
Sports engineering is a field of engineeri g that involves the design, development and testing of sports
equipment. The equipment used by athletes has always gone through technological design and  evelopment
based on current knowledge a d understanding. Computer Science is the scientific and practical approach to
computation and its applications. It is the systematic study of the feasibility, structure, expression, and mechanization of the methodical processes that underlie the acquisition, representation, processing, storage, communication of, and access to information, whether such information is encoded as bits in a computer memory or transcribed in genes and protein structures in a human cell. A computer scientist specializes in the theory of computation and the design of computational systems.

Our conference provides a chance for academic and industry professionals to discuss recent progress in the area of Sports Engineering and Computer Science. The selected, peer reviewed paper from SECS 2014 focus on two topics: (1) Sports Engineering and (2) Computer Science and Information Technology. Some papers were highly evaluated by the scientific committees and the reviewers. For example, the “Artificial Neural Networks in the Determination of the Fluid Intake Needs of Endurance Athletes” by Navin R Singh and Edith M Peters; the “Online Multi-player Tracking in Monocular Soccer Videos” by Michael Herrmann, Martin Hoernig and Bernd Radig was highly evaluated. We expect that the conference and its publications will be a trigger for further related research and technology improvements in this importance subject.

Finally, our sincere thanks to the support from technology program committee for designing the conference web page and also spending countless days in preparing the final conference program in time for printing. Sincere thanks to our organization committee for their several months’ hard work in sorting out manuscripts from various authors. Also thanks to other s affs assisting in the various stage of the editorial work, especially the international committees of our conference.

We hope all the participants can obtain useful information from the proceedings.

SECS 2014 Committee



















2212-6716 © 2014 Published by Elsevier B. V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).
Peer-review under responsibility of Scientific Committee of American Applied Science Research Institute doi:10.1016/j.aasri.2014.08.001
