Array 14 (2022) 100171
Available online 22 April 2022
2590-0056/© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).
A multi-agent based enhancement for multimodal biometric system at 
border control 
Susara S Thenuwara a,*, Chinthaka Premachandra a, Hiroharu Kawanaka b 
a Department of Electronic Engineering, Shibaura Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan 
b Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Mie University, Kurimamachiya, Tsu, Mie, Japan   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Artificial intelligence 
Biometrics 
Multi-agent system 
Border control system 
A B S T R A C T   
Border criminals and unauthorized immigrants are dramatically increasing within the last few years in globally 
due to the absence of proper authorization methods at the border locations. Usually, passenger controls done by 
trained immigration officers who compare the passport and the physical appearance at the border while some of 
the countries done by automated border control (ABC) systems. ABC is one of the applicable real-world appli-
cations of the biometric domain which commonly implements with fingerprint and face (multimodal) biometric 
authorization. However, selecting an appropriate classification method is a challenging task at the decision- 
making stage. This paper proposes a novel architecture for multimodal biometric authorization engaged with 
the multi-agent system (MAS) to come up with the optimal solution by using the co-feature of MAS, such as 
coordination, corporation, and negotiation features. The experiment was done with four available multimodal 
datasets, namely, the National Institute of Standard Technology (NIST) multimodal, SDUMLA-HMT multimodal, 
BANCA and PRIVATE databases have been reported to demonstrate the efficiency of the proposed method. The 
experimental result delivers an excellent performance comparing with previous ABC systems at the authenti-
cation phase and computationally fast.   
1. Introduction 
Biometrics are measures of biological patterns belong to individuals 
such as fingerprint, iris pattern, voice, and face [1]. Face-biometric and 
fingerprint can be identified as cost-effective and easy access traits in the 
biometric domain. It has only become available over the last few years, 
due to significant advances in the field of computer security [2]. 
Furthermore, face and fingerprint biometrics do not need to be 
remembered and cannot be easily lost. This makes it much easier for the 
user and it cannot be easily stolen or loaned to a friend [3]. Biometric 
technologies consume those traits and authorize the person for a certain 
task called biometric authorization systems [4]. There are two types of 
biometric authentication systems; multimodal and unimodal. Most of 
the research has been conducted using multimodal systems as it has 
many improvements over the unimodal systems [4]. Even though there 
are spoofing attacks on single biometrics, multimodal biometric systems 
are still placing their strength at the upper level [5]. Passenger flow 
control using biometric traits can be identified as a significant 
advancement of the biometric domain [4]. Traditional border control is 
done by trained immigration officers who compare the passport or travel 
identity documents and physical appearance of the passenger at the 
border locations [5]. Rely on the passport face image is a vulnerable 
factor of the whole authorization process [14]. Due to this loop-hole 
drugs, frauds, crimes are on the rise in an uncontrollable level. Hence, 
these threats have severely affected many key sectors in the country, 
such as national security, finance, and tourism. On the other hand, 
illegal immigrants are a burning issue in some countries. Therefore, 
biometrics-based authorization methods are very popular in passenger 
flow control and significant trend in researchers since the last decade 
[12]. 
1.1. Automated border control (ABC) 
ABC at the border (e-Gates), is one of the main critical real-world 
applications in the biometric domain in recent years ([1,8,9]). Howev-
er, few biometric traits can be used for automated border controls in 
border locations stated in the International Civil Aviation Organization 
(ICAO) [1]. There are several organizations responsible for passenger 
control at border points such as ICAO, IATA, and CEN. These organi-
zations specially ICAO recommend some features of biometric data such 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: susara@susara.lk (S.S. Thenuwara).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Array 
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/array 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2022.100171 
Received 9 April 2022; Accepted 19 April 2022   
Array 14 (2022) 100171
2
as image resolution, angle, position, and depth [1]. This research has 
been conducted with two biometric traits (face and fingerprint) with 
ICAO recommended standard. Despite that, there was high accuracy of 
the iris traits in recognition strategy, the combination of fingerprint and 
face traits deliver reliable results in the time-critical environment due to 
many reasons such as processing time, sensor cost, capturing time and 
privacy [8]. Fig. 1 shows the evaluation of the ABC system with a 
timeline. Evaluation of ABC systems was started with an access control 
system that can be used for specific user groups and continuously 
growing with biometrics up to today’s eBorder system to handle the 
unknown risk travelers. Several factors influencing the performance of 
ABC’s dramatically increase during the time frame. 
Automated biometric authorization systems are significant advances 
with engaging the machine learning techniques within the last few years 
[6]. Even though many classification algorithms deliver high perfor-
mance at the research level, there are not reliable results in real-world 
applications such as time-critical environments with large databases 
[7]. Obtaining a reliable result from one single classification and 
implement with real-world applications difficult task as it has influenced 
other factors. Therefore, combining classifiers (multi-classifiers) are 
more reliable and widely used [9]. However, the optimal choice of the 
combination method is another difficult task at the decision-making 
stage [10]. Simply, finding a fusion method for the final adopted 
version is a difficult process and there is no chance to change the final 
output after the fusion process is done. The basic idea is behind the 
strategy is to reach an optimal solution using different classification 
techniques. That inbuilt testing strategy is a very important part of the 
multi-classifier technique and the final decision-making process [17]. 
The balance between false-positive rate (FPR) and false-negative rate 
(FNR) is the most critical task among those issues [11]. Our approach is 
to negotiate a strategy using agent-based architecture and come up with 
an optimal result. 
1.2. Issued with existing systems 
By considering the existing technology and utilize the ABC system in 
border following conclusion can be made. Europian Union (EU) e-Gate 
system rejection rate one out of eight [5] and it may vary in other 
countries. All rejections transferred to the manual gate with the guid-
ance of immigration control. Sydney Airport reduces 43% automated 
system after 2012 due to the increase of failure rate as well as privacy 
cases [2]. However, there are some controllable factors such as quality 
of biometrics, acceptance, and accuracy of the ABC system, airport lo-
gistics, skill rate of immigration officers, and human-machine interface 
problems. Other factors like passenger awareness and disabilities are not 
controllable. Traditional automated biometric recognition systems are 
varying from the ABC system as shown in Table 1. Iris recognition 
immigration system in the UK (IRIS) and EU e-Gates are good examples 
for semi-automated ABC systems [5]. 
1.3. Intelligent multi-agent paradigm 
Agent-based architecture interactive with its environment gives dy-
namic and flexibility as it has a corporation, coordination, and negoti-
ation features at the decision-making stage [34]. In our previous 
research “Multi-agent approached to face recognition at border control”, 
we used two popular recognition algorithms principal component 
analysis (PCA) and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) with engaging the 
multi-agent paradigm to recognize the face (unimodal) and authorize 
the passenger [13]. However, there are many difficulties in unimodal 
biometric with a large database in the practical case, hence it was 
implemented with classical algorithms [6]. To overcome such issues, we 
proposed a multi-classifier, multimodal, multi-agent-based architecture 
in this paper. Agents can carry out classification task and a multi-agent 
concept gives the direction of the final decision of the multi classifier 
agents [47]. This can be identified as a novel concept to make the 
decision-making process in biometric authorization systems and it 
overcomes the inabilities of other combination methods as well as effi-
cient handling problems of the fusion [6]. There are many multimodal 
biometric recognition systems available at the moment to authorize the 
persons in different real-world scenarios [8]. However, while main-
taining optimum results in time-critical applications are considerably 
difficult (e-Gates) [2]. Combination of fingerprint and face traits are the 
main ingredient of our research and relatively applicable when 
Fig. 1. Evolution of ABC system with a timeline that starts from access control systems to eBoder system [5].  
Table 1 
Comparison of biometric recognition and ABC system [1].  
Biometric recognition system 
The automated border control system 
The location of capturing and recognition 
does not matter. 
Capturing and recognition location is 
matter 
Huge noise and different lighting 
condition in capturing and recognition 
phases 
Less noise and similar lighting condition 
in capturing and recognition phases 
Multiple faces in image many 
Only a single face image at a time 
Facial expressions, angles are obstacles in 
the recognition phase 
Fewer obstacles in the recognition 
phase 
Find the identity from a large population 
Find identity from a small population 
More training images 
Less training images  
S.S. Thenuwara et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Array 14 (2022) 100171
3
considering other traits such as:  
• Availability, the flexibility of the authorization process  
• Relatively cheap and easy to adopt  
• Universality – in case of disability can use other traits  
• Similar class problem-like similar faces like twins [7]. 
The method we proposed is the agent-based architecture in the final 
decision-making process of authorization strategy. The individual 
agents perform as a classification task to identify the biometric traits. 
The main point is agent could “punish” the other agents with the per-
formance matrix to deliver the optimal result. An intelligent agent is a 
small computer entity that has negotiation ability, reactive and proac-
tive features [13]. They can communicate with each other using stan-
dard protocols as well as make active to deliver the common goal [34]. 
Fig. 2 shows a basic overview of the agent-based proposed architecture 
of the multimodal biometric authorization system. The collection of 
agents (multi-agent) have four mail layers which are:  
• Controller layer: This layer waiting for the user biometrics to activate 
the internal agents. This layer can be deciding the punishment of 
agents based on communication results to win the common goal.  
• Decision layer: This layer makes sure the outputs of all classifier 
agents after the reasoning done. The basic idea behind this is to 
search the optimum result and eliminate the other agents. 
• Communication layer: This layer responsible for internal communi-
cation among the agents. It has a proper action plan during the 
negotiation process and some decision-making ability of the 
communication process. However, agents are automatically deciding 
the current result change or not based on the other agent messages.  
• Classifier layer: this layer superintends of classifier algorithm in 
agents. Agents have different classifiers to recognize the feature of 
the image. 
In this architecture, the confidence level is an important factor in 
fusion (combine of classifier) while communicating among agents. In 
this paper, we called it “confidence level” and all classifiers are output the 
confidence level to reach the common goal [49]. The decrease in the 
confidence level is the sensitivity measure of the testing phase of the 
proposed method. Furthermore, our main aim is to analyze and 
investigate the sensitivity of the classifier. To evaluate the experiment 
four databases have been used namely: National Institute of Standard 
Technology (NIST) multimodal dataset [2], SDUMLA-HMT multimodal 
database [18], BANCA database [42] and PRIVATE database. Two ex-
periments have been carried out. One for measure and compare the 
accuracy with previous fusion models and others for comparison with 
existing ABC system using private dataset. 
The contribution of the research as follows:  
(1) To the development of a multimodal multi-agent-based passenger 
authentication system. 
(2) Evaluate the proposed system using multimodal publicly avail-
able databases and compare it with previous fusion methods.  
(3) Evaluate with other ABC systems to analyses the stability of the 
proposed system. 
The remaining sections of the paper organized as follows. Section 2 
describes related works. Section 3 delivers the proposed methodology. 
Section 4 discusses the design and implementation of hardware. Section 
5 discusses the experimental results. Finally, conclusions are drawn in 
section 6. 
2. Related work 
In the recent past, many researchers have been conducted multi-
modal biometric research with engaging machine learning algorithms. 
Our previous research on “Multi-agent approached to face recognition at 
border control” done with principal component analysis (PCA) and 
linear discriminant analysis (LDA) fusion model [13] and “Hybrid 
Approach to Face Recognition System using PCA & LDA in Border 
Control” [44] done without multi-agent approach. There are many types 
of research are going on deep learning method to authorize the person 
autonomously. In the following section, we gave priorities for face and 
fingerprint biometrics and fusion methods due to some recommenda-
tions of ICAO standards for automated passenger flow control systems 
[1]. 
Hiren D Jochi presented a multi-agent biometric authentication 
system for person identification and verification using fingerprint and 
face recognition (BIOMET) [14]. A fingerprint’s unique nature makes it 
ideal for use in automatic recognition systems. A fingerprint consists of a 
series of ridges and grooves which unique characteristics. This method 
used the score level fusion method and face acceptance rate higher than 
the fingerprint trait. The experiment carried out their database which 
includes 200 individuals. However, not used public access databases and 
less amount of dataset size it disadvantages of the method. Furthermore, 
score level fusion methods more suitable to handle fewer images [13]. El 
Mehdi Cherrat et al. discussed the Convolutional neural networks (CNN) 
approach for multimodal biometric identification systems using the 
fusion of fingerprint, finger-vein, and face images [15]. In this latest 
research, individual and dual biometric fusion results also presented. 
CNN with SoftMax won the higher accuracy with SDUMLA-HMT 
multimodal dataset which contains 41,340 individual traits. The 
experiment done with only one dataset and used finger vein traits can be 
considered as disadvantages. Abderrahmane Herbadji et al. have been 
subjected to combining multiple biometric Traits using asymmetric ag-
gregation operators for improved person recognition [16]. This paper 
addresses the fusion method (Asymmetric Aggregation Operators) for 
multimodal biometrics using publicly available databases and compared 
to score level fusion (min, max, t-norms, symmetric-sum). The experi-
ment shows the multimodal accuracy higher (99.40%) than unimodal 
systems with asymmetric aggregation fusion technique. 
David White et al. discussed passport officers’ errors in face matching 
[19]. The photo id is widely used in the security domain. Passport of-
ficers are highly training people who can compare the photo id and 
physical appearance at the borders. The researchers concluded that 
passport officers have poor performance at each level. In some cases, 
Fig. 2. The basic structure of the agent. The knowledge base has information 
about other agents. 
S.S. Thenuwara et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Array 14 (2022) 100171
4
they identified accurate results are not related to the length of experi-
ence or the training. Finally, they brought forward, “Passport staff 
misses one in seven fake IDs” in the Australian context. This implies that 
there is a huge demand in the face recognition domain, and Waldemar 
W´ojcik et al. discussed face recognition: issues, methods, and alternative 
applications [20]. Face recognition is the most successful application of 
the image analysis domain and recently getting more attention. All 
machine learning approaches for face recognition such as an artificial 
neural network (ANN), conventional neural network (CNN) applicable 
for extensive training data set, unfortunately, those approaches are 
inaccurate to model the classes in given only a single or a small number 
of training samples. 
Girija Chetty et al. discussed a multi-agent approach in distributed 
face recognition [21]. The proposed system contains multi-layer archi-
tecture which can achieve high performance in term of the robustness of 
the complex face recognition system in various visual conditions. The 
primary objective of the research is further investigation of facial bio-
metrics and its application of video surveillance and crime in-
vestigations. At the functional level, it consists of three layers, such as 
central, neighboring, and remote agents. Skin segmentation, skin region 
detection, and face fusion agents are responsible for face recognition. 
The layers are using a popular feature extraction algorithm called 
principal component analysis (PCA). The system has been developed in a 
Java framework called ABLE. However, System considers only a face 
recognition phase with distributed. The flow of the whole system and the 
communication protocol is unclear in the paper. In addition to that, 
Rajeev Gupta presented a multi-agent approach to face recognition [22]. 
The color segmentation, skin region detection, feature extraction, clas-
sification can be considered as part of the face recognition system in a 
distributed way. MAS is giving adequate functionality for such distri-
bution and complex systems. Face images of the same person may 
different due to aging, expression, makeup, hairstyle, etc. Everyone has 
a face and ready to display it. This factor is a big advantage over the 
other biometrics. Proposed system using the agent-based solution for 
segmentation, skin region, feature extraction, and classification to come 
up with one emerging solution. However, that proposed system not 
evaluated with authentic biometric samples and not compared with the 
traditional system. 
Wasim Shaikht et al. reviewed about face recognition using the 
multi-agent system [23]. The researchers brought forward traditional 
algorithms were decreased the performance due to illumination. Face 
tracking and face recognition can be solved by an agent-based solution 
using JADE (Java Agent Development Environment). Agents are 
communicating and coordinating with passing Asynchronous messages 
(ACL) with each other by performing their assigned task of face tracking 
and face recognition [22]. However, the proposed system not tested and 
evaluated. Feature extraction alone cannot give accurate results because 
there are many recognition agents are responsible such as color seg-
mentation, skin area detection, etc. Later, Yanfei Zhu et al. discussed 
face feature extraction based on agents with a multi-camera System 
[24]. The proposed system considers each camera as an intelligent agent 
and it will capture the pose parameters of facial features from the 
environment. Images collecting from each camera can be better extract 
the features which can give a solution for false recognition due to angles. 
Fusion mechanism to find an optimal framework can be considered as 
the future work of their research. Adrian Kapczy´nski et al. proposed a 
simulation model of biometric authentication using a multiagent 
approach [25]. Multi-modal biometric systems are a concern with 
different authentication factors, algorithms, and distributed. They use 
key performance indicators as false acceptance and false rejection rates. 
Authentication factors are in serial or parallel architecture are consider 
as research challenges of their work. Finally, Deng Zhang et al. presented 
a robust intelligent face recognition framework using a GNP-based 
Multi-agent System [26]. Genetic Network Programming GNP-MAS 
method gives the highest robustness with compare to GNP-PCA. Ac-
cording to the experimental result, the proposed method came up with 
higher accuracy than GNP-PCA traditional method. 
BIOPASS II Automated biometric border crossing systems based on 
electronic passports and facial recognition [27] can be considered as the 
highest accuracy ABC system. It gives more detail about RAPID and 
SmartGate which utilized with Portugal and Australia. The identifica-
tion task is done with e-passport and physical appearance at the border 
(face) and applied in real situations. However, their system imple-
mented in two countries and required prior registration means not suf-
ficient enough to handle the other countries. Spreeuwers et al. evaluated 
automated face recognition for ABC systems on using actual data in 
Schiphol Airport [28]. The evaluation of their system given by authors 
and it shows in high accuracy of (verification rates of 99% at a FAR of 
0.1%) with the digital image in passenger passports. Kosmerlj et al. 
discussed face recognition issues in a border control environment and 
proposed a system for authorizing passport holders using face identifi-
cation [29]. They used few databases to analyze their method with 
Norwegian people and identified few constraints like hair, which can 
significantly impact with face recognition. They conclude with only 
unimodal (face) not sufficient to authorize the person at passenger flow 
control. Kwon and Moon proposed a method for passenger identification 
using face recognition which utilizes the Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) 
[30]. They maintain their system with ICAO standards. However, the 
accuracy of the system not enough to reach the ICAO level. Cantarero 
et al. presented multi-modal (face and fingerprints) biometric fusion 
implementation for the ABC system [31]. Their system implemented in 
Barajas Airport in Spain and shows high applicable for automated gates. 
Conde et al. done experiments at the same airport to analyze Face 
recognition in uncontrolled environments [32]. They used surveillance 
cameras to capture the passenger images in several locations and SVM 
used as classification. However, their system not sufficient enough to 
maintain accuracy due to various constraints such as illumination. 
H. M. Nguyen et al. presented biometrics fusion with applications in 
passenger re-authentication for automated border control systems [44]. 
Their target focuses on face image recognition with cloth features which 
can be identified as low applicability for ABC systems however the 
overall accuracy of the system gains higher accuracy (99.20%). Table 2 
shows the applicability, performance, cost, authorization delay, and 
overall performance in our point of view. 
After a comprehensive study, we concluded the best approaches for 
multimodal biometric recognition in a time-critical environment with an 
intelligent agent-based solution using negotiation protocol. According to 
the previous researchers, there is a need for a system to authorize the 
persons using multimodal biometrics in the time-critical environment in 
an effective way. Therefore, the proposed solution used past researchers’ 
contributions to get an idea about the most suitable algorithms in each 
step. 
3. Proposed methodology 
This section focuses on the proposed multi-agent-based multimodal 
concept. Multi-agent negotiation strategies are first discussed and then 
the multi-classifier and base classifier in outline. The system includes 
main three parts such as face and fingerprint capturing, MAS negotia-
tion, and output of the authentication results. First, the images of the 
face and fingerprints of a passenger is captured. Then the preprocessing 
is applied to introduce the images to CNN from the captured face images 
and fingerprints. Then those pre-processed image data is used to detect 
the identification and authorization of the passengers. The passenger 
authorization is done by comparing with the previously stored face and 
fingerprint image data with the currently captured image data using 
multi-classifiers. In this paper, the selecting a most appropriate result 
from fusions is done based on a multi-agent method and is the main 
novelty of this work. 
The proposed method occupies four classifiers as an agent and 
comparison of two classifies done by using error mean which can be 
obtained after introducing the test data set. Our methodology is based on 
S.S. Thenuwara et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Array 14 (2022) 100171
5
the testing and evaluation process with fusion methods and assigning 
punishment to a lower confidence level. The advantages of the proposed 
method can be seen when tested with publicity available four datasets 
described in the experiment section. The evaluation has been done with 
majority voting and sum based fusion methods. Fig. 3 shows the basic 
overview of the proposed system and steps as follows; 
Step 1: Capture the face and fingerprint biometrics and preprocess 
the images. 
Step 2: Evaluate the Statistical values from multi-classifiers. 
Step 3: Output of the classifiers used to negotiation of the MAS and 
let it choose an optimal value. 
Step 4: Using the optimal value output recognition confidence level 
with authentication status. 
3.1. Multi-agent negotiation strategy 
As already mentioned in the introduction section, the confidence level 
is the measurement of performance at the classifier level. The “confi-
dence level” used to identify the sensitivity of the classifier at the agent 
negotiation process in the proposed method. The final decision is drawn 
after negotiation among recognition agents and knowledgebase using 
the verification process. Fig. 4 shows the communication flow chart of 
the multi-agent-based system. 
Input interface used for capturing two biometric traits and then 
preprocessing done before start the classification. Four classifiers have 
been selected for recognition and verification agents such as Convolu-
tional Neural Networks (CNNs) with SoftMax [15], Support Vector 
Machine (SVM) [34], Linear Regression (LR) [33], and Radom Forest 
(RF). Comparison of two classifiers done by statistical significance of 
error mean of classification rate on test data sets. After that, we evaluate 
the p-values using a t-test to measure the degree of confidence. Next 
section stepwise describes the negotiation part of the multi-agent system 
in between verification agents, recognition agents, and knowledge base 
which represented in a red color square in Fig. 4. The output interface 
used to display the authentication message to the passenger to proceed 
with the next step of the immigration process. 
All agents agreed to train the classifier and negotiate the result for 
the testing phase. The main idea of the process is assigned “punishment” 
based on the output of the recognition agents [39]. Classifier level action 
plan can be illustrated as follows: 
Step1: Start the training process of all classifiers and calculate the 
training mean value for each classifier. 
Step2: Start the negotiation process by comparing the measured 
values and calculate the punishment using equation (1). (to decline their 
level of confidence).  
• Rank the difference between the test pattern and training mean for 
all classes  
• Loop the following task for first N attributes  
a. Select one agent and let it select another one for punish.  
b. Check the class allocated to this attribute by the attacked agent, 
and the sensitivity of the appropriate classifier.  
c. Obtain the output of verification agents and they will produce 
“Yes” if the test sample correctly verified otherwise “No”.  
d. Send the other agent a message proposing penalty by raising the 
agent’s confidence level 
Table 2 
Overview of ABC system in the literature review.   
Performance 
Applicability 
Cost 
Authorization delay 
Overall Performance 
Jose Sanchez et al. [1] 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
H. M. Nguyen et al. [44] 
High 
Very Low 
Medium 
Low 
Low 
FastPass [46] 
High 
Medium 
High 
Low 
Medium 
BIOMET [14] 
High 
Medium 
High 
Low 
High 
BIOPASS II [27] 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Very High 
El Mehdi Cherrat et al. [15] 
High 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Kwon and Moon [30] 
Medium 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Low 
Conde et al. [32] 
High 
Low 
High 
High 
Low 
Spreeuwers et al. [28] 
High 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
Thenuwara SS [44] 
High 
Medium 
Low 
Medium 
Medium 
Thenuwara SS [13] 
Medium 
High 
Low 
Medium 
Low 
Cantarero et al. [31] 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
High  
Fig. 3. Overview of the proposed multi-agent-based system.  
Fig. 4. Proposed multi-agent-based multimodal architecture. Number 1 
represent predicted identity send from recognition agents. 2 represent verifi-
cation input from knowledgebase and 3 represents verification output. 
S.S. Thenuwara et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Array 14 (2022) 100171
6
Step3: Complete the negotiation process and the overall result takes 
from the highest confidence level with the recognition agent. It is the 
most suitable one for classify test patterns [40]. 
Fig. 5 shows the flowchart of the overall punishment-based negoti-
ation process of the proposed method. 
The agent punishment is a cyclic process and once the agent sends 
the message to downgrade the confidence level and receiver agent send 
back the punishment on the sender agent [48]. Likewise, this process has 
cyclic behavior until found the non-negative confidence level. A higher 
difference between the training mean and test pattern will higher chance 
to get a weak classifier [36]. The confidence level will decrease if there is 
not match with knowledgebase while monitoring using the verification 
level. Considering this autonomy punishment can be express as 
following Equation (1). Observed Significant Level (P-value) estimate by 
the degree of confidence result and used it like 95% which can consider 
the statistical difference when p-value lower than 0.05. We used the 
sum-based and majority vote-based fusion technique to evaluate the 
overall process. 
Punishment i =
Difi × Seni
Ri × Ln(Nverfified ˝NO˝) × Rank
(1)  
where:  
- Dif: Difference between test pattern i and training mean  
- Sen: Sensitivity of ith pattern  
- R: Rank of the ith and training mean  
- Ln: Natural logarithm of output “no”  
- Rank: Classifier rank factor 
There is a threshold value during the cyclic behavior to change the 
individual agent’s result when it over the punishment value. Therefore, 
the agent can decide on an alternative path to reach the outcome. In 
Equation (1) natural logarithm used for non-negative from verification 
classifiers. The agent-based architecture developed with a Python-based 
multi-agent platform [35]. 
3.2. Multi-classifiers 
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) with SoftMax [15], Support 
Vector Machine (SVM) [34], Linear Regression (LR) [33], and Radom 
Forest (RF) are used as multi-classifiers. CNN has been used as a base 
that is under the supervised learning model. We did not train the models 
from scratch to develop the face and fingerprint CNN model. Visual 
Geometry Group (VGG) at Oxford University released the VGGNet 
model and there are two deep learning models VGG16 and VGG19. 
VGG19 network not practical this application due to a massive number 
of parameters and joint representation [26]. Here, the VGG 16 pre-
trained model has been used, and lasts fully connected layers are 
replaced by a new one and the first four blocks in VGG16 wt were frozen. 
Sixteen weighted layers contain in VGG16 and achieved an accuracy of 
93.44% with the ImageNet database [18]. Fig. 6 shows the structure of 
VGG16. 
Finally, using these four classifications and multi-agent-based 
structures as well as using different datasets will deliver a fascinating 
result for real-time application. The next section illustrates two experi-
ments in detail. 
3.2.1. Data preprocessing 
Data preprocessing is an important stage before the classification 
process. Image resizing and data augmentation has been done as two 
preprocessing techniques [37]. All images resized 224 × 224 pixels to be 
suitable for the VGG16 model and augmentation techniques used to 
rotate the face images [38]. 
3.3. Computational complexity 
The computational complexity of the optimal value is mainly 
determined by the solution process. Consider the multi-agent model 
architecture shown in Fig. 5 for the negotiation process. The cost of a 
message communication can be calculated as follows: 
Com i = δ ​ x(p) ​ x ​ ( ​ Ttrasm) + β
(2)  
where δ: number of identification messages; p: punishment; Ttrasm: 
transmission time to send a data, β: message latency in the etwork. 
Maximum Q value select as follows. 
a i = argmaxQ(si, ai)
(3)  
s i = [M, p1, p2, p3, ……]
(4) 
Set Q-learning parameters α, λ, w, rref 
Set MAS motion model parameters rc, cα, cγ 
Set other parameters rs, m, n, N, etc. 
Create state space, behavior space and Q-value. 
Set the maximum training times for training data set NT. 
Initialize the value of each agent and state s, action selected by 
random agents. 
While (Q maximum update after punishment) do. 
For each agent i. 
Calculate the value of last state-action r(si, ai). 
Calculate state s′ i. 
Update the p-value 3). 
Calculate and Select action a′i using (4). 
Update the state and action: si = s′i, ai = a′
End For. 
End WhileThe Q-Traversal algorithm has a computational 
complexity of querying a list and finding the maximum Q-value in action 
space. In fact, many comparison operations are used in list queries and 
maximum searches after punishment applies. The length of the list and 
Fig. 5. The negotiation process of the proposed multi-agent-based method.  
Fig. 6. VGG16 layer structure.  
S.S. Thenuwara et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Array 14 (2022) 100171
7
the type of comparison data define the number of comparisons. 
4. Experiments 
This section describes the main component of experimental analysis 
such as experimental data, protocol, result, and comparison of the pro-
posed method. There are two experiments done: Experiment 1: to 
measure the accuracy of the proposed model with a large dataset and 
compare with other fusion methods, Experiment 2: to compare with 
previous ABC systems using the private dataset (D). The preprocessed 
has been done before the experiment to maintain the guidelines of the 
ABC process [1]. 
4.1. Experimental data 
Dataset A, Dataset B, Dataset C, and Dataset D represent as National 
Institute of Standard Technology (NIST) multimodal dataset [2], 
SDUMLA-HMT multimodal database [18], BANCA database [42] and 
PRIVATE database respectively in our discussion section. Data pre-
processing has been done to maintain the ICAO standards [1]. Therefore, 
data augmentation and resizing have been applied for images. 224 ×
224 pixels images are most suitable for VGG16 and augmentation 
methods (rotation and flipping) used for face images.  
• Dataset A: National Institute of Standard Technology (NIST) released 
BSSR1 multimodal dataset for research purposes. In this dataset 
fingerprint, iris, and face images are linked together to identify the 
individuals. All individuals are formally consented to use their bio-
metrics to advance research purposes [2]. This data gathered during 
Nail to Nail Fingerprint Challenge [8] from several hundreds of 
people. Front angle face images and fingerprints (lift and right) have 
been selected. 
• Dataset B: SDUMLA-HMT Shandong University released a multi-
modal trait database including face images in seven angles, finger-
print, finger vein, and iris from 106 individuals [18].  
• Dataset C: BANCA is multimodal biometric database [42].  
• Dataset D: PRIVATE dataset that we created for our last biometric- 
based authorization research which updated with fingerprint and 
face from 450 students in the university. This dataset uses for prac-
tical test the authorization process in our laboratory. 
These three databases (A, B, and C) and different classifiers engaging 
with a multi-agent paradigm show absorbing results for the proposed 
automated multimodal biometric system. In the next section, we will 
discuss the experimental protocol. The four multimodal datasets include 
88,430 individuals’ traits and divided into training, testing, and vali-
dation as shown in Table 3. 
4.2. Experimental evaluation protocol 
To make the evaluation process, four datasets have been divided into 
tearing, testing, and validation as shown in Table 4. The performance 
accuracy measure with the following Equation (3). Sensitivity and 
specificity represented in Equations (4) and (5) respectively. True pos-
itive (TP) is correctly recognized that authorized person, the true 
negative (TN) is not correctly recognized authorized person, False pos-
itive (FP) is unauthorized recognized and false-negative (FN) is an un-
authorized person not recognized over the total number of tests. The 
accuracy rate of the classification rate used to compare the two classi-
fiers [18] and datasets was implemented in alphabetical order. 
4.3. Experimental results (Experiment 1) 
Before engaged with multi-agent, we tested other classifiers indi-
vidually (face and fingerprint) with four datasets. Table 5 shows the 
different classifier results with the CNN model. Fingerprint trait shows 
the highest accuracy of 99.66% engaging with SoftMax classifier and 
SVM is the highest accuracy classifier for face biometric engage with 
CNN base model. 
The next step is finding the result of fusion and negotiation-based 
strategy with multimodal. Table 6 shows the standard deviation of 
four classifiers at recognition and verification stages using four datasets. 
Verification classifiers deliver good results than recognition classifies as 
we expected. Results showing SoftMax and SVM classifiers make better 
outcomes than others. Results show more similar comparing to different 
classifiers. 
However, after applying the multi-agent negotiation method and 
other fusions techniques results shows in Table 7. It shows a significant 
improvement of the negotiation method than sum and vote based 
technique for all datasets. 
As we already mentioned unimodal systems are vulnerable to at-
tackers, therefore our aim is a fusion method, not individual biometric 
accuracy. Receiver Operating Characteristic curve (ROC) used to 
compare different classifiers in general with each dataset [43]. The 
shape of the curve contains useful information. Figs. 7 and 8 represents 
the ROC curves of different classifiers with four datasets respectively. 
Ideal classifier should go through the origin (0, 0), the top-left corner (0, 
1) and the top-right corner (1, 1). The proposed method shows in the red 
curve and it very close to ideal with dataset A and another significant 
improvement with other datasets as well. 
4.4. Comparison with previous fusion methods 
The following part is a very important result of our proposed system. 
The majority of researchers are done biometric authorization systems 
using iris and other highest-level traits [15]. However, we unable to use 
some biometric traits as already mentioned in this paper (ICAO Stan-
dard). Therefore, we compare our proposed method with face and 
fingerprint authorization systems other researchers have done. The ac-
curacy of the proposed system compared and revived with other 
multimodal systems in our literature [13,15,16] in Table 8. Accuracy is 
more similar to three multimodal (fingerprint, finger vein, and face) that 
have been proposed by El Mehdi Cherrat et al. [15]. However, finger 
vein traits are not recommended to use for passenger flow control due to 
privacy and cost [1]. Computational time is a very important 
Table 3 
Multimodal datasets (fingerprint and face).   
Dataset A 
(NIST BSSR1) 
Dataset B 
(SDUMLA-HMT) 
Dataset C 
(BANCA) 
Dataset D 
(PRIVATE) 
No. of 
Images 
45,990 
33,540 
8450 
450  
Table 4 
Multimodal datasets (fingerprint and face). 
Accureccy =
True Positive + True Negative
True Positive + True Negative + False Positive + False Negative
(3a)  
Sensitivity =
True Positive
True Positive + False Negative
(4a)  
Specificity =
True Negative
True Negative + False Positive
(5)    
Dataset A 
(NIST BSSR1) 
Dataset B 
(SDUMLA- 
HMT) 
Dataset C 
(BANCA) 
Dataset D 
(PRIVATE) 
No. of 
Images 
45,990 
33,540 
8450 
450 
Training 
30,792 
26,832 
5070 
270 
Validation 
4599 
3354 
1690 
90 
Test 
4599 
3354 
1690 
90  
S.S. Thenuwara et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Array 14 (2022) 100171
8
measurement of passenger flow control systems [2]. Furthermore, 
Table 8 shows the comparison of time consumption with different fusion 
methods [15,45]. The proposed method shows less computational time 
than other fusion methods with all datasets. 
4.5. Comparison with existing ABC systems (Experiment 2) 
In our research, comparing with fusion methods is not enough 
therefore in this section describes the comparison with few available 
ABC systems to measure the overall performance. Experiment 2 carried 
out with two stages, the first stage collects the face and fingerprint 
Table 5 
Different classifier accuracy (%) results with unimodal biometrics.   
Dataset A 
Dataset B 
Dataset C 
Dataset D 
Classifiers 
Face 
Fprint 
Face 
Fprint 
Face 
Fprint 
Face 
Fprint 
CNN & SoftMax 
99.36 
99.66 
98.57 
98.99 
97.45 
99.45 
99.58 
99.47 
CNN & SVM 
99.56 
99.45 
99.11 
99.12 
98.45 
98.55 
99.50 
99.44 
CNN & LR 
99.25 
99.47 
99.47 
99.24 
98.41 
98.74 
98.98 
98.77 
CNN & RF 
99.35 
99.55 
98.47 
98.66 
98.66 
97.66 
99.45 
98.66  
Table 6 
Error results of individual classifiers.  
Classifiers 
Dataset A 
Dataset B 
Recognition 
Verification 
Recognition 
Verification 
CNN & 
SoftMax 
10.12% ∓
2.41 
09.62% ∓
3.41 
10.77% ∓
2.89 
09.22% ∓
3.41 
CNN & SVM 
11.12% ∓
2.58 
09.12% ∓
2.96 
12.12% ∓
2.36 
09.12% ∓
3.55 
CNN & LR 
12.12% ∓
2.63 
09.10% ∓
2.81 
13.52% ∓
2.58 
09.12% ∓
3.41 
CNN & RF 
13.12% ∓
2.44 
09.02% ∓
2.51 
12.72% ∓
2.62 
09.12% ∓
3.21  
Dataset C 
Dataset D 
Classifiers 
Recognition 
Verification 
Recognition 
Verification 
CNN & 
SoftMax 
11.52% ∓
2.41 
09.22% ∓
2.47 
11.18% ∓
3.91 
09.55% ∓
3.42 
CNN & SVM 
10.12% ∓
2.51 
08.52% ∓
2.54 
11.42% ∓
3.47 
09.98% ∓
2.49 
CNN & LR 
11.12% ∓
3.71 
09.82% ∓
2.25 
12.62% ∓
3.81 
09.25% ∓
3.61 
CNN & RF 
12.12% ∓
3.41 
09.57% ∓
3.41 
12.12% ∓
3.21 
09.82% ∓
2.33  
Table 7 
Fusion technique results.  
Fusion Technique 
Dataset A 
Dataset B 
Proposed Multi-agent 
4.42% ∓ 2.41 
4.77% ∓ 2.41 
Sum Based 
9.22% ∓ 2.56 
08.12% ∓ 2.41 
Majority Vote 
11.12% ∓ 2.61 
10.52% ∓ 2.41  
Dataset C 
Dataset D 
Proposed Multi-agent 
4.18% ∓ 3.99 
3.55% ∓ 3.42 
Sum Based 
9.42% ∓ 3.45 
8.98% ∓ 2.49 
Majority Vote 
12.62% ∓ 3.71 
11.25% ∓ 3.61  
Fig. 7. ROC curve different classifiers dataset A (left) and dataset B (right).  
Fig. 8. ROC curves different classifiers dataset C.  
S.S. Thenuwara et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Array 14 (2022) 100171
9
biometrics using 450 students and authorization done by the second 
stage. This experiment was done with Intel Corei7 Processor, 8 GB Ram, 
and Nvidia GeForce GTX 880 CPU in 64 Bit Ubuntu 16 Environment. 
Logitech HD QuickCam and AFS 510 USB scanner used for capturing 
face image and fingerprint respectively. Table 9 shows the comparison 
of ABC systems with the proposed model by examining the computa-
tional cost, security, and accuracy proposed model exceedingly appli-
cable for the ABC system. Purpose of the dataset D is to measure the FN 
and FP rates in real-time border control like the environment in our 
laboratory. 
The balance between false negative and false positive is very 
important and Fig. 9 shows significant improvement of the proposed 
method. Table 9 shows an application-wise comparison with other ABC 
systems. The final comparison was done with selected ABC systems 
(accuracy more than 96%) by considering the major components in the 
system [1] from their research paper. Accuracy refers the ability of 
correctly identify the live sample, applicability refers to how overall 
system capacity of using biometric recognition task, cost refers to 
implementation and sensor costs by capturing and identification phases, 
authorization time refers to average system time taken for identifying 
the biometric traits, security refers to use lower-level unimodal bio-
metrics which already identified vulnerable to spoofing attacks and 
usability refers to how the flexibility of the overall ABC system. In 2012 
BIOMET [33] has been developed for passenger flow control with 98% 
accuracy. They used to face and fingerprint fusion and applicability is 
low as they already mention that capacity of the system is low. Cost, 
time, and security very low due to cost-effective biometrics [7]. Security 
can be considerably low as feature level fusions already vulnerable to 
attackers and overall medium usability of the system. BOPPASSII [27] 
and Spreeuwers et al. [28] showed a higher accuracy of 99.45% and 
99% with information about SmartGate ABC systems already 
implemented in Australia and Portugal. Both systems have a lot of user 
comments regarding the flexibility and recognition time on survey re-
sults [4]. Furthermore, Spreeuwers et al [28] system commonly known 
as Frontex, and it was acquiring high costs at the implementing stage as 
well as higher time delay at authorization [1]. El Mehdi Cherrat et al. 
[15] and Nada Alay et al. [18] are presented a research-level ABC system 
with an accuracy of 99% and 98.72% respectively. Both systems have 
higher accuracy with lower applicability for ABC systems hence they 
used finger-vein as modalities [1]. Therefore, both types of research are 
not significantly useable as automated passenger flow control. Spanish 
ABC [6] system inaugurated in late May 2010 and implemented in 
Barajas and El Prat airports. The main disadvantage of the system is if 
either facial or fingerprint fail to recognize, the system considered the 
traveler authentication process unsuccessful. Therefore, applicability 
and usability can be considered as lower than other systems as it already 
outdated [29,41]. We have done two previous research engage with 
unimodal biometrics with and without a multi-agent approach [13,44] 
which encourage us to do a multimodal multi-agent approach. Both 
types of research are accurate and security-wise lower than others. 
however, our target is to achieve low cost and high applicable ABC 
system. Finally, we decided to use multimodal traits that capable of 
higher security as well as a considerable cost-effective model. The pro-
posed system capable of handling large datasets as well as higher ac-
curacy range compares to BIOMET and BIOPASS II. 
Finally, we can conclude that our multimodal multi-agent system is 
more appropriate and reliable for real-world passenger flow control with 
maintaining the standards because: 
Table 8 
Accuracy and computational time compared with proposed system.  
Algorithms 
Dataset A 
Dataset B 
Accuracy (%) 
Time (ms) 
Accuracy (%) 
Time (ms) 
ALGO1 
99.49 
79 
91.34 
97 
ALGO2 
99.31 
480 
93.33 
345 
ALGO3 
99.40 
560 
92.33 
456 
ALGO4 
96.00 
78 
91.04 
88 
ALGO5 
99.62 
62 
95.52 
67  
Dataset C 
Dataset D 
Classifiers 
Accuracy (%) 
Time (ms) 
Accuracy (%) 
Time (ms) 
ALGO1 
89.49 
79 
89.25 
79 
ALGO2 
78.37 
450 
78.36 
580 
ALGO3 
77.44 
480 
77.41 
340 
ALGO4 
89.55 
88 
90.00 
77 
ALGO5 
90.12 
90 
90.62 
70 
ALGO1 - Fingerprint ANN & Fingervein ANN & Face ANN [15]. 
ALGO2 - Fingerprint CNN & face CNN [15]. 
ALGO3 - Multimodal Asymmetric Agg Operators [16]. 
ALGO4 - Our Previous Research Thenuwara SS [13]. 
ALGO5- Proposed Multi-agent-based fingerprint CNN & face CNN. 
Table 9 
Comparison with other ABC systems.   
Accuracy % 
Applicability 
Cost 
Authorization Time 
Security 
Usability 
BIOMET [14] 
98.74 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Medium 
BIOPASS II [27] 
99.45 
Medium 
High 
High 
Low 
High 
Spreeuwers et al. [28] 
99.00 
High 
High 
High 
High 
High 
El Mehdi Cherrat et al. [15] 
99.49 
Low 
High 
Medium 
High 
Very Low 
Nada Alay et al. [18] 
98.72 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Low 
Medium 
Spanish ABC [6] 
96.61 
Low 
High 
High 
Low 
Low 
Our Previous Research 1 [13] 
96.00 
Medium 
Low 
High 
Low 
Medium 
Our Previous Research 2 [44] 
98.00 
Medium 
Low 
High 
Low 
Low 
Proposed Multi-Agent 
99.62 
High 
Low 
Medium 
High 
High  
Fig. 9. ROC curves FP and FN rates with different classifiers using dataset D.  
S.S. Thenuwara et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Array 14 (2022) 100171
10
• The proposed enhanced method recognition rate higher than other 
latest multimodal authorization systems especially face and 
fingerprints.  
• The proposed method shows the less computational time for fusion 
as it used the negotiation paradigm. Time is a very important factor 
in border control matters.  
• The balance between FPR and FNR are favorable.  
• CNN is a deep learning method and it could handle a large number of 
passenger databases who register with the e-Gate system.  
• The sensor device cost is relatively lower than other higher-level 
biometric capturing devices. And also capturing time is lesser than 
others.  
• We can address the distributed level biometric authorization system 
as well as task-related agents that can be adaptable. 
5. Conclusion 
A system for passenger flow control using multimodal biometrics 
with the enhancement of an intelligent agent-based paradigm has been 
introduced in this paper. The negotiation strategy is the principal 
concept of the proposed method and it is relatively similar to a human- 
based decision-making task. The individual agent responsible for the 
recognition task is a novel concept of an automated biometric authori-
zation domain. The agent-based system improves the quality of the 
decision-making process than other fusion methods as shown in the 
results. The experimental result of the proposed method has shown 
overall accuracy, performance and computational time are preferable 
than other multimodal authorization systems. Furthermore, the pro-
posed method improved, acceptable and reliable results than other ABC 
systems. It implies that protentional benefits can be harvest from 
allowing a negotiation strategy among intelligent agents. Furthermore, 
the proposed method used ICAO standard biometrics (face and finger-
print) which relatively cost-effective than others. For future study, 
enhance the proposed passenger flow control system with engaging the 
robotic operating system (ROS) and against spoofing attack is a task 
worth investigating. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
References 
[1] Sanchez del Rio Jose, Moctezuma Daniela, Conde Cristina, Martin de Diegoa Isaac, 
Cabelloa Enrique. Automated border control e-gates and facial recognition systems. 
Comput Secur J 2016;62:49–72. 
[2] Yang Xin, Kong Lingshuang, Liu Zhi, Wang Chunhua, Zhu Hongliang, 
Gao Mingcheng, Zhao Chensu. Multimodal feature-level fusion for biometrics 
identification system on IoMT platform. IEEE Access 2018;6. 
[3] Gomez-Barrero Marta, Rathgeb Christian, Ulrich Scherhag, Busch Christoph. 
Predicting the vulnerability of biometric systems to attacks based on morphed 
biometric information. IEEE IET Biometr J 2018;7. 
[4] Orteg David, Fern´andez-IsabelIsa Alberto, de Diego Martín, Conde Cristina, 
Cabello Enrique. Dynamic facial presentation attack detection for automated 
border control systems. Comput Secur J 2020;92. 
[5] Gorodnichy D, Yanushkevich S, Shmerko V. Automated border control: problem 
formalization, IEEE symposium series in computational intelligence (SSCI 2011). 
2015. 
[6] Daniel Cuesta Cantarero; David Antonio P´erez Herrero; Fernando Martín M´endez, 
A multi-modal biometric fusion implementation for ABC systems, 2013 European 
Intelligence and security informatics conference. 
[7] Robertson Joshua J, Guest Richard M, Elliott Stephen J, O’Connor Kevin. 
A framework for biometric and interaction performance assessment of automated 
border control processes. IEEE Trans Human Machine Syst J 2017;47(6). 
[8] Tsutomu M, Hiroyuki M, Koji Y, Satoshi H. Impact of artificial gummy fingers on 
fingerprint systems. Int J Opt Secur Count Deter Technol 2002;4677(IV):275–89. 
[9] Kwon Taekyoung, Moon Hyeonjoon. Biometric authentication for border control 
applications. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng J 2008;20(Issue 5). 
[10] Eastwood Shawn C, Shmerko VP, Yanushkevich SN, Dr M, ahansky, 
Gorodnichy DO. Biometric-enabled authentication machines: a survey of open-set 
real-world applications. IEEE Trans Human Machine Syst J 07 May 2015;46(Issue): 
2. 
[11] Dmitry O. Gorodnichy, multi-order biometric score analysis framework and its 
application to designing and evaluating biometric systems for access and border 
control, IEEE symposium Series in computational intelligence (SSCI 2011), workshop 
on computational intelligence in biometrics and identity management (CIBIM). 
Paris – France; 11-15 April 2011. 
[12] Labati Ruggero Donida, Genovese Angelo, Mu˜noz Enrique, Piuri Vincenzo, 
Scotti Fabio, Sforza Gianluca. Automated border control systems: biometric 
challenges and research trends. International Conference on Information Systems 
Security; 2015. 
[13] SS Thenuwara and AS Karunananda Department of Computational Mathematics, 
University of Moratuwa. Sri Lanka. Multi-agent approach to face recognition in 
border control. General Sir John Kotelawala Defence University; 2013. to 2017 
International Research Conference. http://ir.kdu.ac.lk/handle/345/2282. 
[14] Hiren D. Joshi phd, dept. Of computer science. BIOMET: a multimodal biometric 
authentication system for person identification and verification using fingerprint 
and face recognition. 0975 –8887 Int J Comput Appl 2012;51. No.17. 
[15] Cherrat El, Alaoui R, Bouzahir H. Convolutional neural networks approach for 
multimodal biometric identification system using the fusion of fingerprint, finger- 
vein and face images. PeerJ Comput Sci J 2020;6. e248 , 2020. 
[16] Herbadji A, Akhtar Z, Siddique K, Guermat N, Ziet L, Cheniti M, Muhammad K. 
Combining multiple biometric traits using asymmetric aggregation operators for 
improved person recognition. Symmetry 2020;12:444. 
[17] Sun Yunlian, Zhang Man, Sun Zhenan, Tan Tieniu. Demographic analysis from 
biometric data: achievements, challenges, and new frontiers. IEEE Trans Pattern 
Anal Mach Intell 2017;40(Issue):2. 
[18] Nada Alay, Heyam H, Al-Baity. A multimodal biometric system for personal 
verification based on different level fusion of Iris and face traits. Bioscience 
Biotechnology Research Communications Journal 2019;12. Number 3. 
[19] White David, Kemp Richard I, Jenkins Rob, Matheson Michael, Mike Burton A. 
Passport officers’ errors in face matching. Sydney, Australia: School of Psychology, 
The University of New South Wales; 2014. 
[20] Waldemar W´ojcik, Konrad gromaszek and muhtar junisbekov 2016 face 
recognition: issues, methods, and alternative applications Institute of electronics 
and information technology, Lublin University of Technology, Lublin, Poland. 
[21] Girija chett and dharmendra sharma 2006 distributed face recognition: a multi- 
agent approach. School of Information Sciences and Engineering, University of 
Canberra, Australia IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network 
Security; 2006. OL.6 No.8A. 
[22] Gupta Rajeev. Multi-agent approach towards face recognition. M.M. Institute of 
Computer Technology & Business Management Maharishi Markandeshwar 
University; 2011. 
[23] Shaikh Wasim, Shinde Hemant, Sharma Grishma. Face recognition using multi- 
agent system. Int J Comput Sci Eng 2016;4(4). 
[24] Zhu 1 Yanfei, Ruan Qiuqi. Face Feature Extraction Based on Agents with Multi- 
camera System International Journal of Information and Computer Science 2012; 
(2):34–8. 2012, IJICS Volume 1PP. 
[25] Kapczy´nski Adrian, Owczarek Tomasz. Simulation model of biometric 
authentication using multiagent approach. J Telecommun Inf Technol 2010;6. 
[26] Deng Zhang, Mabu Shingo, Hirasawa Kotaro. A robust intelligent face recognition 
framework using GNP-based multi-agent system. SICE Annual Conference 2011; 
13–18:2011. 2011, September. 
[27] BIOPASS II Automated biometric border crossing systems based on electronic 
passports and facial recognition: RAPID and SmartGate, Tech. rep., agency, 
European cooperation, operational borders, external states, Member Union, 
European. 
[28] Spreeuwers LJ, Hendrikse AJ, Gerritsen KJ. Evaluation of automatic face 
recognition for automatic border control on actual data recorded of travelers at 
Schiphol Airport. Proceedings of the international conference of the Biometrics 
Special Interest Group (BIOSIG), 2012 BIOSIG 2012:1–6. 
[29] Kosmerlj M, Fladsrud T, Hjelm E. Face recognition issues in a border control 
environment. In: David Ahang AKJ, editor. Advances in biometrics lecture notes in 
computer science. Hong Kong: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2006. p. 33–9. 
[30] Kwon T, Moon H. Biometric authentication for border control applications. IEEE 
Trans Knowl Data Eng 2008;20:1091–6. 
[31] D.C. Cantarero, D.A.P. Herrero, F.M. MendezA Multi-modal biometric fusion 
implementation for ABC systems, 2013 European Intelligence and security informatics 
conference 277–280. 
[32] Conde C, Martin de Diego I, Cabello E. Face recognition in uncontrolled 
environments, experiments in an airport, e-business and telecommunications. 
Commun Comput Inform Sci 2011;314:20–32. 
[33] Garcia-Salicetti S, et al. BIOMET: a multimodal person authentication database 
including face, voice, fingerprint, hand and signature modalities. In: Kittler J, 
Nixon MS, editors. Audio- and video-based biometric person authentication. 
AVBPA 2003. Lecture notes in computer science, vol. 2688. Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer; 2003. 
[34] Marjory Cristiany Da Costa Abreu. Analyzing the benefits of a novel multiagent 
approach in a multimodal biometrics identification task. IEEE Syst J 2009;3(4). 
[35] Stephen Knoxa, MeierJimYoon Philipp, Harou cJulien J. A python framework for 
multi-agent simulation of networked resource systems. ScienceDirect Journal 
2018;103:16–28. 
[36] Malcolm Reida Elhadi M.Shakshukia. Implementing a multi-agent system for 
recording and transmitting biometric information of elderly citizens 2017. The 7th 
International Conference on Current and Future Trends of Information and 
S.S. Thenuwara et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Array 14 (2022) 100171
11
Communication Technologies in Healthcare (ICTH 2017), Volume 113, Pages 334- 
343. 
[37] Gunasekaran K, Raja J, Pitchai R. Deep multimodal biometric recognition using 
contourlet derivative weighted rank fusion with human face, fingerprint and iris 
images. Automatika Science Direct Journal 2019;60(3):253–65. 
[38] Mohite Ayusha, Gamare Shruti, Karan, Patil Nita. International Research Journal of 
Engineering and Technology (IRJET) 2019;(6 Issue). 
[39] Patil Abhijit, Kruthi R, Gornale Shivanand. Analysis of multi-modal biometrics 
system for gender classification using face, Iris and fingerprint images. J. Image, 
Graphics and Signal Processing 2019;5:34–43. 
[40] Park Eunsoo, Kim Weonjin, Li Qiongxiu, Kim Jungmin, Kim Hakil. Fingerprint 
liveness detection using CNN features of random sample patches. International 
Conference of the Biometrics Special Interest Group (BIOSIG) 2016:321–8. 
[41] Cockell R, Halak B. On the design and analysis of a biometric authentication system 
using keystroke dynamics. Cryptography 2020;4:12. 
[42] Rane M, Latne T, Bhadade U. Biometric recognition using fusion. In: Kumar A, 
Paprzycki M, Gunjan V, editors. ICDSMLA 2019. Lecture notes in electrical 
engineering, vol. 601. Singapore: Springer; 2020. 
[43] Walia GS, Rishi S, Asthana R, Kumar A, Gupta A. Robust secure multimodal 
biometric system based on diffused graphs and optimal score fusion. IET Biom 
2019;8(4):231–42. 
[44] Thenuwara SS, Premachandra C, Sumathipala S. "Hybrid approach to face 
recognition system using PCA & LDA in border control," 2019 national information 
technology conference (NITC), colombo. Sri Lanka; 2019. p. 9–15. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/NITC48475.2019.9114426. 
[45] Nguyen HM, Rattani A, Derakhshani R. Biometrics fusion with applications in 
passenger Re-authentication for automated border control systems. Woburn, MA, 
USA: 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Technologies for Homeland Security 
(HST); 2019. p. 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1109/HST47167.2019.9032968. 
[46] Clabian Markus, FastPass - Automated Border Control as Challenging Combination 
of Various Security Technologies. IH&MMSec ’14: Proceedings of the 2nd ACM 
workshop on Information hiding and multimedia security. 2014. 
[47] Zhang X, Chang Z, Wang Y. Multi-model method decentralized adaptive control for 
a class of discrete-time multi-agent systems. IEEE Access 2020;8:193717–27. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3030635. 
[48] Palanca J, Terrasa A, Julian V, Carrascosa C. SPADE 3: supporting the new 
generation of multi-agent systems. IEEE Access 2020;8:182537–49. https://doi. 
org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3027357. 
[49] Bei X, Liu S, Poon CK, et al. Candidate selections with proportional fairness 
constraints. Auton Agent Multi-Agent Syst 2022;36:5. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s10458-021-09533-7. 
S.S. Thenuwara et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
