Agri-BIGDATA: A smart pathway for crop nitrogen inputs
Guijun Yang a,b, Yanbo Huang c, Chunjiang Zhao b,⁎
a Key Laboratory of Quantitative Remote Sensing in Agriculture of Ministry of Agriculture, Beijing Research Center for Information Technology in Agriculture, Beijing, China
b National Engineering Research Center for Information Technology in Agriculture, Beijing, China
c Crop Production Systems Research Unit, United States Department of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service, Stoneville, MS, United States
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 30 May 2020
Received in revised form 4 August 2020
Accepted 4 August 2020
Available online 8 August 2020
Keywords:
Big data
Smart farming
Nitrogen requirement
Big data provide a pathway to lower crop nitrogen inputs from genetic breeding to ﬁeld production. Moreover,
multidisciplinary efforts from plant health sensing, deep machine learning and cloud computing can integrate
multi-source data to form information and knowledge. So big data analysis as a prospective optimal method,
will make leaps towards addressing future issues of sustainable agriculture.
© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open
access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
The challenge to increase food production in an economically viable
way while retaining environmental quality will face a balance control in
food systems. Achieving synchrony between nitrogen supply and crop
(e.g. wheat, maize and rice) demand without excess or deﬁciency is
the key to optimize tradeoffs amongst yield, proﬁt, and environmental
protection. In recent years, a large number of innovations appear for
the efﬁcient use of nutrients from all aspects, including biology, breed-
ing, farming, cultivation and crop production management. However,
if some of the links mentioned above are not effective, the overall nutri-
ent utilization cannot be optimized at all costs. Therefore, it is necessary
for integrating the local feasible links to form a comprehensive crop ni-
trogen optimized approach from crop breeding to crop production. Fi-
nally, the goal of maintaining stable crop yield and grain quality can
be reached through reduction of crop nitrogen inputs.
We found the article by Swarbreck et al. (2019) proposed an inter-
esting and valuable idea which introduces a roadmap for the reduction
of crop nitrogen inputs by the joint effort of farmers, breeders and scien-
tists, while sustaining cereal yields and reducing greenhouse gas emis-
sions. We fully agree with this opinion, but there is also an urgent
need to provide an achievable pathway for smart crop nitrogen man-
agement as described in the literature (Swarbreck et al., 2019). With
this letter, we mainly emphasize the role of an integrated and compre-
hensive agricultural big data (Agri-BIGDATA) framework, which can
provide effective guidance for crop cultivation practices, including low-
ering crop production nitrogen requirement. In the agriculture commu-
nity, Agri-BIGDATA is generally viewed as a combination of technology
and analytics that can collect and compile novel data, and process data
in a more useful and timely way to assist decision-making (The AIMS
Team from FAO of the United Nations, n.d.). Therefore, this Agri-
BIGDATA often generated by geneticists, breeders, agronomists, and
plant scientists, consists of genotype-phenotype related variety traits
and cultivation knowledge, remote sensing observations, and meteoro-
logical and soil databases. The applications and practices of Agri-
BIGDATA are creating a new era of ‘smart farming’ for the world to be-
hold (The AIMS Team from FAO of the United Nations, n.d.; Gilpin,
2015).
Why can big data analysis provide solutions for lowering crop nitro-
gen application for smart farming? As Swarbreck et al. (2019) has con-
cluded, optimal decisions of lowering nitrogen requirement need to be
made according to many factors speciﬁc for each cropping system, in-
cluding fertilizer cost, expected yield, and variety-speciﬁc agronomic in-
formation and training in cultivation techniques. However, nitrogen
related information of crop breeding or cultivation form the massive
and complex big data collected by sensors, farmers and experts. Obvi-
ously, it is difﬁcult for ordinary farmers to timely master these huge
data and to retrieve relevant knowledge. So, it is necessary to establish
an interdisciplinary Agri-BIGDATA platform, which could provide top-
down intelligent decision-making solutions based on data/information
chains. Moreover, with rapid development and maturity of the latest In-
ternet of Things, 5G communication, big data, and artiﬁcial intelligence
technologies, farming practices will become increasingly data driven
and data-enabled. Undoubtedly, now is the best time in history to de-
velop and apply Agri-BIGDATA, not only for lowering nitrogen inputs,
but for the entire crop production management. Thus, Agri-BIGDATA
enables data to be more efﬁciently translated into knowledge to serve
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 150–152
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: yanggj@nercita.org.cn (G. Yang), zhaocj@nercita.org.cn (C. Zhao).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2020.08.001
2589-7217/© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage: http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-
intelligence-in-agriculture/
an enormous number of agricultural producers even real-time online by
intelligent
communication
or
vividly
augmented
reality
(AR)
technologies.
The accurate guidance based on big data can help producers with
streamlined decision-making and precision nitrogen management.
The most typical case of big data in agriculture is the Gene Bank
(Mascher et al., 2019), which links catalogs of crop genetic variation
and enquiries into biological mechanisms of plant performance. For ex-
ample, once the genotype and phenotype parameters related to crop ni-
trogen utilization are determined, they can be connected directly to
develop the virtual reality breeding tool with the crop growth model
(e.g. DSSAT) (Araus et al., 2018). With this tool, breeders and re-
searchers can visualize how the plants grow in advance and greatly op-
timize breeding procedure for the goal of high-efﬁciency nitrogen use.
The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) plans to aggregate
and manage agricultural big data created by connected farming equip-
ment, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), and even satellites to ensure
food security and agricultural sustainability. USDA launched the
GODAN (Global Open Data for Agriculture and Nutrition) program
(Wolfert et al., 2017) to support the sharing of open data to improve
ability of crop monitoring and decision making. In particular, many
open-source satellite imagery datasets are accessible through platforms
such as Amazon Web Services S3 (AWS) and Google Earth Engine to
serve precision agriculture (Shelestov et al., 2017). An infrastructural
framework based on a three-layer nice-level remote sensing cube was
proposed to monitor the status of agricultural ﬁelds (Huang et al.,
2018). Similarly, the Monsanto Corporation acquired by Bayer also
launched a suite of digital tools, called Integrated Field Systems (IFS),
for collecting and analyzing farm data in soil conditions, varieties and
weather to generate digital nutrient mapping (Monsanto, 2014).
AgSpace (Swindon, UK) can seamlessly connect their business with
thousands of farms and use technologies to provide scientiﬁc farmland
zoning scheme, the best fertilizer prescription and the fertilizer procure-
ment time according to the ﬂuctuation of market price (Agspace, n.d.).
Based on the mode of government-led, enterprise-run agricultural big
data service, a national agricultural science and education cloud plat-
form has also been promoted and developed in China (http://njtg.
nercita.org.cn/, n.d.). This platform has gathered various agricultural
data and information resources to provide online learning, interactive
communication and service docking for farmers. For nitrogen manage-
ment, a scientiﬁc fertilizer prescription for strong or weak gluten
wheat can be determined according to big data of crop gluten-
associated phenotyping, meteorological, soil and farmland resources
with while considering the optimization of fertilizer and water
operations.
In addition, online social media (e.g., Twitter, Wechat, and Google
Search) as an important source of big data, for example, to learn fertiliz-
ing operation, collect fertilizer and grain market information. On the one
hand, more and more users are timely sharing agriculture-related infor-
mation (e.g., nutritional diagnosis, fertilization prescriptions, yield and
quality, food consumption, proﬁt information etc.). On the other hand,
advanced production experience, consumer interests and food market-
ing trends can be retrieved from social media platforms, which are valu-
able references for farmers.
Big data provides a good solution for the precise management in ag-
ricultural production, including fertilizers and pesticides applications,
although it has many urgent problems to solve, especially in terms of
privacy and security, quality and traceability, and integration and
norm (Semantic Community, 2015). In this aspect we have two other
emphases that require extensive attention. Firstly, attention should be
paid to the Agri-BIGDATA derived mechanistic models based on agron-
omy, informatics and statistics because they are the key blocks for agri-
cultural big data analysis and application. Once the mechanistic
research is done, it will be possible to better interpret and utilize the
data to ﬁll current knowledge gaps. Secondly, the crop nitrogen man-
agement involves a large number of spatial-temporal big data generated
by remote sensing from satellites, UAVs and ground-based systems,
which exhibit spatiotemporal auto-correlation and non-stationarity.
The current spatial statistical methods (e.g., spatial auto-regression)
do not scale up to big datasets due to their computational complexity.
Fig. 1. Framework for big data in agriculture to support smart crop production. The agricultural big data platform connects scientists, engineers, farmers, and business managers, leveraging
all the technologies, data, knowledge, and skills that are related to the entire crop growth process, from breeding to harvest.
151
G. Yang et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 150–152
So, there is a great need to develop scalable spatiotemporal data analyt-
ics to validate hypotheses with the aid of Agri-BIGDATA.
In conclusion, to make leaps towards addressing issues of future ag-
ricultural production and sustainable development, agricultural big data
will certainly play a key role and will be aided by innovations in data sci-
ence and technology. Moreover, multi-disciplinary driven cloud com-
puting, big data and deep learning technologies will provide
comprehensive solutions of various agricultural problems (see Fig. 1),
including proper input and effective use of nitrogen. We are convinced
that Agri-BIGDATA as an achievable pathway is undoubtedly the prior-
ity in developing smart agriculture in the near future.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Chunjiang Zhao: conceptualization. Guijun Yang: writing - original
draft. Yangbo Huang: writing - review & editing. All authors read and
approved the ﬁnal manuscript.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Develop-
ment Program of China (2017YFE0122500) and the Beijing Natural Sci-
ence Foundation (6182011).
References
Agspace, d. Unparalleled farming data. https://agspace.com/innovation/. (Accessed 15
July 2019). .
Araus, J.L., et al., 2018. Translating high-throughput phenotyping into genetic gain. Trends
Plant Sci. 23, 451–466.
Gilpin, L., 2015. How Big Data is going to help feed nine billion people by 2050.
TechRepublichttp://www.techrepublic.com/article/how-big-data-is-going-to-
helpfeed-9-billion-people-by-2050/. (Accessed 7 July 2019). .
China National Agricultural Science and Education cloud platform. http://njtg.nercita.org.
cn/. (Accessed 20 July 2019). .
Huang, Y., et al., 2018. Agricultural remote sensing big data: management and applica-
tions. J. Integr. Agric. 17 (9), 1915–1931.
Mascher, M., et al., 2019. Genebank genomics bridges the gap between the conservation
of crop diversity and plant breeding. Nature Genetics 51, 1. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41588-019-0443-6.
Monsanto, 2014. Fieldscripts. http://www.monsanto.com/products/pages/ﬁeldscripts.
aspx. (Accessed 15 July 2019). .
Semantic Community, 2015. Big Data science for precision farming business. http://
semanticommunity.info/Data_Science/Big_Data_Science_for_Precision_Farming_
Business. (Accessed 20 July 2019). .
Shelestov, A., et al., 2017. Exploring Google Earth engine platform for big data processing:
classiﬁcation of multi-temporal satellite imagery for crop mapping. Front. Earth Sci. 5,
17. https://doi.org/10.3389/feart.2017.00017.
Swarbreck, S.M., et al., 2019. A roadmap for lowering crop nitrogen requirement. Trends
Plant Sci. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2019.06.006.
The AIMS Team from FAO of the United Nations, d. Big Data: unlocking the future for Ag-
riculture. http://aims.fao.org/activity/blog/big-data-unlocking-future-agriculture.
(Accessed 7 July 2019). .
Wolfert, S., et al., 2017. Big data in smart farming – a review. Agric. Syst. 153, 69–80.
152
G. Yang et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 150–152
