Hierarchical approach for ripeness grading of mangoes
Anitha Raghavendra a,⁎, D.S. Guru b, Mahesh K. Rao a, R. Sumithra b
a Maharaja Institute of Technology Mysore, Belawadi, S.R.Patna Taluk,Mandya 571477, India
b Department of Studies in Computer Science, Manasagangothri, University of Mysore, Mysore 570006, India
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 12 February 2020
Received in revised form 6 October 2020
Accepted 10 October 2020
Available online 14 October 2020
Keywords:
Alphonso mango
L*a*b color space
Threshold based classiﬁer
Support vector machine
Grading of fruits based on their ripeness has been a topic of research for the last two decades. Identifying the rip-
ened mangoes has become more of an art than science and is a challenging task. This study aims at introducing a
system to grade mangoes with four classes based on their ripeness. The study was demonstrated through an ex-
tensive experimentation on a newly created dataset consisting of 981 images of Alphonso mango variety belong-
ing to four classes viz., under-ripen, perfectly ripen, over-ripen with internal defects and over-ripen without
internal defects. In this study, a hierarchical approach was adopted to classify the mangoes into the four classes.
At each stage of classiﬁcation, L*a*b color space features were extracted. For the purpose of classiﬁcation at each
stage, a number of classiﬁers and their possible combinations were tried out. The study revealed that, the Support
Vector Machine (SVM) classiﬁer works better for classifying mangoes into under-ripen, perfectly ripen and over-
ripen while the thresholding classiﬁer has a superior classiﬁcation performance on over-ripen with internal de-
fects and over-ripen without internal defects. Further, to bring out the superiority of the hierarchical approach, a
conventional single shot multi-class classiﬁcation approach with SVM was also studied. The results of the exper-
imentation demonstrated that the hierarchical method with an accuracy of 88% outperforms the counterpart
conventional single shot multi-class classiﬁcation approach in addition to several existing contemporary models.
© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open
access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
1. Introduction
Mango is one of the most popular delicious fruits produced and con-
sumed throughout the world. India is one amongst the most proliﬁc
mango growers across globe. India constitutes about 57% of the world-
wide production of mangoes with a demand in local and international
markets (Khoje and Shrikant, 2012). According to Agricultural and Proc-
essed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA), gradation
and inspection processes would fetch better market price and hence
they are necessary steps in post-harvest handling of mangoes. Auto-
matic grading of mangoes has thus become inevitable, not only for ex-
port purpose, but also for consumption including food processing
industries, as it brings down human intervention while dealing with
large quantities. In recent years, machine vision based technology has
become more popular in the ﬁelds of agriculture and food industry.
Machine vision based grading of fruits and vegetables is considered
efﬁcient as it avoids inconsistency, inaccuracy, time consuming and
labor intensive. There has been an extensive research done on computer
vision based grading of fruits and vegetables. Apple stem-end identiﬁca-
tion, calyx areas and surface defect detection (Li and Weikang, 2002),
segmentation of mango region from mango tree image (Guru and
Shivamurthy, 2013), automatic grading of Jonagold apples using hierar-
chical method based on their external defects (Leemans and Destain,
2004), grading of tomatoes based on defect discrimination (David
et al., 2019), automatic segregation of good olives from defective ones
(Barreiro et al., 2008), fusion based approach for categorization of fruits
and vegetables (Rocha et al., 2010), ripeness based classiﬁcation of
Golden delicious apples (Stefany et al., 2017) and a hybrid method of
classifying citrus fruits into immature and diseased on tree canopy im-
ages through their detection (Lu and Won, 2018; Sharif et al., 2018)
are a few interesting works to mention in literature.
A considerable work could be traced on automatic grading and
sorting of mangoes speciﬁcally based on attributes related to external
appearances such as shape, size, color, weight and defects (Roomi
et al., 2012; Sa'ad et al., 2015). A work on grading of mangoes using
shape features (region-based and contour based) and wavelet descrip-
tor is reported in (Khoje and Shrikant, 2012). Further, Khoje and
Shrikant (2013) have used feed forward neural network and support
vector machine for grading of mangoes based on their size features.
Identiﬁcation of external defects on mangoes using texture features is
also addressed (Musale and Pradeep, 2014; Pauly and Deepa, 2015).
In addition to the above mentioned attributes, the ripeness parame-
ter is also taken into consideration for grading of mangoes (Vyas et al.,
2014; Nayeli et al., 2012; Salunkhe and Aniket, 2015; Chhabra et al.,
2011; Mansor and Othman, 2014; Nandi et al., 2014). However, most
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 243–252
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: anithbg@gmail.com, anitharaghavendra_ece@mitmysore.in
(A. Raghavendra), dsg@compsci.uni-mysore.ac.in (D.S. Guru),
maheshkrao_ece@mitmysore.in (M.K. Rao).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2020.10.003
2589-7217/© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage: http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-
intelligence-in-agriculture/
of the works reported are on only classiﬁcation of unripen and ripen
fruits. Indeed, ripeness evaluation of mangoes plays a very important
role at the consumer selection, export level and food industries.
Mangoes in different stages of ripening are used to make products like
sweets, candy, juice, pulps, ice-creams, etc. Prediction on ripeness stages
of mangoes would also help in making up decision during transporta-
tion depending on time requirement. Hence, automatic grading of
mangoes based on their ripeness is a necessary requirement in real
time applications. In general, classiﬁcation of unripen and ripen
mangoes would be easier due to existence of high inter class variations.
On the other hand classiﬁcation of under-ripen, perfect- ripen and over-
ripen mangoes is very challenging because of low inter class variation.
Therefore, this study is on building up classiﬁcation model which
could stratify mangoes under different stages of ripeness. Over-ripen
mangoes generally have some black spots on their external appearances
and hence get rejected with an assumption that there may be some in-
ternal defects. But, most of the over-ripen mangoes with black spots
being not internally defected are safe for consumption. To the best of
our knowledge, no work could be traced in literature on classiﬁcation
of over-ripen mangoes with black spots into internally defected or not
internally defected and thus has been taken up as a part of this study.
In order to address effectively the above mentioned issues, investi-
gating on a suitable feature extraction technique is required. As color
is the common parameter to classify different stages of ripening
mangoes, different color features were studied extensively in literature
(Stefany et al., 2017; Leon et al., 2006; Khoje and Bodhe, 2016; Khoje
and Bodhe, 2015). The L*a*b color space coordinates have been used
for the classiﬁcation of fruits. As CIE L*a*b color space coordinates suit
human perception better and its features also show objective color
with ﬁdelity (Riquelme and Ruiz-Altisent, 2008) and assess color differ-
ences, individual values of L, *a and *b can be used to distinguish be-
tween any two samples based on their color characteristics. It shall be
noted that ‘L’ indicates lighter/darker, ‘*a’ represents more red/green
while ‘*b’ refers more yellow/blue in general. Hence, in this study,
L*a*b color space features are recommended to be adopted.
Generally, many important real world classiﬁcation problems have
been resolved using a hierarchical method, where classes are to be orga-
nized into levels of hierarchy (Silla and Freitas, 2011). The main objec-
tive of this study was to develop a computer vision system that can be
used to grade mangoes effectively. The speciﬁc objectives of this study
were to choose efﬁcient features and to develop suitable classiﬁers to
grade mangoes based on their ripeness with a hierarchical procedure.
This proposed system can be applied to ofﬂine mango post harvest man-
agement, as precision agriculture aims to have efﬁcient utilization of
resources for achieving targeted production of fruits. Overall, the
following are the major contributions of this work:
• Extensive study on ripeness evaluation of mangoes for grading.
• Proposal of a hierarchical multi-stage classiﬁcation approach.
• Exploitation of L*a*b color space features for effective representation.
• Study on suitability of different six classiﬁers and their possible
combinations for optimized performance.
• Creation of dataset of 981 mango images of four different classes.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Experiment setup and dataset collection
Experiments were conducted on Alphonso variety of mangoes. This
variety has four classes such as under-ripen, perfect-ripen, over-ripen
black spots without internal defects and over-ripen black spots with
internal defects. A total of 230 mangoes were collected from local
farm, Mysore, Karnataka, India. Later the mangoes were subjected to a
ripening process guided by different ripening procedures. An overview
of the proposed system is shown in Fig. 1.Images were acquired from
day 5 after they were kept for ripening, irrespective of the ripeness
treatments which were applied on mangoes. Due to the type of ripeness
treatment, on day 5 some mangoes had ripened and some had not rip-
ened. Therefore, mangoes were ﬁrst classiﬁed by an empirical method
to generate the ground truth. Detailed description on the created
dataset is given in Table.1. Some sample images of mangoes of all four
classes are shown in Fig. 2 as examples.
The image acquisition system was composed through android mo-
bile camera of resolution 16MP mounted perpendicularly in front of
an imaging table at a distance of 15 cm, as shown in Fig. 3. The camera
was connected via a data cable to an Intel core with i5-4500U CPU,
4GHz, and 16GB physical memory. Two focusing lights (Built-In Air
TTL, Recycling: 0.05 to 1.2 Sec, Li-Ion Battery: 350 Full Power Flashes,
LED Modeling Light, 9 Stop Power Range, 76 Ws Output) were placed
in diagonal direction to the table at two different corners. Images were
captured for each mango sample in different orientations chosen
Fig. 1. An overview of the proposed system.
A. Raghavendra, D.S. Guru, M.K. Rao et al.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 243–252
244
randomly. To make the task of region segmentation simple and easier,
the background is made up of black cardboard. The size of each image
was set to 4608 * 3456 at the time of acquiring images.
2.2. Proposed method
2.2.1. Feature extraction
During ripening process of mangoes, changes in skin color and tex-
ture are the predominant features irrespective of the method being
used for ripening. In our study, initially color features were adopted to
represent each stage of ripeness in mangoes. To quantify the color pres-
ent in a segmented region of a mango, color features from different color
spaces such as RGB, L*a*b, HSV, CMY and YCbCr were extracted
(Gonzalez and Richard, 2002). Four color features were extracted from
each individual color space. For example, in case of RGB space, features
representing each individual channel (R, G, B) and their fusion as a sep-
arate feature were extracted. As mean value provides the average value
of all the pixels in an image, means of individual channels of a color
space were considered as features.
Let f(a,b) be an image of size NxM expressed by three channels say
fi(a,b): i = 1, 2, 3 in a particular color space. Here a and b denote the spa-
tial coordinates. For the image f, three mean values (μ's) are computed
corresponding to each channel using Eq. (1).
μi ¼ 1
NM ∑
N
a¼1
∑
M
b¼1
f i a, b
ð
Þ
ð1Þ
In addition to these three features, fusion of these features (u) is also
taken as a feature in the respective color space and is given by
u ¼ ∑
3
i¼1
μi
3
ð2Þ
In general, if K is the number of color spaces each having three dif-
ferent channels then each color space has four different features
where three correspond to each individual channel and the other
one correspond to their fusion resulting with totally 4K number of
features. In this study K is set to ﬁve as mentioned above, there are
ﬁve color spaces.
As texture features (Haralick and Shanmugam, 1973; Abdur et al.,
2013; Dengsheng et al., 2000) were also found to be equally important
in literature, in this study the effectiveness of texture features such as
Local Binary Pattern (LBP), Grey Level Co-Matrix (GLCM-Haralick) and
Gabor were also studied against color features.
Table 1
The description on the dataset created.
Category
Number of Samples on different days of ripening process
Total number of images
Day1
Day 5
Day 7
Day 9
Day 11
Raw
230
–
–
–
–
–
Under-ripen
0
85
340 images
(85 × 4 views)
0
0
0
340 images (under-ripe)
Ripen (only 121 samples were used)
0
70
280 images (70 × 4 views)
38
152 images
(38 × 4 views)
13
52 images
(13 × 4 views)
–
484 images (perfect ripe)
Over-ripen with black spots
0
30
30 images
(30 × 1 view)
80
80 images
(80 × 1 view)
30
30 images
(30 × 1 view)
17
17 images
(17 × 1 view)
107 images (without internal defects)
50 images (with internal defects)
Decayed samples
0
45
67
75
26
–
Total images
–
–
–
–
–
981 images
Fig. 2. Sample images of mangoes of all four classes (a) under-ripen (b) perfect-ripen (c) over-ripen, black spot without internal defects (d) over-ripen, black spot with internal defects.
A. Raghavendra, D.S. Guru, M.K. Rao et al.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 243–252
245
2.2.2. Classiﬁcation
After extraction of features, mango images were classiﬁed using six
different classiﬁers. Naïve Baye's (NB), k-Nearest Neighbor (k−NN),
Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), Support Vector Machine (SVM),
Probabilistic Neural Network (PNN) and threshold based classiﬁers
were considered (Islam et al., 2007; Alan and Izenman, 2013; Kim and
Choi, 2014; Musavi et al., 1994). The NB classiﬁer, a linear simple prob-
abilistic classiﬁer, predicts a probability distribution over a set of classes
for a given observation. The LDA is a linear classiﬁer which separates
two or more classes of samples based on a linear combination of the fea-
tures. The SVM is a discriminative classiﬁer formally deﬁned by a class
separating hyperplane. The K-NN is a simple classiﬁer which takes a de-
cision based on the nearest neighbors. In PNN, the parent Probability
Distribution Function (PDF) of each class is approximated by a Parzen
window and a non-parametric function. The PDF of each class and the
class probability of a new input data are estimated by Bayes' rule.
Along with these classiﬁers, a new classiﬁer was designed based on
the threshold value of individual color spaces. Threshold based classiﬁer
was designed based on the differences between the samples of two dif-
ferent classes for each color space. The threshold values were empiri-
cally ﬁxed using training samples. Subsequently based on the
threshold values, testing samples were categorized. To validate the
model, the dataset was divided into two subsets, a training set and a
testing set at each level of classiﬁcation.
2.2.3. Hierarchical method of classiﬁcation
In order to have a high degree of discrimination, hierarchical struc-
ture was adopted for classiﬁcation assuming a binary classiﬁcation
model at every stage of ripeness as shown in Fig. 4.
Let [S1, S2……….Sn] be a set of n sample images of mangoes belong-
ing to 4 classes say Cj: j = 1, 2, 3, 4, representing different ripening stages
such as under-ripen, perfect ripen, black spotted over-ripen without in-
ternal defects and black spotted over-ripen with internal defects respec-
tively. The ﬁrst level of classiﬁcation, involves binary classiﬁcation
between C1 and the remaining classes (C2∪C3∪C4). Once the ﬁrst level
classiﬁcation was done, the second level of classiﬁcation was considered
between C2 and C3∪C4. Finally, the last stage of classiﬁcation was consid-
ered between C3 and C4.
2.2.4. Model optimization
In order to optimize a model, it is recommended to study on the per-
formances of each classiﬁer with respect to each individual four color
features of all K number of color spaces at each level of the proposed hi-
erarchical method of classiﬁcation. Based on the performances of classi-
ﬁers at each level of classiﬁcation, the best performing classiﬁer and the
corresponding color feature of the respective color space is ﬁxed up. To
optimize the system, the dataset was divided into T1% for training and
T2% for testing at every level of classiﬁcation. Let P be the number of
classiﬁers used at every level of the hierarchical method of classiﬁcation.
The study was recommended to be carried out for L number of trials by
choosing the training and testing samples randomly.
During optimization, the average accuracy of each classiﬁer across all
L trails was calculated and preserved with respect to each color feature
of all color spaces. Hence this optimization involves 12PKL trails of em-
pirical study. As the interest is in ﬁnding the best classiﬁer and the fea-
ture combination for each level, the highest accuracy amongst all trails
at a particular level was noted down. The classiﬁer and feature combina-
tion corresponding to that highest accuracy was identiﬁed to be the
method of classiﬁcation for that particular level. Overall, the proposed
hierarchical approach for ripeness grading of mangoes is the sequence
of the identiﬁed best performing combination of classiﬁer and color
feature.
3. Experimentation
3.1. Performance analysis and model optimization
In this subsection, the recommended hierarchical method of classiﬁ-
cation has been set up to function at its maximum performance through
an extensive experimentation. For this purpose,
the dataset has been divided into a training subset and a testing sub-
set with 60:40 ratio at every level of hierarchical method of classiﬁca-
tion. The average accuracies over 100 trails for each of the six
classiﬁers at each level of classiﬁcation (three levels) considering four
possible features at a time in each of the ﬁve color spaces were com-
puted as explained in Section 2.2.4. Fig. 5 presents the computed
accuracies.
Based on the computed accuracies, the best performing classiﬁers
and the corresponding color feature of the respective color space were
identiﬁed at each level. Fig. 6 gives the plot of highest accuracies ob-
tained in each color space for all the three levels.
In this study, based on the computed accuracies, it is observed that
the feature fusion of L,*a and *b had attained highest accuracy over
rest of the color space features both at level I and level II, while the
Fig. 3. Image acquisition system.
A. Raghavendra, D.S. Guru, M.K. Rao et al.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 243–252
246
individual color feature *b of L*a*b color space had attained highest ac-
curacy over the rest of the color space features at level III. It is quite in-
teresting observation that at all three levels irrespective of a classiﬁer,
the feature responsible for better performance is from L*a*b color
space and hence in the subsequent discussion, only the L*a*b color
space is presented. Therefore, the accuracies obtained for all six classi-
ﬁers using L*a*b fusion feature at level I and level II, and using the indi-
vidual color feature *b at level III are tabulated in Table 2.
From Table 2, it is learnt that the SVM classiﬁer performs better than
the others at level I and level II, and the threshold based classiﬁer per-
forms better than the others at level III. Hence, the combination of
SVM and L*a*b fusion feature is identiﬁed to be the method of classiﬁca-
tion adopted at both level I and level II. On the other hand, for level III,
the combination of threshold based classiﬁer and *b feature is identiﬁed
to be the best performing one. Thus the optimized model recommended
in this study is a hierarchical method of classiﬁcation with three levels
where in, the ﬁrst level classiﬁes the class of under-ripen mangoes
from rest of other classes using SVM with L*a*b fusion feature, second
level classiﬁes the class of perfectly ripen mangoes from the class of
over-ripen mangoes using SVM with L*a*b fusion feature and third
level uses a threshold based classiﬁer with *b feature to further classify
over-ripen mangoes into internally defected and not internally defected
mangoes.
As stated in Section 2.2.1, the performance of the recommended sys-
tem was also analyzed by considering texture features in order to bring
out the effectiveness of the color features. The results of L*a*b color fea-
tures were compared with that of the texture features such as LBP (52
features), GLCM (14 Haralick features) and Gabor (500 features). In
Fig. 7 the highest accuracies obtained for all the three types of texture
features out of all six classiﬁers are shown against each of the three
levels of classiﬁcation along with the accuracies obtained by the recom-
mended hierarchical method of classiﬁcation using L*a*b color space.
From Fig. 7, the texture features were found to be the discriminating
features at only level II. In fact it is not surprising as it shall be noticed
that in Fig. 2(b and c), there is a considerable difference in terms of tex-
tures between perfect-ripen and over-ripen mangoes due to presence of
wrinkles as mangoes get ripened. However, there is no consistency in
performance at all levels using texture feature. Hence, L*a*b color
space features appear to be the best features even when compared to
all other color spaces in addition to the texture features. Since the four
classes of mango samples are found to be more distinguishable in
L*a*b color space, a 3-dimensional plot of the three feature values of
all samples of the dataset is shown in Fig. 8 for visualization.
In Fig. 8, a perceptible separation of under-ripen class from rest of
the classes shall be noted. Therefore, a better classiﬁcation result was
obtained at ﬁrst level. However, in second and third levels, the results
were comparatively less due to less inter class variations as perfectly
ripen samples appear to be more similar to that of over-ripen as for as
color is concerned. Further, the performance at level III is slightly less
than that of level II because of the fact that color is not uniform across
all samples of level III due to presence of irregular black spots making
class separability a difﬁcult one. Hence, well-known statistical classiﬁers
such as SVM were shown to be performing poor when compared to a
threshold based classiﬁer at level III.
3.2. Discussion and comparative analysis
Conventionally, the problem being addressed in this study is as-
sumed to be a multiclass classiﬁcation problem, where a single classiﬁer
is trained using a particular type of feature to categorize all four classes of
mangoes. Therefore, to promote the recommended hierarchical method
of classiﬁcation with three levels, the study has been extended towards
performance analysis of a single shot multi-class classiﬁcation approach
using all six different classiﬁers based on each individual four features
(including fusion) of L*a*b color space. Each of the six classiﬁers was
trained on each of the four features of the color space by considering
60% samples of the dataset and confusion matrices were built for the re-
maining 40% samples. Based on the computed confusion matrices, the
accuracy of each classiﬁer was computed for each of the individual fea-
ture type and the maximum amongst them was noted down. It was as
expected, observed that all classiﬁers have had maximum accuracy
when they were trained on fusion of L,*a and *b features. Fig. 9 shows
Fig. 4. Hierarchical method for classiﬁcation of mangoes based on ripeness.
A. Raghavendra, D.S. Guru, M.K. Rao et al.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 243–252
247
the accuracies obtained for each of the six classiﬁers when they were
used for single shot multi class classiﬁcation with L*a*b feature fusion.
In Fig. 9, the SVM classiﬁer attains 86.5% accuracy which is slightly
higher than that of all other classiﬁers. Table 3(a) depicts the confusion
matrix obtained for SVM classiﬁer when it is used as a single shot
multi-class classiﬁcation approach. The 40% of the samples of the
dataset considered for computing this confusion matrix involved 136,
193, 43 and 20 number of samples respectively belonging to under-
ripen, perfectly ripen, over-ripen back spots without internal defects
and over-ripen back spots with internal defects.
Fig. 5. Accuracies computed for various classiﬁers considering possible color spaces against each feature at a) I Level (b) II Level and (c) III Level.
A. Raghavendra, D.S. Guru, M.K. Rao et al.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 243–252
248
In a similar line, the same 40% of the samples were classiﬁed by the
use of the recommended hierarchical method of classiﬁcation and the
confusion matrix was generated as given in Table 3(b).
Based on the confusion matrices (Table.3), measures such as accu-
racy, precision, sensitivity and speciﬁcity were computed for both the
recommended hierarchical method of classiﬁcation and the SVM
based single shot multi-class classiﬁcation method and are shown in
Fig. 10.
single shot multi-class classiﬁcation method.
From Fig. 10, it is clear that the recommended hierarchical method of
classiﬁcation achieves considerably better results when compared to
that of SVM based single shot multi-class classiﬁcation method which
is shown to be performing better than rest of the classiﬁers.
Moreover, the recommended hierarchical method of classiﬁcation
has also been compared against existing contemporary works reported
on classiﬁcation of mangoes using ripeness. The works which have been
considered for comparative analysis are the only works that could be
traced on ripeness based classiﬁcation/grading of mangoes. The com-
parative analysis made in this study has considered different qualitative
attributes such as mango variety, feature type and classiﬁcation method
in addition to quantitative attributes such as number of samples and ac-
curacy. Table 4 gives details on each of the considered work including
the proposed method on all qualitative and quantitative attributes.
As observed in Table 4, the works reported in literatures have con-
sidered majorly two classes of mangoes, unripe and ripe which exhibit
high inter class variation and only few have considered an additional
Fig. 6. The maximum accuracy obtained in each color space irrespective of classiﬁer and feature combination at (a) Level I (b) Level II and (c) Level III.
Table 2
Accuracies obtained for different classiﬁers in L*a*b color space.
Classiﬁers
Levels
I
II
III
Threshold Based
96.20
77.51
80.28
Naïve Bayes
97.95
83.09
77.85
LDA
98.77
83.60
77.88
SVM
99.09
85.94
77.43
k-NN
98.44
82.92
77.72
PNN
95.81
79.32
68.80
Fig. 7. Comparison of L*a*b color feature with texture features at three levels of hierarchy.
Fig. 8. Three Dimensional plot of L*a*b feature values of all samples of four classes of mangoes.
A. Raghavendra, D.S. Guru, M.K. Rao et al.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 243–252
249
class of mangoes called over-ripen. The classiﬁcation methodologies
adopted in all these works are like a single shot multi- class classiﬁca-
tion approach which has already been demonstrated to be not superior
to the recommended hierarchical method of classiﬁcation.
On contrary, in this study, in addition to two classes viz., under-ripen
and perfectly ripen, two more classes such as over-ripen black spots
without internal defects and over-ripen black spots with internal
defects were taken at the third level of classiﬁcation. This added ability
of our model is a good contribution of this study because black spotted
over-ripen mangoes without any internal defects can be identiﬁed
so that they can still be put to use in food product manufacturing indus-
tries instead of being rejected with an assumption of having internal de-
fects. At each level of classiﬁcation, suitable classiﬁers and feature
combination were adopted achieve better results. It is interesting to
infer through comparative analysis that the dataset considered in this
study is reasonably sized when compared to that of the most of the
existing works. It could also be observed that the accuracy, 99.09% ob-
tained by the hierarchical method of classiﬁcation at level I is relatively
higher than that of the other works while classifying under-ripen and
ripen classes. At level II and level III, the proposed method exhibits re-
spectively 85.94% and 80.28% of accuracies. As our system is a hierarchi-
cal method with three levels of classiﬁcation where in different
classiﬁers and feature combination were adopted at each level having
different accuracies of classiﬁcation, it is introduced to compute overall
system accuracy as follows (Ashok, 1978). Let there be in general four
different classes say C1, C2, C3 and C4 respectively with say w, x, y
and z number of samples. Let α, β and γ were the accuracies of the hi-
erarchical method respectively at level I separating C1 from the remain-
ing classes (C2UC4UC3), at level II separating C2 from rest of the classes
(C3UC4) and at level III separating C3 and C4. The system accuracy A is
computed as
A ¼ wα þ xαβ þ yαβγ þ zαβγ
w þ x þ y þ z
ð3Þ
For our test dataset with w = 136, x = 193, y = 43 and z = 20, and
the obtained accuracies α = 99.09%, β = 85.94% and γ = 80.68%, the
overall system accuracy, A is computed to be 87.34%, which is also tab-
ulated in Table 4.
The entire work presented in this paper has been realized on a i5
core computer with 4GHz having 16GB memory with a support of
image processing toolbox in Matlab.
4. Conclusion
In this study, a successful attempt was made to explore the applica-
bility of a hierarchical method of grading of mangoes based on their
ripeness. The signiﬁcance of the L*a*b color space features in discrimi-
nating four different classes of Alphonso mango variety was brought
out. The empirical analysis made in this study argues that the hierarchi-
cal approach has a superior performance than a single-shot multiclass
approach. Further, the study on six classiﬁers and their possible combi-
nations with different color features revealed that, the usage of SVM and
simple threshold classiﬁer was more effective. The success of this study
on post-harvest management of Alphonso mangoes motivated for fur-
ther studies of other varieties of mangoes in addition to consideration
of additional parameters such as store time, temperature and moisture.
The recommended method of classiﬁcation can be deployed for ofﬂine
application in post-harvesting management of mangoes.
Fig. 9. Accuracies of various classiﬁers when used for single shot multi class classiﬁcation with L*a*b feature fusion.
Table 3
Confusion matrices obtained for (a) SVM classiﬁer with L*a*b feature fusion when used as
a single shot classiﬁcation approach (b) the recommended hierarchical method of
classiﬁcation.
C1
C2
C3
C4
C1
133
3
0
0
C2
2
183
8
0
C3
0
27
11
5
C4
0
5
5
10
C1
C2
C3
C4
C1
134
2
0
0
C2
2
174
12
5
C3
0
17
24
2
C4
0
0
5
15
Fig. 10. Different measures computed for hierarchical method of classiﬁcation and SVM
based.
A. Raghavendra, D.S. Guru, M.K. Rao et al.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 243–252
250
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Anitha Raghavendra: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software,
Writing - original draft. D.S. Guru: Visualization, Investigation. Mahesh
K. Rao: Supervision. R. Sumithra: Software, Writing - review & editing.
Acknowledgments
We thank all the reviewers for their critical cum encouraging com-
ments which helped us a lot in signiﬁcant improvement on quality
and readability of the content of the manuscript.
References
Abdur, Md. Rahim, Shaﬁul, Md. Azam, Nazmul, Hossain, Rashedul, Md. Islam, 2013. Face
recognition using local binary patterns. Glob. J. Comput. Sci. Technol. 13 (4) ISSN:
0975-4172.
Alan, Julian, Izenman, 2013. Linear discriminant analysis-modern multivariate statistical
techniques. Springer in Statistics. 8, pp. 237–280. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-
387-78189-1.
Ashok, V. Kulkarni, 1978. On the mean accuracy of hierarchical classiﬁers. IEEE Trans.
Comput. 27 (8), 771–776.
Barreiro, Pilar, Constantino, Valero, Margarita, Ruiz, Altisent, 2008. Olive classiﬁcation ac-
cording to external damage using image analysis. J. Food Eng. 87 (3), 371–379.
Chhabra, Manish, Abhishek, Gupta, Prateek, Mehrotra, Smarti, Reel, 2011. Automated de-
tection of fully and partially ripened mango by machine vision. Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Soft Computing for Problem Solving-Springer.
131,
pp. 153–164.
David, Ireri, Eisa, Belal, Cedric, Okinda, Nelson, Makange, Changying, Ji, 2019. A computer
vision system for defect discrimination and grading in tomatoes using machine learn-
ing and image processing. Artif. Intelligence Agricult. 2, 28–37.
Dengsheng, Zhang, Aylwin, Wong, Maria, Indrawan, Guojun, Lu, 2000. Content-based
image retrieval using Gabor texture features. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Learning, pp. 392–395.
Gonzalez, C. Rafael, Richard, E. Woods, 2002. Digital Image processing. 2nd edition. Pren-
tice Hall.
Guru, D.S., Shivamurthy, H.G., 2013. Segmentation of mango region from mango tree
image. Proc. First International Conference, MIKE. Springer, pp. 201–211 LNAI. 8284.
Haralick, R.M., Shanmugam, K., 1973. Textural features for image classiﬁcation. IEEE Trans.
Syst. Man. Cybernetics 3 (6), 610–621.
Islam, Md J., Wu, Q.M. Jonathan, Ahmadi, Majid, Maher, A., Sid-Ahmed, 2007. Investigat-
ing the Performance of Naive- Bayes Classiﬁers and k-Nearest Neighbor Classiﬁers. 5
(2) pp. 133–137.
Khoje, Suchitra, Bodhe, S.K., 2015. Comparative performance evaluation of fast discrete
curvelet transform and color texture moments as texture features for fruit skin dam-
age detection. Springer J. Food Sci. Technol. 52, 6914–6926.
Khoje, Suchitra, Bodhe, S.K., 2016. Application of color texture moments to detect external
skin damages in guavas. World Appl. Sci. J. 27 (5), 590–596.
Khoje, Suchitra, Shrikant, Bodhe, 2012. Performance comparison of Fourier transform and
its derivatives as shape descriptors for mango grading. Int. J. Comput. Appl. 53 (3),
17–22.
Khoje, Suchitra, Shrikant, Bodhe, 2013. Comparative performance evaluation of size met-
rics and classiﬁers in computer vision based automatic mango grading. Int. J. Comput.
Appl. 61 (9), 1–7.
Kim, S., Choi, J., 2014. An SVM-based high-quality article classiﬁer for systematic-reviews.
J. Biomed. Inform. 47, 153–159.
Leemans, V., Destain, M.F., 2004. A real-time grading method of apples based on features
extracted from defects. J. Food Eng. 61, 83–89.
Leon, K., Mery, D., Pedreschi, F., Leon, J., 2006. Color measurement in L*a*b units from RGB
digital images. Food Res. Int. 39, 1084–1091.
Li, Qingzhong, Maohua, Wang, Weikang, Gu, 2002. Computer vision based system for
apple surface defect detection. Compt. Electron. Agric. 36, 215–223.
Lu, Jun, Won, Suklee, Haogan, Xiuwen, Hu, 2018. Immature citrus fruit detection based on
local binary pattern feature and hierarchical contour analysis. Biosyst. Eng. 171,
78–90.
Mansor, Ab Razak, Othman, Md., 2014. Fuzzy ripening mango index using RGB color sen-
sor model. Res. World J. Arts Sci. Commerce 5 (2) E-ISSN2229-4686 ISSN2231-4172.
Musale, Sandeep, Pradeep, Patil, 2014. Identiﬁcation of defective mangoes using Gabor
wavelets: a non-destructive technique based on texture analysis. Int. J. Agricult.
Innov. Res. 2 (6), 992–996.
Musavi, M.T., Chan, K.H., Hummels, D.M., Kalantri, K., 1994. On the generalization ability
of neural network classiﬁers. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 16 (6), 659–663.
Nandi, C., Tudu, B., Koley, C., 2014. Machine vision based techniques for automatic mango
fruit sorting and grading based on maturity level and size. Springer 8, 27–46.
Nayeli, V. Rivera, José, J. Chanona Pérez, Reynold, F. Rebollo, José, Blasco, Georgina, C.
Domínguez, de María, J.P. Flores, Israel, A. Vázquez, 2012. Description of maturity
stages of mango ‘Manila’ by image analysis and ripening index. CIGR-Ageng Confer-
ence www2.atb-potsdam.de.
Table 4
Qualitative comparison with other well-known methods of mango ripeness classiﬁcation.
Number of classes (Mango variety)
Number
of
samples
Feature
type
Classiﬁcation method adopted
Accuracy
Vyas et al., 2014
3
unripe
semi ripe
ripe
(Totapuri, Badami⁎)
150
mangoes
L⁎a⁎b
Rule based classiﬁcation
(Histogram of L,⁎a and ⁎b)
94.97%
Salunkhe and
Aniket, 2015
4
Green stage
unripen
Ripen
Fully ripen
(Alphonso)
80
mangoes
RGB
and
HSV
Rule based classiﬁcation (Relative changes in the
components i.e. R/G, R/B, S/H)
90.4% (RGB)
84.2% (HSV)
Chhabra et al.,
2011
2
unripe
ripe
200
mangoes
HSV
Neural Network
95%
Mansor and
Othman, 2014
3
under-ripe
ripe
over-ripe
(Chokanan)
60
mangoes
RGB
Fuzzy logic
87%
Nandi et al.,
2014
4
Raw
Semi-matured
Matured
Over-matured
(Kumrapali, Amrapali, Sori, Langra, Himsagar)
750
mangoes
RGB
Gaussian Mixture model and Fuzzy logic
less than 90% in
all varieties
Proposed Study
4
1)Under-ripen,
2)Perfect- ripen,
3) Over-ripen black spots without internal defects and 4)
Over-ripen black spots with internal defects.
Alphonso
230
mangoes
L⁎a⁎b
Hierarchical method of classiﬁcation
(sequence of classiﬁer and feature combination)
Level I-99.09%
Level II 85.94%
Level III- 80.68%-
Mean Accuracy-
87.34%
⁎ Badami is also called Alphonso.
A. Raghavendra, D.S. Guru, M.K. Rao et al.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 243–252
251
Pauly, Leo, Deepa, Sankar, 2015. A new method for sorting and grading of mangoes based
on computer vision system. Intl. Adv. Comput. Conf. https://doi.org/10.1109/
IADCC.2015.715489.
Riquelme, M.T., Barreiro, P., Ruiz-Altisent, M., Valero, C., 2008. Olive classiﬁcation accord-
ing to external damage using image analysis. J. Food Eng. 87 (3), 371–379.
Rocha, Anderson, Daniel, C. Hauagge, Jacques, Wainer, Siome, Goldenstein, 2010. Auto-
matic fruit and vegetable classiﬁcation from images. Compt Electron. Agric. 70,
96–104.
Roomi, S., Md, Mansoor, Jyothi, R. Priya, 2012. Classiﬁcation of mangoes by object features
and
contour
modeling.
Int.
J.
Pure
Appl.
Math.
https://doi.org/10.1109/
MVIP.2012.6428786.
Sa’ad, F.S.A., Ibrahim, M.F., Shakaff, Md A.Y., Zakaria, A., Abdullah, M.Z., 2015. Shape
and weight grading of mangoes using visible imaging. Compt Electron. Agric.
115, 51–56.
Salunkhe, R. Pralhad, Aniket, A. Patil, 2015. Image processing for mango ripening stage detec-
tion: RGB and HSV method. IEEE Conf. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICIIP.2015.7414796.
Sharif, Md, Attique, Md Khan, Zahid, Md Iqbal, Faisal, Md Azam, Ikram, M. Ullah, Lali,
Younus, Javed, Md, 2018. Detection and classiﬁcation of citrus diseases in agriculture
based on optimized weighted segmentation and feature selection. Compt. Electr.
Agric. 150, 220–234.
Silla, N. Carlos, Freitas, A. Alex, 2011. A survey of hierarchical classiﬁcation across different
application domains. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery. 22. Springer, pp. 31–72.
Stefany, Cardenas-Perez, Jorge, Chanona-Perez, Juan, V. Mendez-Mendez, Georgina,
Calderon-Dominguez, Ruben, Lopez-Santiago, Maria, J. Perea-Flores, Israel, Arzate-
Vazquez, 2017. Evaluation of the ripening stages of apple by means of computer vi-
sion system. Bio-system Engineering. 159, pp. 46–58.
Vyas, M. Ankur, Bijal, Talati, Sapan, Naik, 2014. Quality inspection and classiﬁcation of
mangoes using color and size features. Intern. J. Compt Appl. 98 (1), 1–5.
A. Raghavendra, D.S. Guru, M.K. Rao et al.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 243–252
252
