Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 95–110
Available online 5 August 2023
2666-5441/© 2023 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC
BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Optimization of shale gas fracturing parameters based on artificial 
intelligence algorithm 
Shihao Qian a, Zhenzhen Dong a, Qianqian Shi a, Wei Guo b, Xiaowei Zhang b, Zhaoxia Liu b, 
Lingjun Wang a, Lei Wu a, Tianyang Zhang a, Weirong Li a,* 
a Xi’an Shiyou University, Xi’an, 710065, China 
b Research Institute of Petroleum Exploration & Development, PetroChina, Beijing, 100083, China   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Shale gas 
Parameter optimization 
Prediction 
GBDT 
PSO 
A B S T R A C T   
Resource-rich shale gas plays a pivotal role in new energy types. The key to scientifically and efficiently 
developing shale gas fields is to clarify the main factors that affect the production of shale gas wells. In this paper, 
according to the shale gas reservoir characteristic of the Fuling marine Longmaxi Formation, a single-well 
geological model was established using the reservoir numerical simulation software CMG. Then, 10,000 
different reservoir models were randomly generated for different formation physical parameters, completion 
parameters, and fracturing parameters using the Monte Carlo method, and these 10,000 models were simulated 
numerically. The machine learning model uses a dataset of 10,000 different geological, completion, and frac-
turing parameters as input and 10,000 production curves as output. Multiple machine learning regression 
methods were used to train and test the dataset, and the optimal method (GBDT algorithm) was selected, and the 
accuracy R2 of the test set of the GBDT prediction model is 0.96. A fracturing parameter optimization workflow 
was constructed by combining a production prediction model with a particle swarm optimizer (PSO). The process 
can quickly optimize the fracturing parameters and predict the production for each time by targeting the cu-
mulative gas production under different geological conditions. The optimized parameters are Fracture Spacing, 
Fracture Width, Intrinsic Permeability, Fracture Half-length, Langmuir Pressure, and Langmuir Volume. The 
initial predicted cumulative gas production was 4.59 × 108 m3, which was optimized to 4.90 × 108 m3. The 
proposed PSO-GBDT proxy model can instantly predict the production of shale gas wells with considerable ac-
curacy, reliability, and efficiency, which is a vital tool for optimizing fracture design. This investigation provides 
a solid foundation for predicting the production of unconventional gas reservoirs and for parameter optimization.   
1. Introduction 
Shale gas is an unconventional natural gas stored in reservoir rock 
systems, mainly organic-rich shale. It can be present in a free state in 
natural fractures and pores but also in an adsorbed condition on the 
surface of the cheesecake and clay particles, as well as a minor amount 
stored in a dissolved state in the cheesecake and asphaltene, with the 
percentage of adsorbed gas generally ranging from 20% to 85% (King, 
2010). Shale gas resources are abundant worldwide and have great 
potential for development. Shale gas resources worldwide are 4.57 ×
1014 m3, of which 1.87 × 1014 m3 is technically recoverable (Ambrose 
et al., 2010). In the world, the five nations with the largest technically 
recoverable resources of shale gas are China (3.6 × 1013 m3, accounting 
for about 20%), the United States (2.4 × 1013 m3, about 13%), 
Argentina, Mexico, and South Africa. Shale gas is abundant in China, 
with technically recoverable resources of 3.6 × 1013 m3, 1.6 times more 
than conventional gas (Ma et al., 2017; Johnson and Boersma, 2013). As 
a result, the plentiful shale gas resources in China lay the foundation for 
the further development of the energy industry and the importance of 
shale gas as a resource with huge reserves. 
Many scholars have conducted sensitivity analysis as well as opti-
mization of physical parameters of reservoirs, well completion param-
eters, and fracturing parameters in shale gas reservoir development 
attributed to the different petrophysical properties and production 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: LTXH990111@163.com (S. Qian), dongzz@xsyu.edu.cn (Z. Dong), sqq17765855520@163.com (Q. Shi), weiguo12022@163.com (W. Guo), 
zhangxw12022@163.com (X. Zhang), liuzhaoxia@petrochina.com.cn (Z. Liu), w894459085@163.com (L. Wang), wuleiyx@aliyun.com (L. Wu), zty16223334@ 
gmail.com (T. Zhang), weirong.li@xsyu.edu.cn (W. Li).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 
journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-geosciences 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiig.2023.08.001 
Received 11 April 2023; Received in revised form 4 July 2023; Accepted 4 August 2023   
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 95–110
96
characteristics of shale gas reservoirs (Onwunalu and Durlofsky, 2009; 
Williams-Stroud, 2008; Xu et al., 2015). Curtis et al. (Curtis, 2002) 
introduced the concept of shale and shale gas. They analyzed and 
compared the maturity, gas adsorption coefficient, reservoir thickness, 
organic content, and total gas volume of five shale reservoirs in the 
United States. The study’s results indicate that the degree of natural 
fracture development was an essential controlling factor in shale gas 
development and that successful extraction of shale gas reservoirs re-
quires hydraulic fracturing. Zhang (Zhang et al., 2009) investigated the 
effect of reservoir parameters and hydraulic fracturing parameters on 
the productivity of shale gas reservoirs using Eclipse software. Unsteady 
gas flow from matrix to fracture and multi-component gas desorption 
were considered. The matrix-fracture coupling factor (sigma) and frac-
ture permeability were used to characterize the fracture network caused 
by fracturing. The effects of matrix and fracture permeability, non-Darcy 
flow coefficient, porosity, matrix sub-grid, channeling coefficient, rock 
compressibility, half-length, and spacing of prominent fractures on 
production were analyzed. WeiYu et al. (Yu and Sepehrnoori, 2013) 
demonstrated the accuracy of multi-stage hydraulic fracture numerical 
simulations for valuable Barnett Shale production data by factoring in 
gas desorption effects. Based on the Barnett Shale data, six uncertain 
parameters within a reasonable range are determined to finalize the 
optimal design based on NPV maximization for different gas price con-
ditions. This integrated technique optimizes well location and hydraulic 
fracture treatment design to produce the best drainage area around the 
well. It gives insight into hydraulic fracture interference between single 
wells and nearby wells. Yan Xuemei (Yan et al., 2015) developed a 
production prediction model based on “main fracture + network frac-
ture 
permeability” 
using 
Eclipse 
software 
and 
applied 
a 
Plackett-Burman-type linear experimental design method. Parameters 
such as the practical reconstruction volume, the number of primary 
fractures, and the length of prior fractures were optimized through 
sensitivity analysis. Zhu Dawei et al. (Zhu et al., 2020) developed a 
coupled local grid encryption-embedded discrete fracture model for 
fractured well production prediction. They adopted an orthogonal 
design to optimize parameters, including fracture length, fracture con-
ductivity, and the number of fracture sections. 
With the fast growth of data science in recent years, big data analysis 
methodologies have been increasingly employed in oil and gas explo-
ration and production (Ben et al., 2020; Dong et al., 2022; Wu et al., 
2021; Zhan et al., 2019). Petroleum engineers have started to use ma-
chine learning methods for production prediction and fracturing 
parameter optimization for unconventional resources, which can not 
only accurately evaluate the fracturing effect of each well but also 
optimize the fracturing parameters. Gorucu et al. (Gorucu and Ertekin, 
2011) investigated optimizing the design of hydraulically fractured 
horizontal wells in naturally fractured tight gas-sand reservoir systems. 
An expert system for planning efficient production improvement 
methods was created by combining a commercial reservoir simulator 
with an artificial neural network (ANN). The developed ANN-based 
production prediction model was utilized by Nejad et al. (2015) to 
simulate and optimize the fracturing parameters of a fractured well in 
the Eagle Ford formation. The production of a single well using the 
optimized combination of fracturing parameters was measured to be 
43% higher than the actual one. In 2018, Luo et al. (2018) selected 13 
model input parameters from the Bakken shale based on previous 
experience and careful consideration. The parameter selection was the 
so-called feature extraction using Pearson correlation coefficient, 
random forest, RFE method, and Ll parametric method. A neural 
network prediction model was developed with sound production in the 
first year as the target variable. Where the hidden layer is four layers 
with 100 neurons per layer, and the accuracy of the test set is R2 =
0.614, and finally a sensitivity analysis was performed to prove the 
applicability of the machine learning method. Wang (Wang and Chen, 
2019) developed yield prediction models based on RF, AdaBoost, SVM, 
and ANN algorithms. The yield prediction models were preferentially 
developed by comparing the prediction accuracy and prediction mean 
square deviation of multiple models. The coefficient of determination 
(R2) of both the training and prediction sets of AdaBoost and RF algo-
rithms were higher and the prediction results were better. However, the 
mean square error difference between the AdaBoost training and vali-
dation sets was large, indicating that the AdaBoost method had the 
problem of overfitting. As a result, Wang proposed developing the 
production prediction model utilizing RF rather than the AdaBoost 
method. Tan Chaodong et al. (Tan et al., 2020) used the fracturing 
construction history data of 200 existing wells and reservoir physical 
characteristics to develop a Bayesian neural network model to optimize 
the fracturing parameters. Principal component analysis (PCA) was 
employed to decrease the dimensionality even further. The Bayesian 
neural network model’s input parameters are the reduced-dimensional 
principal components, and the output parameter is the fracturing 
impact evaluation index. To avoid overfitting the neural network, the 
Bayesian approach was used to adaptively update the regularization 
coefficients, and a three-layer Bayesian neural network prediction 
model was created. The model was trained using 90% of the 200 wells as 
training data and 10% as test data. The testing findings revealed that the 
model’s relative error in predicting the test set after training was less 
than 5% and that it could be utilized to improve the fracturing 
parameters. 
In recent years, there has been an increasing trend among scholars to 
employ machine learning in shale gas production. Specifically, various 
machine learning methods are utilized to predict key performance in-
dicators, such as gas production and net present value, and optimize 
both reservoir and fracturing parameters in shale gas reservoir frac-
turing operations. In their study, Zhao et al. (2022) proposed an inno-
vative approach called VFRBF-FSO, which utilizes an intelligent variable 
fidelity radial basis function (VFRBF) surrogate model for optimizing 
fracture stages in a multi-objective framework. The objective functions 
considered were the net present value (NPV) and cumulative gas pro-
duction (CGP). The optimization variables selected included fracture 
half-length, fracture spacing, well spacing, number of fracture strips, 
and well length. The results of the optimization process revealed that the 
VFRBF-FSO method demonstrated excellent convergence and versa-
tility. Moreover, it significantly reduced the simulation run time 
compared to the HF model by approximately five times for two different 
well and fracture configurations. Wang et al. (2022a) proposed a 
multi-objective optimization prediction model (MOO-PM) that in-
tegrates the least squares support vector regression (LSSVR) prediction 
model and the non-dominated ranking genetic algorithm II (NSGA-II). 
The objective functions considered were the fracture fluid return rate 
(FBR) and the first-month gas production (PROD). Optimization vari-
ables included horizontal length, number of fracture sections, fracture 
length, fracture fluid injection rate, fracture fluid viscosity, fracture fluid 
volume, and proppant dosage. Furthermore, in the same year, Wang 
et al. (2022b) introduced a novel integrated optimization method called 
WSF-MFSVR, which utilized a multi-fidelity support vector regression 
(MFSVR) surrogate model. The optimization focused on horizontal well 
spacing and fracture stage placement. Optimization variables included 
well spacing, fracture half-length, number of fracture strips, fracture 
spacing, and well length. The optimization objectives were defined as 
net present value (NPV) and cumulative gas production (CGP). To 
enhance evaluation accuracy, the researchers employed a particle 
swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm to determine the optimal hyper-
parameters of the MFSVR model. In 2023, Zhou and Ran (2023) intro-
duced a modified genetic algorithm approach called Spearman Genetic 
Algorithm (SGA) for efficient optimization of fracturing parameters in 
the context of reservoir engineering. The optimization process focused 
on key parameters including the number of fracture sections, horizontal 
length, fracture width, and fracture half-length. Additionally, leveraging 
a dataset obtained from simulations of multi-stage fractured horizontal 
wells in shale gas reservoirs, the researchers developed a production 
prediction model using the XGBoost algorithm. This model allowed for 
S. Qian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 95–110
97
accurate forecasting of production outcomes based on the analyzed data. 
Although various techniques have been utilized to predict shale 
reservoir production performance and optimize each parameter, after 
reviewing the literature and related works, we observed that some 
problems remain. 
(1) The application of machine learning techniques in optimizing 
shale gas fracturing parameters and predicting shale gas production is 
currently a trending area of research that demands further exploration to 
unlock its full potential. (2) Most studies get one data point, e.g., final 
recovery, daily oil (gas) production, etc. They are not a complete pro-
duction curve, so it is impossible to use machine learning for parameter 
optimization and production prediction. (3) Because of the complex 
physical properties of shale gas reservoirs, most research models tend to 
be idealized, which significantly weakens prediction accuracy. Geolog-
ical conditions of shale gas reservoirs and historical production data 
should be needed to ensure the accuracy of prediction models. (4) In the 
above research investigation, the small data set resulted in an insuffi-
cient amount of data. When machine learning is then performed on the 
data, overfitting occurs, thus making the established prediction models 
perform poorly. 
This study proposes a complete workflow for optimizing fracturing 
parameters in horizontal shale gas wells, combining reservoir numerical 
simulation with machine learning to generate a machine learning model 
and using particle swarm algorithm (PSO) to optimize fracture param-
eters. Section 2 describes the machine learning methods used in this 
study, and the workflow is illustrated. Section 3 develops the reservoir 
geological and numerical models for the target block. Section 4, a shale 
gas horizontal well-fracturing dataset is obtained by numerical simula-
tion. A multi-factor sensitivity analysis is performed on the physical, 
completion, and fracturing parameters. Section 5 the performance of 
different ML-based yield prediction models was evaluated to compare 
the results of different models trained on the dataset to optimize the best 
ML-based capacity prediction model. In section 6 the prediction and 
optimization of capacity and parameters, respectively, through the PSO- 
GBDT parameter optimization process. 
2. Methods 
This section describes the methodological principles and the work-
flow of the main algorithms used in the study. The methods used include 
machine learning methods (Wang et al., 2023) (Linear Regression 
(Kavitha S et al., 2016; Lim, 2019), Support Vector Machines (SVM) 
(Cios et al., 2007; Vapnik, 1999), Decision Tree (DT) Regression (Wang 
and Xia, 2017), Gradient Boosting Decision Tree (GBDT) Regression, 
Random Forest (Brieman, 2001; Gamal et al., 2021)), and Particle 
Swarm Optimization (PSO). 
To predict cumulative gas production, we initially employ machine 
learning techniques, specifically the gradient-boosted decision tree 
(GBDT) algorithm, which yields optimal results. Subsequently, we uti-
lize the particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm to optimize both 
the fracturing parameters and the predicted cumulative production. 
Detailed explanations of the GBDT algorithm and the PSO algorithm are 
provided below. 
2.1. GBDT regression 
Machine learning is one of the most sophisticated and cutting-edge 
data processing research topics. Machine learning, in its broadest 
sense, is a process that allows a machine to learn and execute activities 
that cannot be accomplished by direct programming. Machine learning, 
in practice, is a process that takes a vast quantity of data as input, trains a 
model, and then utilizes the model to generate predictions. As a simu-
lation of the human brain, the process of “training” and “prediction” is 
equivalent to the human brain’s “induction” and “speculation" (Jordan 
and Mitchell, 2015). In this paper, we mainly use machine learning is 
GBDT regression. 
MART (Multiple Additive Regression Tree), also known as GBDT, is 
an iterative decision tree technique that comprises multiple decision 
trees (He et al., 2014; Friedman, 2001). The learning process of the 
decision tree is to use the sample features of the training set to divide the 
data and obtain the predictions of the leaf nodes of each node (as in 
Fig. 1). 
The model is also based on the Boosting algorithm. Each iteration 
produces a new decision tree in the direction of minimizing residuals 
and iterates constantly to enhance prediction accuracy. 
GBDT is a member of the integrated learning boosting family; how-
ever, it is not the same as classic Adaboost (Tang et al., 2020). It is an 
optimization technique that employs an additive model and a forward 
distribution algorithm to achieve learning. The algorithm’s primary 
phase is as follows: First, the base learner, a tree with only the root node, 
is initialized. Then M base learners are generated, and the current 
model’s negative gradient value of the loss function is computed and 
utilized as an estimate of the residuals. The residual is then fitted with a 
regression tree CART. The fitted tree’s leaf nodes are then searched for a 
value that minimizes the loss. Finally, the learner is brought up to date. 
The input training sample set T = {(x1,y1),(x2,y2),(xi,yi),⋯(xn,yn)}, 
xi ∈ X ⊆ Rn, X is the input sample space, xi is the evaluation metric, 
yi ∈ Y ⊆ R, Y is the compliance case, the loss function is L(y,f (x)), and 
the output is the regression tree ̂f(x). The specific procedure of the GBDT 
algorithm is as follows.  
(1) Initialize the estimation function so that the loss function is 
minimized. 
f0(x) = arg min
∑
N
i=1
L(yi, c)
(1) 
f0(x) is the tree with only one root node and L(yi, c) is the loss 
function, where c is the constant that minimizes the loss function.  
(2) Let the number of iterations be m, and perform (A)-(D) when m 
≤M, where (m = 1,2, …, M).  
(A) For sample i = 1, 2, …, N, calculate the negative gradient of 
the loss function and use it as the residual estimate. Calculate 
the residual rmi. 
rmi = −[∂L(yi, f(xi))/∂f(xi)]f(x)=fm−1(x)
(2)   
Fig. 1. Hybrid model structure. Each tree’s output is handled as a categorical 
input feature to a sparse linear classifier. Boosted decision trees tend to be quite 
effective feature transformations. 
S. Qian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 95–110
98
(B) Fitting the residuals to rmj generates a regression tree to estimate 
the regression tree leaf node region. The m-th tree node region 
Rmj, j = 1, 2, ⋯, J is obtained.  
(C) For j = 1, 2, ⋯, J, the value of the leaf node region is estimated 
using linear search to minimize the loss function. 
Cmj = arg min
∑
xi∈Rmj
(yi − (fm−1(xi) + c))2
(3)    
(D) Update Learner fm(x). 
fm(x) = fm−1(x) +
∑
M
m=1
cmjI
(
x ∈ Rmj
)
(4)    
(3) The final regression tree is obtained by accumulating all Cmj 
values in the same leaf node region. 
̂f (x) = fM(x) =
∑
M
m=1
∑
J
j=1
cmj I
(
x ∈ Rmj
)
(5)  
2.2. Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) 
The particle swarm optimization was first proposed by Kennedy 
(Kennedy and Eberhart, 1995), an American psychologist, and Ebert Art, 
an electrical engineer, in 1995 as a new parallel metaheuristic algo-
rithm. The algorithm simulates the mechanism of cooperation in the 
flock foraging behavior of organisms such as flocks of birds and fish in 
nature to find the optimal solution to the problem (Fernandez-Martinez 
et al., 2008). 
The heuristic Algorithm is a problem-solving strategy that employs 
inductive reasoning and experimental investigation. The primary per-
formance criteria for heuristic algorithms are generality, stability, and 
quick convergence. 
The Meta-heuristic Algorithm is a heuristic algorithm modification 
created by merging a stochastic algorithm with a local search algorithm. 
Meta-heuristics is an iterative generating process that allows for study-
ing and exploiting the search space with heuristic algorithms via the 
clever mixing of many notions. Learning tactics are utilized in this 
process to collect and master knowledge to locate near-optimal solutions 
effectively. 
PSO is a widely used algorithm known for its simplicity and ease of 
implementation. It does not require gradient information, making it 
applicable to a range of optimization problems. Its key strength lies in its 
ability to explore the global search space effectively, finding optimal 
solutions in complex domains. 
In practical applications, PSO is used in function optimization, 
neural network training, image processing, robot control, and aero-
space. In reservoir engineering, PSO has shown its usefulness in 
parameter optimization, such as determining optimal values for reser-
voir properties and well operating parameters. It can also be applied to 
reservoir prediction tasks, helping to estimate future reservoir behavior 
based on historical data. Additionally, PSO has been employed in well 
network optimization, optimizing the placement and configuration of 
wells to maximize hydrocarbon recovery from the reservoir. 
Overall, PSO is a versatile algorithm with broad applications in 
various domains, including reservoir engineering. It offers effective so-
lutions to complex optimization problems when used appropriately and 
with proper parameter tuning. 
In Fig. 2, we present the flow chart of PSO. 
2.3. Data dimensionality reduction 
In shale gas reservoirs, the production of fractured horizontal wells is 
influenced by a multitude of parameters, each with varying magnitudes. 
These parameters play a crucial role in constructing accurate production 
prediction models and analyzing data effectively. To ensure the 
comparability of these parameters, it is necessary to standardize the 
original data. By applying data standardization techniques, we can 
eliminate the impact of varying magnitudes among the parameters, 
facilitating more reliable and meaningful analysis. 
In the field of data standardization, two commonly employed 
methods are Z-score normalization (Jain et al., 2005; Zou et al., 2020) 
and Min-max normalization (Kim et al., 2021). Z-score normalization, 
also known as standardization, is a widely recognized data standardi-
zation technique. It involves transforming raw data into a standard 
normal distribution with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. This 
method is useful as it eliminates the scale differences among different 
variables in the dataset, making the data comparable and facilitating 
meaningful analysis. 
By converting the data into a standard normal distribution, the Z- 
score normalization technique provides several advantages. Firstly, it 
enables the identification of outliers, which are data points that deviate 
significantly from the average. These outliers can be easily detected as 
they fall outside the typical range of values within the standardized 
distribution. Secondly, standardization allows for more effective data 
analysis, modeling, and comparison. Since the data now follow a stan-
dard distribution, statistical measures such as mean, standard deviation, 
and correlation coefficients can be readily calculated and interpreted. 
This, in turn, enhances the reliability and accuracy of any subsequent 
analyses or modeling performed on the standardized data. 
The Z-score normalization is calculated as follows:  
1. Calculate the mean and standard deviation of the original data,  
2. For each data point, the Z-score is calculated using equation (6), 
where X is the original data point: 
Z =
(X − mean)
standard deviation
(6a)   
Fig. 2. Flow chart of PSO.  
S. Qian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 95–110
99
3. The obtained Z-score value indicates the degree of deviation from the 
mean for each data point, in units of standard deviation. A positive 
value indicates that the data point is above the mean and a negative 
value indicates that the data point is below the mean. 
However, when processing data using z-score normalization, it is 
required that the data needs to satisfy the condition of normal distri-
bution. The parameter data set of this subject does not satisfy the normal 
distribution, so this subject uses the Min-max normalization method to 
process the data, and the values of all parameters are mapped uniformly 
to the interval [0, 1]. The Min-max normalization formula is shown in 
Equation (7). 
Xnew =
X − min(X)
max(X) − min(X)
(7)  
2.4. Workflow 
As illustrated in Fig. 3, there are four processes in our forecast of the 
shale 
gas 
resources’ 
production 
performance 
and 
parameter 
optimization. 
Step 1: Numerical model building. We obtained an overview of the 
current status of the application of artificial intelligence in fracturing 
horizontal wells for shale gas extraction through extensive literature 
research. Using the reservoir numerical simulation program CMG soft-
ware, single-well geology and numerical models were created for the 
Fuling 
maritime 
Longmaxi 
Formation’s 
shale 
gas 
reservoir 
characteristics. 
Step 2: Database generation. The 10,000 sets of varying reservoir 
models are randomly generated and simulated using the Monte Carlo 
method to obtain the corresponding 10,000 sets of production curves for 
the orientation of different reservoir physical parameters, completion 
parameters, and fracturing parameters. Multi-factor sensitivity analysis 
is performed on these parameters. 
Step 3: Machine learning model building and application. The 
data set from Step 2 is used as the input for the machine learning model 
with 10,000 different sets of geological, completion, and fracturing 
parameters and 10,000 different sets of production curves as the output. 
The best method (GBDT algorithm) is then chosen by training the data 
set with various machine learning regression techniques. 
Step 4: Parameter optimization and prediction. It is possible to 
Fig. 3. Workflow of shale gas parameter optimization based on artificial intelligence algorithm.  
S. Qian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 95–110
100
quickly optimize the fracturing parameters and predict the production 
for each period based on different geological conditions by combining a 
production prediction model with a particle swarm optimizer (PSO). 
3. Numerical model building 
3.1. Regional geological overview 
The Sichuan Basin is a vast hydrocarbon-bearing superimposed basin 
formed from the Upper Yangzi Craton. It is currently encircled by tec-
tonic mountain belts like the Longmen Mountains, the Mixing Moun-
tains, and the Daba Mountains, covering an area of approximately 18 ×
104 km2. The sedimentary rocks of the Sichuan Basin have grown to a 
thickness of 12,000 m. It is the basin in China with the greatest con-
centration of minerals, thanks to the formation of nine groups of 
meridional rocks (Dai et al., 2021). The Late Ordovician–Early Silurian 
Upper Ordovician Wufeng Formation–Lower Silurian Longmaxi For-
mation, which was heavily deposited in the Sichuan Basin and its sur-
rounding regions under the influence of tectonic and marine erosion, is 
rich in penstock fossils. The Wulong Formation-Longmaxi Formation is 
dominated by siliceous, clayey, calcareous, and silt shales. The 
high-quality shales at the bottom of the Wubong Formation and a 
sub-section of the Longmaxi Formation are characterized by thin layers, 
carbon-rich, silica-rich, deep water, and low deposition rate, which are 
the core formations for shale gas development and exploration (Fig. 4) 
(He et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2020). 
3.2. Numerical model building for shale gas reservoirs 
Shale reservoirs have extremely low permeability and microfractures 
with different degrees of development. The overall performance is 
characterized by dual pore, so a dual pore dual permeability model is 
usually established to simulate the shale numerically. A single-well 
numerical model of a shale multi-stage fractured horizontal well is 
built using the geological characteristics of the Upper Ordovician 
Wufeng Formation reservoir and the engineering parameters of hori-
zontal wells in the Sichuan Basin and its outlying areas. 
The grid number is 300 × 29 × 9, as shown in Fig. 5. The numerical 
model 
is 
3000m 
(300 
×
10) 
long, 
440m 
(∑(10 ×20, 10, 8.5, 1, 0.4, 0.2, 0.4, 1, 8.5, 10, 20 ×10)) wide and 45m (9 
× 5) deep. The reservoir type is dual pore dual permeability, and the 
total geological reserves of shale gas are 16.73 × 108 m3, including 5.04 
× 108 m3 of free gas reserves, and the geological, construction, and 
fracture parameters are shown in Table 1. 
4. Generation of dataset 
4.1. Construction of dataset 
After building the geological model, many datasets are required to be 
generated to train the predictive model built using machine learning. 
This study uses a numerical model to randomly generate cumulative 
production data for a set of 10,000 geological and completion parame-
ters using a Monte Carlo approach. In this study, 15 geological and 
completion parameters were studied, including matrix permeability, 
Fig. 4. Distribution map of shale gas fields in the Sichuan Basin and its southern edge, Wufeng Formation-Longmaxi Formation (Dai et al., 2020).  
S. Qian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 95–110
101
fracture permeability, matrix porosity, fracture porosity, water satura-
tion, upper, lower, bottom hole pressure, native permeability, fracture 
half-length, fracture spacing, fracture width, Lang pressure, Lang 
volume, gas adsorption constants (Table 2). And the probability distri-
bution of each parameter is shown in Fig. 6. 
The applicable range of each parameter in the table is mainly set 
according to the practical situation of Chinese shale gas reservoirs. 
Among these 15 parameters, gas reservoir parameters: matrix perme-
ability and porosity, fracture permeability and porosity, Langmuir 
pressure, Langmuir volume and gas adsorption constant, water satura-
tion; fracturing parameters: intrinsic permeability, fracture spacing, 
fracture half-length, fracture width, upper and lower layers; and work-
ing regime: BHP. 
The cumulative shale gas production is the output parameter 
employed in this study, which is simulated for each combination cor-
responding to the monthly shale gas production estimated using nu-
merical simulation model simulations. Fig. 7 depicts the cumulative gas 
production distribution over one month, one year, five years, and ten 
years. And is explained in Table 3. 
4.2. Correlation analysis 
The correlation analysis of various parameters on cumulative gas 
production for a one-month production period is presented in Fig. 8(a). 
It can be seen that among these parameters, Matrix Permeability, Water 
Saturation, Intrinsic Permeability, and Fracture Spacing correlation 
coefficients of 0.198, 0.283, 0.492, and 0.593, respectively, have a 
strong correlation on the cumulative gas production compared to the 
other parameters. While Matrix Porosity, Fracture Half-length, Lang-
muir Pressure, Langmuir Volume, and Gas Adsorption Constant have 
weak correlations. Fig. 8(b) demonstrates that Matrix Permeability, 
Water Saturation, Intrinsic Permeability, and Fracture Spacing still 
maintain strong correlations with cumulative gas production, while the 
correlation value for DIFRAC changes from 0.082 to 0.216, indicating a 
transition from weak to strong correlation as production time increases. 
In Fig. 8(c), Matrix Permeability, Fracture Permeability, Matrix 
Porosity, Water Saturation, Intrinsic Permeability, Fracture Spacing, and 
Fracture Width display strong correlations. The correlation value for 
Matrix Permeability increases, while Fracture Spacing exhibits a slight 
decrease compared to the previous plot. Fig. 8(d) shows that the cor-
relation value for Matrix Permeability changes from 0.021 to 0.357, 
while Fracture Spacing decreases from 0.593 to 0.310. 
Overall, among the parameters to be optimized, Intrinsic Perme-
ability, Fracture Half-length, Fracture Spacing, Fracture Width, Lang-
muir Pressure, and Langmuir Volume, the strong correlations are 
Intrinsic Permeability, Fracture Spacing, and Fracture Width. At the 
beginning of production, without considering geological conditions, the 
main influencing factors for cumulative gas production are Intrinsic 
Permeability and Fracture Spacing; at the middle and late production, 
the main influencing factors of cumulative gas production are Intrinsic 
Permeability, Fracture Spacing, and Fracture Width. 
Fig. 5. Numerical modeling of shale gas multi-stage fractured horizontal wells.  
Table 1 
Basic parameters of the shale gas single well numerical model.  
Parameters 
Value 
Unit 
Langmuir pressure 
5000 
kPa 
Langmuir volume 
0.004 
m3/kg 
Matrix permeability 
10–4 
mD 
Fracture Permeability 
0.02 
mD 
Matrix porosity 
3.1 
% 
Fracture porosity 
0.34 
% 
Horizontal well length 
2000 
m 
Grid top 
5000 
m 
Fracture half-length 
100 
m 
Fracture spacing 
20 
m 
Initial formation pressure 
38.2 
MPa 
Formation temperature 
82 
◦C 
Water saturation 
20 
% 
Reserves 
16.73 
108m3 
Bottom hole pressure 
5 
MPa 
Daily gas production 
106 
m3/day  
Table 2 
Parameters and associated distribution to study.  
Parameters 
Minimum 
value 
Maximum 
value 
Distribution 
type 
Symbol in  
Fig. 6 
Matrix 
permeability, 
mD 
0.000001 
0.001 
lognormal 
PERMI_M 
Fracture 
permeability, 
mD 
0.001 
0.1 
Triangle 
PERMI_F 
Matrix Porosity 
0.02 
0.1 
Triangle 
POR_M 
Fracture 
Porosity 
0.005 
0.001 
Uniform 
POR_F 
Water Saturation 
0.2 
0.6 
Uniform 
SW 
Layer-up 
0 
4 
Uniform 
LAYERSUP 
Layer-down 
0 
4 
Uniform 
LAYERSDOWN 
Operation BHP, 
kPa 
3000 
10000 
Uniform 
BHP 
Intrinsic 
permeability, 
mD 
10 
100 
Uniform 
K1INT 
Fracture half- 
length, m 
60 
180 
Uniform 
BWHLEN 
Fracture spacing, 
m 
20 
220 
Uniform 
FRACSPACING 
Fracture width, 
m 
10 
50 
Uniform 
DIFRAC 
Langmuir 
pressure, kPa 
3000 
20000 
Triangle 
ADGPCRIT 
Langmuir 
volume, m3/kg 
5 × 10−7 
0.008 
Uniform 
ADGMAXV 
Gas Adsorption 
Constant, 1/ 
kPa 
0.001 
0.005 
Uniform 
ADGCSTV  
S. Qian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 95–110
102
5. Machine learning model and application 
5.1. Regression model 
In this study, 75% of the dataset obtained in Section 4 was utilized as 
the training set, while 25% of the dataset was used as the test set. Five 
machine learning prediction models were developed: Linear Regression, 
Decision Tree (DT) Regression, Gradient Boosting (GBDT) Regression, 
Support Vector Machine (SVM), and Random Forest. The datasets were 
also processed, and the effects of the different models were evaluated by 
R2. 
The correlation index (R2) was chosen as a criterion to assess the 
prediction accuracy of the neural network model developed in this study 
(Ottah et al., 2015). The value of R2 runs from 0 to 1, and the higher the 
number, the better the model fit. The formula for calculating R2 is as 
follows. 
R2 = 1 −
∑K
i=1 (̂yi − yi)2
∑K
i=1 (yi − yi)2
(6b) 
Fig. 6. Histograms of geological and completion parameters generated.  
S. Qian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 95–110
103
Where, yi is the average value of yi. 
Fig. 9 shows the scatter plots of the prediction results and the actual 
results of the five prediction models studied in this study. The correla-
tion index (R2) results of the selected prediction models are shown in 
Table 4. The linear regression model, the support vector machine model, 
and the decision tree moderator model have scattered predicted and 
actual value points, low R2 values, large errors, and poor prediction 
results. 
Fig. 10 shows the relative errors of the prediction results of 200 
randomly selected validation cases combined with Table 4. It can be 
seen that Gradient Boosting and Random Forest both have R2 over 0.9 
with more minor errors compared to the other three machine learning 
Fig. 7. Distribution of different times of cumulative gas production calculated by numerical simulation.  
Table 3 
Cumulative gas production distribution table at different times.  
Cumulative gas production ( × 107m3) 
P = 0.1 
P = 0.5 
P = 0.9 
1-month 
0.06 
0.13 
0.26 
1-year 
0.52 
1.07 
2.06 
5-year 
1.70 
3.60 
6.00 
10-year 
2.90 
5.40 
8.40 
Note: When P = 0.1, P = 0.5 and P = 0.9, it indicates that with a 10%, 50% and 
90% probability. 
Fig. 8. Histogram of sensitivity of each parameter to capacity for 1 month, 1 year, 5 years, and 10 years.  
S. Qian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 95–110
104
models. The results obtained are more concentrated around the x-axis, 
and the error distribution range is much smaller than the other methods, 
which is far superior to the other models. 
Therefore, to filter out more suitable ML prediction models from 
gradient boosting and random forest, we compared their predicted 
values from machine learning with the actual values from numerical 
simulations for one month, one year, five years, and ten years, respec-
tively (as shown in Fig. 11). The horizontal coordinates in Fig. 11 
Fig. 9. Model performance of each model on the training and test set.  
S. Qian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 95–110
105
represent the actual cumulative gas production of distinct samples, 
while the vertical coordinates represent the anticipated values of the 
Gradient Boosting (GBDT) and Random Forest algorithms, respectively. 
The lesser the discrepancy between the model prediction and the actual 
sample, the closer the sample points are to the red 45-degree line. Most 
of the points plotted in Fig. 11 are distributed near the 45-degree line. 
However, whether the prediction is for one month, one year, five years, 
or ten years, the prediction of Gradient Boosting has a higher aggrega-
tion than that of Random Forest. The calculated Gradient Boosting’s R2 
is larger than those of Random Forest, indicating that the prediction 
performance of Gradient Boosting is better than that of Random Forest. 
5.2. Model application 
This work analyzes the sensitivity analysis of different fracturing 
parameters on cumulative shale gas production to evaluate the influence 
of different fracturing parameters on cumulative gas production, as 
illustrated in Fig. 12. 
Before performing the sensitivity analysis on the cumulative gas 
production, a set of basic groups with parameters must be set, as shown 
in Table 5. Each parameter is set with 5 different sets of values from 
small to large in the distribution range of Table 2, respectively. 
Fig.(a) demonstrates that cumulative gas production generally in-
creases with decreasing fracture spacing, with a notable increase 
occurring early in the mining process. It indicates that fracture spacing is 
strongly sensitive to cumulative gas production and is negatively 
correlated. 
According to Fig.(b), the cumulative gas production increases as the 
fracture half-length increases, but this rise is less pronounced in the 
parameter distribution range. It suggests a positive correlation and that 
the fracture half-length is less susceptible to total gas output. 
According to Fig.(c), the cumulative gas production grows dramati-
cally with increasing intrinsic permeability, peaks at the beginning of 
extraction, and is proportional to intrinsic permeability. It suggests that 
Table 4 
Comparison of the prediction performance of various models.  
Machine Learning Algorithms 
Train R2 
Test R2 
Linear 
0.69 
0.69 
SVM 
0.55 
0.54 
Decision Tree Regressor 
0.90 
0.74 
Gradient Boosting (GBDT) 
0.97 
0.96 
Random Forest 
0.98 
0.93  
Fig. 10. Relative error of prediction results for selected 200 verification cases.  
Fig. 11. Comparisons of the true values and the predicted cumulative gas productions, Gradient Boosting (GBDT) is shown on the left of the figure, and Random 
Forest is shown on the right. (a, b) for 1 month of production, (c, d) for 1 year of production, (e, f) for 5 years of production, and (g, h) for 10 years of production. 
S. Qian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 95–110
106
intrinsic permeability and cumulative gas production have a positive 
correlation and are extremely sensitive to each other. 
The cumulative gas production grows as the fracture width increases 
in Fig. (d), and the fracture width significantly increases the ultimate 
cumulative gas production of gas wells. It shows a positive correlation 
between fracture width and cumulative gas output. 
Fig.(e) shows that Langmuir volume positively correlates with cu-
mulative gas production. But, when Langmuir volume is generally at a 
low level, the contribution of increasing Langmuir volume to gas well 
production is minimal—indicating that the sensitivity of Langmuir 
volume to gas well production is weak. However, when Langmuir vol-
ume increases to a certain level, a further increase in Langmuir volume 
significantly improves gas well production. As the Langmuir volume 
increases, the proportion of adsorbed gas in the matrix increases, 
although the free gas content does not change. With 30 years of cumu-
lative production, the adsorbed gas recovery is increasing as the free gas 
is continuously recovered. 
According to Fig.(f), the cumulative gas production of gas wells in-
creases comparatively significantly as Langmuir pressure rises. It sug-
gests that the Langmuir pressure is somewhat sensitive to gas well 
Fig. 12. Sensitivity analysis of cumulative gas production to fracturing parameters.  
Table 5 
Basic case parameters and values.  
Parameters 
value 
Parameters 
value 
Matrix permeability, mD 
10–4 
Fracture permeability, mD 
0.02 
Matrix Porosity,% 
3.1 
Fracture Porosity,% 
0.34 
Water Saturation,% 
20 
Operation BHP, kPa 
5000 
Layer-up 
4 
Intrinsic permeability, mD 
30 
Layer-down 
4 
Fracture half-length, m 
100 
Fracture spacing, m 
20 
Langmuir pressure, kPa 
5000 
Fracture width, m 
10 
Langmuir volume, m3/kg 
0.004 
Gas Adsorption Constant, 1/kPa 
0.0035    
S. Qian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 95–110
107
production. This is mainly because improved gas well production results 
from quicker desorption of adsorbed gas from shale reservoirs when the 
Langmuir pressure constant increases. The figure also shows that at the 
beginning of gas well extraction, the contribution of the Langmuir 
pressure constant to gas production is not immediately apparent. This is 
primarily because during the initial stages of gas well extraction, and 
free gas is extracted first, then adsorbed gas is desorption. As a result, the 
Langmuir pressure constant primarily affects the intermediate and final 
stages of gas reservoir extraction. 
6. Parameter optimization and prediction 
6.1. Coupling of PSO optimization and GBDT regression model 
The Particle Swarm Optimization protocol (PSO), a well-known 
meta-heuristic global optimizer, to determine the optimal design of 
fracturing parameters. The PSO algorithm is combined with a trained 
Gradient Boosting Decision Tree (GBDT) model, which serves as a fitness 
evaluator for a large set of project design parameters. By employing the 
GBDT model, the computational burden of the optimization process is 
significantly reduced, allowing for a larger number of PSO iterations. 
To provide a comprehensive understanding, Table 6 presents the 
final parameters of the PSO model, including the GBDT parameters. 
Additionally, Fig. 13 illustrates the flow of the optimization process. 
By integrating the PSO algorithm with the GBDT model, we aim to 
achieve an efficient and effective optimization of the fracturing 
parameter design. This approach enables us to explore a wide range of 
design possibilities and identify the most favorable parameter 
configurations. 
6.2. Optimization and predicted results 
Through the sensitivity analysis of cumulative gas production, 
various fracturing parameters and gas reservoir parameters affect the 
cumulative gas production when fracturing horizontal wells for gas re-
covery from shale. Therefore, in this study, the PSO algorithm is used to 
optimize the fracturing parameters among the input parameters with the 
objective of optimal cumulative gas production. Fig. 14 shows the trend 
of cumulative gas production during the PSO optimization. The cumu-
lative gas production progressively rises and eventually reaches a 
plateau as the number of iterations rises. This indicates that the cumu-
lative gas production is closer to the optimal result through PSO 
iterations. 
Based on the specified basic parameters and using cumulative gas 
production as the objective function, the optimization results for frac-
turing parameters and gas reservoir parameters are presented in Table 7. 
The optimization process led to several changes. The fracture spacing 
remained unchanged, but the fracture width was optimized from 10m to 
12m. The intrinsic permeability was reduced from 30mD to 18mD, while 
the base value of fracture half-length increased from 100m to 139m after 
optimization. Regarding the gas reservoir parameters, the initial values 
for Langmuir pressure and Langmuir volume were 5000 kPa and 0.004 
m3/kg, respectively. Through optimization, these values were adjusted 
to 10263 kPa and 0.0056 m3/kg, respectively. The machine learning 
algorithm predicted a cumulative gas production volume of 4.59 × 108 
m3. However, by employing the PSO algorithm to optimize the param-
eters, the optimal cumulative gas production volume was achieved at 
4.90 × 108 m3. Thus, through parameter optimization using the PSO 
algorithm, the optimal cumulative gas production was significantly 
improved. 
In summary, by applying the PSO algorithm for parameter optimi-
zation, the fracturing and reservoir parameters were fine-tuned, result-
ing in improved cumulative gas production. The optimized values 
demonstrate the effectiveness of the PSO algorithm in achieving better 
production outcomes in gas reservoirs. 
7. Discussion 
Machine learning has become a widely adopted research methodol-
ogy for data processing, and the predictive model employed in this study 
holds immense potential for further refinement. In this investigation, we 
have leveraged the Gradient Boosting Decision Tree (GBDT) model, 
continuously fine-tuning crucial aspects such as the number of hidden 
layers, neuron count, learning rate, and other parameters to achieve 
optimal performance. By iteratively adjusting these hyperparameters, 
we aim to enhance the model’s prediction accuracy and achieve more 
reliable results. 
To bolster the predictive capabilities of the GBDT model, we can 
incorporate advanced optimization techniques like Particle Swarm 
Optimization (PSO) or Genetic Algorithms (GA) to optimize the hyper-
parameters. This integration of state-of-the-art optimization methods 
aids in identifying the most favorable parameter settings, thereby 
elevating the model’s overall performance and predictive power. 
Furthermore, it is important to acknowledge that the evaluation and 
optimization undertaken in this study have primarily focused on a single 
objective function, specifically the cumulative gas production. However, 
future research endeavors should consider employing a multi-objective 
optimization approach, such as the Pareto method. By incorporating 
additional functions, such as cumulative gas production and net present 
value (NPV), a more comprehensive and robust assessment of the res-
ervoir’s performance and economic viability can be attained. 
Through a continuous cycle of refinement, exploration of cutting- 
edge optimization techniques, and integration of multi-objective opti-
mization strategies, our aim as reservoir engineers is to push the 
boundaries of machine learning applications in reservoir engineering. 
By doing so, we aspire to elevate the precision and effectiveness of 
decision-making processes, ultimately leading to the maximization of 
reservoir performance and economic success. 
8. Conclusion 
This study proposes a cumulative gas production evaluation work-
flow based on coupled particle swarm optimization and the GBDT model 
for fracturing parameter optimization for capacity prediction and frac-
turing parameter optimization, leading to the following conclusions.  
(1) Machine learning methods can efficiently process field data and 
solve non-linear problems compared to traditional simulation 
and prediction methods. And synthesize a variety of factors, such 
as geology, fracturing construction, and production, which 
significantly improves the model’s efficiency and prediction 
accuracy. 
(2) Correlation and sensitivity analyses reveal that intrinsic perme-
ability and fracture width are the dominant factors influencing 
cumulative gas production in shale gas reservoirs. These param-
eters exhibit strong correlations with cumulative gas production, 
with correlation coefficients of 0.367 and 0.316, respectively, 
over a 10-year production period. On the other hand, the impact 
of fracture half-length on cumulative gas production is found to 
be minimal, as indicated by a low correlation coefficient of only 
0.009 after 10 years of production. 
Table 6 
Hyperparameters of PSO algorithm and GBDT model.  
Parameters in PSO algorithm 
Value 
Parameters of GBDT 
model 
Value 
Population number group size 
15 
Loss 
deviance 
Maximum number of iterations 
maximum 
50 
Learning_rate 
0.1 
Inertia weight(ω) 
0.8 
max_depth 
3 
Learning factor (c1) 
2 
Criterion 
gini 
Learning factor (c2) 
2 
n_estimators 
100  
S. Qian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 95–110
108
(3) Different machine learning models have other production pre-
diction effects. By comparing five production prediction models, 
we concluded that GBDT and Random Forest yielded R2 of 0.96 
and 0.93, respectively, and they predicted models with better 
prediction performance than Linear, SVM, and Decision Tree 
Regressor. Through more in-depth testing and training, the final 
study concluded that the GBDT model was used to predict single 
well capacity and evaluate fracturing effectiveness.  
(4) The combination of PSO and the trained GBDT model enables 
efficient optimization of fracturing parameters. PSO effectively 
identifies the optimal fracturing parameters that maximize cu-
mulative gas production within the search domain, resulting in 
significant computational savings. PSO successfully optimized 
various parameters, including fracture spacing, fracture width, 
intrinsic permeability, fracture half-length, Langmuir pressure, 
and Langmuir volume. As a result of the optimization, the cu-
mulative gas production, which was initially predicted to be 4.59 
× 108 m3, was improved to 4.90 × 108 m3. 
Declaration of interests 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Shihao Qian: Data curation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, 
Methodology, Software. Zhenzhen Dong: Conceptualization, Writing – 
review & editing. Wei Guo: Project administration. Xiaowei Zhang: 
Project administration. Zhaoxia Liu: Visualization. Lingjun Wang: 
Software. Lei Wu: Software. Tianyang Zhang: Resources. Weirong Li: 
Supervision. 
Fig. 13. Optimization workflow.  
Fig. 14. The trend of Cumulative gas production during PSO iteration.  
Table 7 
Optimal parameters.  
Basic Parameters 
value 
Optimization 
Parameters 
value 
Optimal 
value 
Matrix permeability, 
mD 
10–4 
Fracture spacing, m 
20 
20 
Matrix Porosity,% 
3.1 
Fracture width, m 
10 
12 
Water Saturation,% 
20 
Intrinsic permeability, 
mD 
30 
18 
Layer-up 
4 
Fracture half-length, m 
100 
139 
Layer-down 
4 
Langmuir pressure, kPa 
5000 
10263 
Fracture 
permeability, mD 
0.02 
Langmuir volume, m3/ 
kg 
0.004 
0.0056 
Fracture Porosity,% 
0.34 
Cumulative gas 
production, 108/m3 
4.59 
4.90 
Operation BHP, kPa 
5000 
Gas Adsorption 
Constant, 1/kPa 
0.0035  
S. Qian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 95–110
109
Acknowledgment 
Special thanks to Professors for their careful guidance on the selec-
tion, collection, and writing of this thesis to its final draft; to fellow lab 
members for their essential technical help; and to Xi’an Shiyou Uni-
versity for funding the Graduate Student Innovation and Practical Skills 
Training Program (No. YCS21213174). 
References 
Ambrose, R.J., Hartman, R.C., Diaz-Campos, M., Akkutlu, I.Y., Sondergeld, C.H., 2010. 
New pore-scale considerations for shale gas in place calculations. In: All Days. 
Presented at the SPE Unconventional Gas Conference. SPE, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
USA. https://doi.org/10.2118/131772-MS. SPE-131772-MS.  
Ben, Y., Perrotte, M., Ezzatabadipour, M., Ali, I., Sankaran, S., Harlin, C., Cao, D., 2020. 
Real-time hydraulic fracturing pressure prediction with machine learning. In: Day 3 
Thu, February 06, 2020. Presented at the SPE Hydraulic Fracturing Technology 
Conference and Exhibition. SPE, The Woodlands, Texas, USA. https://doi.org/ 
10.2118/199699-MS. D031S008R003.  
Brieman, L., 2001. Random forests. Mach. Learn. 45, 5–32. https://link.springer.com/ar 
ticle/10.1023/A:1010933404324. 
Cios, K.J., Kurgan, L.A., Witold, P., Swiniarski, R.W., SpringerVerlag, 2007. Data mining: 
a knowledge discovery approach. Data Mining: Knowl. Discov. Approach. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-36795-8. 
Curtis, J.B., 2002. Fractured shale-gas systems. AAPG (Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol.) Bull. 86, 
1921–1938. https://doi.org/10.1306/61EEDDBE-173E-11D7-8645000102C1865D. 
Dai, J., Dong, D., Ni, Y., Hong, F., Zhang, S., Zhang, Y., Ding, L., 2020. Several essential 
geological and geochemical issues regarding shale gas research in China. J. Nat. Gas 
Geosci. 5, 169–184. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnggs.2020.07.004. 
Dai, J., Ni, Y., Liu, Q., Wu, X., Gong, D., Hong, F., Zhang, Y., Liao, F., Yan, Z., Li, H., 
2021. Sichuan super gas basin in southwest China. Petrol. Explor. Dev. 48, 
1081–1088. https://doi.org/10.11698/PED.2021.06.01. 
Dong, Z., Wu, L., Wang, L., Li, W., Wang, Z., Liu, Z., 2022. Optimization of fracturing 
parameters with machine-learning and evolutionary algorithm methods. Energies 
15, 6063. https://doi.org/10.3390/en15166063. 
Fernandez-Martinez, J.L., ´Alvarez, J.P.F., García-Gonzalo, M.E., P´erez, C.O.M., 
Kuzma, H.A., 2008. Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO): a simple and powerful 
algorithm family for geophysical inversion. In: SEG Technical Program Expanded 
Abstracts 2008, SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts. Society of Exploration 
Geophysicists, pp. 3568–3571. https://doi.org/10.1190/1.3064068. 
Friedman, J.H., 2001. Greedy function approximation: a gradient boosting machine. 
Ann. Stat. 29, 1189–1232. https://doi.org/10.1214/aos/1013203451. 
Gamal, H., Alsaihati, A., Elkatatny, S., Haidary, S., Abdulraheem, A., 2021. Rock strength 
prediction in real-time while drilling employing random forest and functional 
network techniques. J. Energy Resour. Technol. 143 https://doi.org/10.1115/ 
1.4050843. 
Gorucu, S.E., Ertekin, T., 2011. Optimization of the design of transverse hydraulic 
fractures in horizontal wells placed in dual porosity tight gas reservoirs. In: All Days. 
Presented at the SPE Middle East Unconventional Gas Conference and Exhibition. 
SPE, Muscat, Oman. https://doi.org/10.2118/142040-MS. SPE-142040-MS.  
He, X., Bowers, S., Candela, J.Q., Pan, J., Jin, O., Xu, Tianbing, Liu, B., Xu, Tao, Shi, Y., 
Atallah, A., Herbrich, R., 2014. Practical Lessons from Predicting Clicks on Ads at 
Facebook. Presented at the 20th ACM SIGKDD Conference. ACM Press, New York, 
NY, USA, pp. 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1145/2648584.2648589. 
He, Z., Hu, Z., Nie, H., Li, S., Xu, J., 2017. Characterization of shale gas enrichment in the 
Wufeng Formation–Longmaxi Formation in the Sichuan Basin of China and 
evaluation of its geological construction–transformation evolution sequence. J. Nat. 
Gas Geosci. 2, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnggs.2017.03.002. 
Jain, A., Nandakumar, K., Ross, A., 2005. Score normalization in multimodal biometric 
systems. Pattern Recogn. 38, 2270–2285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
patcog.2005.01.012. 
Johnson, C., Boersma, T., 2013. Energy (in)security in Poland the case of shale gas. 
Energy Pol. 53, 389–399. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2012.10.068. 
Jordan, M.I., Mitchell, T.M., 2015. Machine learning: trends, perspectives, and prospects. 
Science 349, 255–260. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaa8415. 
Kavitha, S., Varuna, S., Ramya, R., 2016. A comparative analysis on linear regression and 
support vector regression. In: 2016 Online International Conference on Green 
Engineering and Technologies (IC-GET). Presented at the 2016 Online International 
Conference on Green Engineering and Technologies (IC-GET). IEEE, Coimbatore, 
India, pp. 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/GET.2016.7916627. 
Kennedy, J., Eberhart, R., 1995. Particle swarm optimization. In: Presented at the 
ICNN’95 - International Conference on Neural Networks. IEEE, Perth, WA, Australia, 
pp. 1942–1948. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICNN.1995.488968. 
Kim, H.-J., Baek, J.-W., Chung, K., 2021. Associative knowledge graph using fuzzy 
clustering and min-max normalization in video contents. IEEE Access 9, 
74802–74816. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3080180. 
King, G.E., 2010. Thirty years of gas shale fracturing: what have we learned?. In: All 
Days. Presented at the SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition. SPE, 
Florence, Italy. https://doi.org/10.2118/133456-MS. SPE-133456-MS.  
Lim, H.-I., 2019. A linear regression approach to modeling software characteristics for 
classifying similar software. In: Presented at the 2019 IEEE 43rd Annual Computer 
Software and Applications Conference (COMPSAC). IEEE, Milwaukee, WI, USA, 
pp. 942–943. https://doi.org/10.1109/COMPSAC.2019.00152. 
Luo, G., Tian, Y., Bychina, M., Ehlig-Economides, C., 2018. Production optimization 
using machine learning in Bakken shale. In: Proceedings of the 6th Unconventional 
Resources Technology Conference. Presented at the Unconventional Resources 
Technology Conference. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Houston, 
Texas, USA. https://doi.org/10.15530/urtec-2018-2902505.  
Ma, Z., Pi, G., Dong, X., Chen, C., 2017. The situation analysis of shale gas development 
in China-based on Structural Equation Modeling. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 67, 
1300–1307. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.06.085. 
Nejad, A.M., Sheludko, S., Shelley, R.F., Hodgson, T., McFall, R., 2015. A case history: 
evaluating well completions in the Eagle Ford shale using a data-driven approach. In: 
Day 2 Wed, February 04, 2015. Presented at the SPE Hydraulic Fracturing 
Technology Conference. SPE, The Woodlands, Texas, USA. https://doi.org/10.2118/ 
SPE-173336-MS. D021S004R004.  
Onwunalu, J.E., Durlofsky, L.J., 2009. Development and application of a new well 
pattern optimization algorithm for optimizing large-scale field development. New 
Orleans, Louisiana. In: All Days. Presented at the SPE Annual Technical Conference 
and Exhibition, SPE. https://doi.org/10.2118/124364-MS. SPE-124364-MS.  
Ottah, D.G., Ikiensikimama, S.S., Matemilola, S.A., 2015. Aquifer matching with material 
balance using particle swarm optimization algorithm – PSO. SPE, Lagos, Nigeria. In: 
All Days. Presented at the SPE Nigeria Annual International Conference and 
Exhibition. https://doi.org/10.2118/178319-MS. SPE-178319-MS.  
Tan, C., He, J., Zhou, T., Liu, J., Song, W., 2020. A Study on the Optimization of 
Fracturing Operation Parameters Based on PCA-BN, vol. 42. Joumal of South wast 
Petroleum University (Science & Technology Edition, pp. 56–62. https://doi.org/ 
10.11885/j.issn.1674-5086.2020.05.12.05. 
Tang, J., Fan, B., Xu, G., Xiao, L., Tian, S., Luo, S., Weitz, D., 2020. A new tool for 
searching sweet spots by using gradient boosting decision trees and generative 
adversarial networks. In: Presented at the International Petroleum Technology 
Conference. OnePetro. https://doi.org/10.2523/IPTC-19941-Abstract. 
Vapnik, V.N., 1999. An overview of statistical learning theory. IEEE Trans. Neural 
Network. 10, 988–999. https://doi.org/10.1109/72.788640. 
Wang, H., Shi, Z., Zhao, Q., Liu, D., Sun, S., Guo, W., Liang, F., Lin, C., Wang, X., 2020. 
Stratigraphic framework of the Wufeng - Longmaxi shale in and around the Sichuan 
Basin, China: implications for targeting shale gas. Energy Geosci. 1, 124–133. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engeos.2020.05.006. 
Wang, L., Yao, Y., Luo, X., Daniel Adenutsi, C., Zhao, G., Lai, F., 2023. A critical review 
on intelligent optimization algorithms and surrogate models for conventional and 
unconventional reservoir production optimization. Fuel 350, 128826. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.fuel.2023.128826. 
Wang, L., Yao, Y., Wang, K., Adenutsi, C.D., Zhao, G., Lai, F., 2022a. Data-driven multi- 
objective optimization design method for shale gas fracturing parameters. J. Nat. Gas 
Sci. Eng. 99, 104420 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2022.104420. 
Wang, L., Yao, Y., Wang, W., Adenutsi, C.D., Zhao, G., Lai, F., 2022b. Integrated 
optimization design for horizontal well spacing and fracture stage placement in shale 
gas reservoir. J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng. 105, 104706 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jngse.2022.104706. 
Wang, S., Chen, S., 2019. Insights to fracture stimulation design in unconventional 
reservoirs based on machine learning modeling. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 174, 682–695. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.petrol.2018.11.076. 
Wang, Y., Xia, S.-T., 2017. Unifying attribute splitting criteria of decision trees by Tsallis 
entropy. In: Presented at the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, 
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, New Orleans, LA, pp. 2507–2511. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP.2017.7952608. 
Williams-Stroud, S., 2008. Using microseismic events to constrain fracture network 
models and implications for generating fracture flow properties for reservoir 
simulation. In: All Days. Presented at the SPE Shale Gas Production Conference. SPE, 
Fort Worth, Texas, USA. https://doi.org/10.2118/119895-MS. SPE-119895-MS.  
Wu, L., Dong, Z., Li, W., Jing, C., Qu, B., 2021. Well-logging prediction based on hybrid 
neural network model. Energies 14, 8583. https://doi.org/10.3390/en14248583. 
Xu, J., Guo, C., Wei, M., Jiang, R., 2015. Production performance analysis for composite 
shale gas reservoir considering multiple transport mechanisms. J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng. 
26, 382–395. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2015.05.033. 
Yan, X., Wang, X., Zhang, H., Wang, Y., Duan, Y., 2015. Analysis of sensitive parameter 
in numerical simulation of shale gas reservoir with hydraulic fractures, 37, 
pp. 127–132. https://doi.org/10.11885/j.issn.1674-5086.2013.06.14.04. 
Yu, W., Sepehrnoori, K., 2013. Optimization of multiple hydraulically fractured 
horizontal wells in unconventional gas reservoirs. J. Petrol. Eng. 1–16. https://doi. 
org/10.1155/2013/151898, 2013.  
Zhan, C., Sankaran, S., LeMoine, V., Graybill, J., Sher Mey, D.-O., 2019. Application of 
machine learning for production forecasting for unconventional resources. In: 
Proceedings of the 7th Unconventional Resources Technology Conference. Presented 
at the Unconventional Resources Technology Conference. American Association of 
Petroleum Geologists, Denver, Colorado, USA. https://doi.org/10.15530/urtec- 
2019-47.  
Zhang, X., Du, C., Deimbacher, F., Crick, M., Harikesavanallur, A., 2009. Sensitivity 
studies of horizontal wells with hydraulic fractures in shale gas reservoirs. In: 
Presented at the IPTC 2009: International Petroleum Technology Conference. 
European Association of Geoscientists & Engineers. https://doi.org/10.3997/2214- 
4609-pdb.151.iptc13338 cp.  
Zhao, G., Yao, Y., Wang, L., Adenutsi, C.D., Feng, D., Wu, W., 2022. Optimization design 
of horizontal well fracture stage placement in shale gas reservoirs based on an 
efficient variable-fidelity surrogate model and intelligent algorithm. Energy Rep. 8, 
3589–3599. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2022.02.228. 
S. Qian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 95–110
110
Zhou, X., Ran, Q., 2023. Optimization of fracturing parameters by modified genetic 
algorithm in shale gas reservoir. Energies 16, 2868. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
en16062868. 
Zhu, D., Hu, Y., Cui, M., Chen, Y., Liang, C., Cai, W., He, Y., Wang, X., Chen, H., Li, X., 
2020. Productivity simulation of hydraulically fractured wells based on hybrid local 
grid refinement and embedded discrete fracture model. Petrol. Explor. Dev. 47, 
365–373. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1876-3804(20)60053-2. 
Zou, Z., Yang, Y., Fan, Z., Tang, H., Zou, M., Hu, X., Xiong, C., Ma, J., 2020. Suitability of 
data preprocessing methods for landslide displacement forecasting. Stoch. Environ. 
Res. Risk Assess. 34, 1105–1119. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00477-020-01824-x. 
S. Qian et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
