Recent advances in emerging techniques for non-destructive detection of
seed viability: A review
Yu Xia a,b,e, Yunfei Xu a, Jiangbo Li a,b,c,d, Chi Zhang a,b,c,d, Shuxiang Fan a,b,c,d,⁎
a Beijing Research Center of Intelligent Equipment for Agriculture, Beijing 100097, China
b National Research Center of Intelligent Equipment for Agriculture, Beijing 100097, China
c Key Laboratory of Agri-informatics, Ministry of Agriculture, Beijing 100097, China
d Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Equipment Technology for Agriculture, Beijing 100097, China
e College of Mechanical and Electronic Engineering, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 17 April 2019
Received in revised form 10 May 2019
Accepted 10 May 2019
Available online 15 May 2019
Over the past decades, imaging and spectroscopy techniques have been developed rapidly with widespread ap-
plications in non-destructive agro-food quality determination. Seeds are one of the most fundamental elements
of agriculture and forestry. Seed viability is of great signiﬁcance in seed quality characteristics reﬂecting potential
seed germination, and there is a great need for a quick and effective method to determine the germination con-
dition and viability of seeds prior to cultivate, sale and plant. Some researches based on spectra and/or image pro-
cessing and analysis have been explored in terms of the external and internal quality of a variety of seeds. Many
attempts have been made in image segmentation and spectra correction methods to predict seed quality using
various traditional and novel methods. This review focuses on the comparative introduction, development and
applications of emerging techniques in the analysis of seed viability, in particular, near infrared spectroscopy,
hyperspectral and multispectral imaging, Raman spectroscopy, infrared thermography, and soft X-ray imaging
methods. The basic theories, principle components, relative chemometric processing, analytical methods and
prediction accuracies are reported and compared. Additionally, on the foundation of the observed applications,
the technical challenges and future outlook for these emerging techniques are also discussed.
© 2019 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open
access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Keywords:
Seed viability
NIR
Hyperspectral imaging
Raman spectroscopy
Infrared thermography
Soft X-ray imaging
Contents
1.
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2.
Emerging technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
2.1.
Near infrared spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
2.2.
Hyperspectral and multispectral imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
2.3.
Raman spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
2.4.
Infrared thermography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
2.5.
X-ray imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.
Technical challenges and trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
1. Introduction
Seeds are one of the most fundamental elements of agriculture and
forestry as ﬁeld establishment of grain, vegetable, fruit, forage crops
and economic forest crops, which are usually performed with the direct
or indirect use of seeds. Seed quality has a profound effect on the unifor-
mity of development, yield and quality of the harvested product.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35–47
⁎ Corresponding author at: Beijing Research Center of Intelligent Equipment for
Agriculture, Beijing 100097, China.
E-mail address: fanshuxiang@outlook.com (S. Fan).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2019.05.001
2589-7217/© 2019 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage: http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-
intelligence-in-agriculture/
Moreover, the safety and quality of seeds and their products directly af-
fect human health (Huang et al., 2015; Rahman and Cho, 2016). Seed
vigor is more promising in seed quality characteristic reﬂecting poten-
tial seed germination, ﬁeld emergence, resistance to biotic and abiotic
stress, and seed storage ability under different conditions than standard
germination (Sun et al., 2007). Moreover, it is well known that seeds
with preferable viability would be proﬁtable to seed industries by
obtaining considerable yield for cultivators and reducing crop variabil-
ity. At the same time, seed dealers or companies could beneﬁt from
seeds with promoted viability via a series of higher quality products. In-
ternational Seed Testing Association (ISTA) deﬁned seed vigor as: “seed
vigor is the sum of those properties that determine the activity and per-
formance of seed lots of acceptable germination in a wide range of envi-
ronments; a vigorous seed lot is one that is potentially able to perform
well under environmental conditions which are not optimal for the spe-
cies”. The high-vigor seeds germinate uniformly, rapidly and grow more
resistant seedlings, then better ﬁeld performance and higher yield are
reasonably hopeful (Marcos Filho, 2015). Currently, conventional
methods including standard germination test, electrical conductivity
test, seedling growth test, accelerated aging test, cold test and tetrazo-
lium have been proposed and applied for the evaluation of seed vigor.
However, those methods are usually non-automated, time-consuming,
destructive and/or require specialized training and experience. Thus,
they are not suitable for large-scale application or compatible with en-
dangered species conservation. Therefore, non-invasive and high-
throughput screening methods are urgently needed for seed industry
to provide high-vigor seeds for farmers before sowing.
In the recent decades, great advances in computer, material and elec-
tronic technologies have led to the remarkable improvement of optical-
based and image-based systems available of evaluating qualities indexes
rapidly and accurately on the static and dynamic or online grading equip-
ment with less labor force (Gowen et al., 2007). Optical-based and image-
based detection systems are of great indispensability in the agro-food
quality determination coupled with satisﬁed reliability and accuracy by
removing the instability and inconsistency via human intervention (Du
and Sun, 2004; Elmasry et al., 2012). Speciﬁcally, optical-based or
image-based techniques, including computer vision, spectral imaging,
near-infrared spectroscopy and other relatively emerging techniques,
have been well trained and widely utilized towards fruits and vegetables
sorting equipment for non-destructive quality assessment and grading
(Elmasry et al., 2012; Huang et al., 2008; Hussain et al., 2018; Lorente
et al., 2012; ElMasry and Nakauchi, 2016; Nicolaï et al., 2007; Xia et al.,
2019; Zhang et al., 2018a). However, studies and applications towards
seeds are correspondingly few using techniques stated above. Although
some emerging techniques are utilized for feasibility exploration, there
is an obvious trend that more emerging techniques are also applied focus-
ing on the determination quality indexes of seeds, such as Raman spec-
troscopy, infrared thermography, X-ray imaging.
In fact, seed vigor is an interaction of characteristics and many fac-
tors are involved in the composition and manifestation of seed vigor,
such as genetic constitution, environment during seed development,
and storage (Rahman and Cho, 2016), hindering the establishment of
a precise deﬁnition of seed vigor (Sun et al., 2007). Therefore, most re-
searchers focused on the detection of seed viability instead of seed
vigor based on emerging non-destructive techniques, such as near infra-
red (NIR) spectroscopy, hyperspectral imaging (HSI) or multispectral
imaging (MSI), Raman spectroscopy (RS), infrared thermography
(IRT), and soft X-ray imaging. Hence, the applications and trends of
these techniques in seed viability detection were reviewed in this paper.
2. Emerging technologies
2.1. Near infrared spectroscopy
Near infrared (NIR) spectroscopy is based on the absorption of elec-
tromagnetic radiation at wavelengths in the range of 780–2500 nm
(Huang et al., 2008; Nicolaï et al., 2007). While the radiation penetrates
agricultural and forest products, their spectral characteristics change
through wavelength dependent scattering and absorption processes.
The tissue structures of products made up of the cells and intra/extracel-
lular environments are responsible for the scattering. The absorption is
mainly caused by C\\H, O\\H, and N\\H bonds of the main compounds
(water, sugars, chlorophylls, carotenoids, etc.). NIR spectra comprise
broad wave bands arising from overlapping absorptions corresponding
mainly to overtones and combinations of these chemical bonds, making
it feasible to detect organic and biological materials.
Radiation interacting with a sample may be absorbed, transmitted or
reﬂected. Specular reﬂection is caused by a smooth surface, while dif-
fuse reﬂection is due to a rough surface. Both reﬂection ways provide
only information about the surface of samples. Scattering depends on
the size, shape and microstructure of the particles, affecting the inten-
sity level of the reﬂected spectrum, while the absorption process affects
the shape of the reﬂected spectrum. Thus, there are different NIR spec-
troscopy measurement modes ﬁtting different applications (Nicolaï
et al., 2007). The common modes are diffuse reﬂectance and transmit-
tance for seed quality measurement (Fig. 1). In reﬂectance mode, light
source and detector are mounted under a speciﬁc angle to avoid specu-
lar reﬂection. The structure of this mode is relatively simple and easy to
establish. However, it can generally obtain the superﬁcial spectral infor-
mation (about 1–2 cm thickness) of samples and is easily affected by
stray light. In transmittance mode the light source is positioned oppo-
site to the detector. In the wavelength range of 1100–2500 nm, the
amount of scattering makes the path length so high that the transmit-
tance of most samples passing through about 1 cm thickness which
can be negligible (Huang et al., 2008). This mode can easily acquire
the internal spectral information with penetration light through sam-
ples, but the requirement of sensitivity in charge coupled devices
(CCD) in spectrometers is pretty high and light sources with higher
power are also demanded (Xia et al., 2018).
However, the fundamental vibrations of these bonds yield absorp-
tion peaks in the visible and near infrared (Vis/NIR) regions that are
broad and overlapping, making the Vis/NIR spectra with complex mix-
tures hard to interpret. In addition, NIR spectra are 10 to 100 times
weaker than their corresponding fundamental mid-infrared absorption
bands (Fu and Ying, 2016). Therefore, the analytical information
contained in NIR spectra is hard to explain and select because of its mul-
tivariate nature, and it is impossible to distinguish the very slight spec-
tral differences between samples. In order to extract useful information
from vast amounts of spectral data speedily and efﬁciently, advanced
chemometric algorithms are needed to extract information by not
only data preprocessing but also quantitative or qualitative analysis as
expected.
It is necessary to preprocess the spectral data to remove any irrele-
vant information and improve calibration model performance. Spectral
pretreatment methods such as spectral ﬁltering, smoothing, normaliza-
tion, mean centering, auto scaling, baseline offset correction (BOC), ﬁrst
and second derivative, Fourier transform (FT), wavelet transform (WT),
orthogonal signal correction (OSC), standard normal variate (SNV), and
multiplicative scatter correction (MSC) are commonly utilized. The pre-
treatment methods based on spectra are an art and can be found in pre-
vious studies (Engel et al., 2013; Nicolaï et al., 2007).
Multivariate regression techniques (quantitative analysis) aim at es-
tablishing a relationship between the observed response values and
spectral data (Nicolaï et al., 2007). Multiple linear regression (MLR) is
the simplest regression analysis technique, in which the response is ap-
proximated by a linear combination of the spectral values at each single
wavelength. However, it might work badly if there are more variables
than samples. In addition, MLR models typically perform worse due to
the high co-linearity of spectra, which might easily lead to over-ﬁtting
and loss of robustness of calibration models (Saranwong et al., 2001).
Principal component analysis (PCA) regression uses a small number of
principal components (PCs) instead of the original variables as
36
Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35–47
predictors to ﬁt a MLR model (Naes et al., 2002). Partial least squares
(PLS) regression is the most widely used regression method compared
to other multivariate methods. Unlike MLR, PLS can be used to analyze
data with strongly collinear (correlated), noisy and redundant variables
(Cozzolino et al., 2009). As one of the nonlinear regression techniques,
support vectors regression (SVR) has been demonstrated with a very
good performance mainly due to its great immunity to the presence of
outliers and tolerance to spectral noise in NIR data sets. Artiﬁcial neural
networks (ANN), least squares-support vector machines (LS-SVM) can
be also employed to deal with non-linear relationships between vari-
ables. Regarding the development of classiﬁcation and identiﬁcation
methods based on NIR spectroscopy, spectral data have been mostly
processed by many well-known qualitative multivariate methods,
such as K-nearest neighbor (KNN), linear discriminant analysis (LDA),
soft independent modeling of class analogy (SIMCA), partial least
squares-discriminant analysis (PLS-DA), support vector machine
(SVM), etc.
Modern spectrometers usually possess high resolution with hun-
dreds or thousands of spectral variables including collinearity, redun-
dancies, and noise, thus, this situation increases the complexity of
calibration model built with full range of spectra, and hinders the com-
puting speed (Fan et al., 2019). The models built using full spectra are
not suitable for on-line or real-time detection in a rapid and non-
destructive manner due to the fact that the calibration process is time-
consuming with heavy pressure in computing and data transmission.
In addition, the irrelevant information within spectra would negatively
affect the accuracy and robustness of model (Li et al., 2014). Therefore, a
large number of variable selection methods have been proposed during
the last decades, such as competitive adaptive reweighted sampling
(CARS), interval random frog (iRF), Monte Carlo-uninformative variable
elimination (MC-UVE), etc. Infromative variable selection or wave-
length selection plays an important role in the quantitative analysis of
spectral data. The details of variable selection methods can be found in
previous studies (Mehmood et al., 2012; Yun et al., 2019).
NIR spectroscopy has been successfully employed in the quality
evaluation of natural resources, such as fruits, vegetables, crops, trees
and their seeds (Pasquini, 2018). In recent years, it has been widely ex-
plored to detect seed viability (Table 1) and the diffuse reﬂection is the
most commonly used mode. The viability of soybean seeds were deter-
mined using Fourier transform near-infrared (FT-NIR) spectroscopy
(Kusumaningrum et al., 2018). A total of 200 soybean seeds were artiﬁ-
cially aged (non-viable) by vacuuming intact seeds in plastic bags and
aging by incubation for 9 days in a water bath maintained at 42 °C
with about 100% relative humidity. The other 200 seeds were set as nor-
mal seeds (viable). The reﬂectance spectrum of each seed was acquired
with illumination focused directly on the germ point using a speciﬁc
sample holder with a hole in the center (Fig. 2a). The sample holder
was designed with suitable size and shape for soybean seeds (Fig. 2b).
There were some major spectral differences between viable and non-
viable seeds in 1000–1900 nm (Fig. 2d), in which the spectra for viable
soybean seeds had a lower reﬂectance than those of non-viable ones. A
classiﬁcation model based on PLS-DA method was built to classify viable
and non-viable seeds. The variable importance in projection (VIP)
method for variable selection combined with PLS-DA was employed. Fi-
nally, 146 optimal variables out of full set with 1557 variables were se-
lected. The results demonstrated that FT-NIR spectral analysis with PLS-
DA method based on all variables or the selected variables showed a
good performance with an accuracy of nearly 100%. FT-NIR was testiﬁed
to be a stable and potential method for measuring soybean seed viability
rapidly.
FT-NIR spectroscopy with a PLS-DA classiﬁcation method could also
correctly classify viable and non-viable corn seeds with a high accuracy
of 100% (Ambrose et al., 2016b), and pepper seeds with accuracy of
90.5% for validation set (Seo et al., 2016). A supervised classiﬁcation
method called extended canonical variates analysis (ECVA) was ex-
plored to predict seeds viability by NIR spectroscopy. The effect of the
number of seeds in a training sample set on the ability to predict the vi-
ability of cabbage or radish seeds was discussed (Shetty et al., 2011).
The results showed that 200 seeds were optimal in a calibration set
for both cabbage and radish data. This conclusion was similar to the mis-
classiﬁcation rate obtained using all seeds in calibration set and effec-
tively enhanced the cost-effectiveness of NIR spectral analysis. The
misclassiﬁcation rates at optimal sample size were 6% for cabbage and
2% for radish, respectively. NIR spectroscopy with proper classiﬁcation
method had also been studied to identify tomato (Shrestha et al.,
2017) and Juniperus polycarpos (Daneshvar et al., 2015) with accuracies
of more than 90%.
2.2. Hyperspectral and multispectral imaging
Hyperspectral imaging (HSI) system, integrates both spectroscopic
and imaging techniques into one system to get a set of monochromatic
images at almost continuous hundreds of wavelengths. This integrated
system combines NIR spectroscopy and digital imaging to give
Fig. 1. Setup for the acquisition of NIR reﬂectance (a) and transmittance (b) spectra of seeds.
37
Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35–47
information about the spatial distribution of compounds. Therefore, HSI
system creates three-dimensional (3D) “hypercube” datasets composed
of two spatial dimensions and a single spectral dimension. In general,
point scanning, line scanning and area scanning approaches are three
commonly used modes to acquire hyperspectral image (Zhang et al.,
2014). As the most widespread application type, hyperspectral reﬂec-
tance imaging is carried out in Vis/NIR (400–1000 nm) or NIR
(1000–2500 nm) range to detect defects, contaminants, and quality at-
tributes of fruits, vegetables and seeds (Nicolaï et al., 2014).
HSI experiments usually involve three different modules: (I) image
acquisition and image pre-processing, (II) data extraction and data
treatment, (III) data modeling and image post-processing. These typical
modules are illustrated in the ﬂowchart of Fig. 3 (ElMasry and Nakauchi,
2016).
The ﬁrst step in this module is the acquisition of a high-quality
hyperspectral image by utilizing ideal acquisition parameters, including
motor speed, exposure time, and object distance. Due to the differences
in camera quantum efﬁciency, the uncorrected radiance may not be the
same, even when HSI system is imaging the same target under the same
condition. Thus, original hyperspectral images need to be corrected to
eliminate the inﬂuence (Gowen et al., 2007). Under the same system
parameters as the sample image acquisition, the white reference
(Rwhite) is captured by a standard whiteboard with a reﬂectance of ap-
proximately 99.9%, and then the dark reference image (Rdark) is ob-
tained with the lamps turned off and optical lens completely covered
by its cap (Yu et al., 2014). The corrected images (R) are calculated ac-
cording to Eq. (1):
R ¼ Rraw−Rdark
Rwhite−Rdark
ð1Þ
where Rraw represents the original hyperspectral image and R repre-
sents the calibrated image. The calibrated image can be then used for
further data processing and analyzing.
In order to obtain regions of interest (ROIs), which represent differ-
ent quality features in the corrected image, segmentation is essentially
conducted to identify different clustered objects in the image for appro-
priate selection of ROIs, classifying objects in the image or building
image masks for subsequent analyses on each. The most commonly
employed method of segmentation is the thresholding by selecting a
proper threshold value. Spectral information of the imaged sample
that represents its physicochemical properties could be extracted di-
rectly from ROIs. In the most circumstances, the extracted spectral
data contain some noise and variability, if the extracted data show
some problems owing to low signal-to-noise ratio, the data could be
preprocessed to reduce noise using preprocessing methods stated
above, followed by the quantitative or qualitative multivariate analysis.
The long acquisition time, required to collect high-dimensional
hyperspectral images, leads to considerable challenges to real-time in-
spections. This limits the HSI technology to commercialized packing
lines which require a fast speed. As a result, HSI is always applied to
off-line applications to select optimal wavelengths performed to form
multispectral images. A multispectral imaging (MSI) system aims at ac-
quiring spatial and spectral information that is directly useful for a spe-
ciﬁc application. It only captures images at the selected wavelengths
(usually about 10 discrete wavelengths), thus this extensively reduces
the total data volume and improves the processing speed and efﬁciency.
Rather than using optical ﬁber probes to obtain average concentrations
of sundry quality attributes at local regions of agricultural samples,
hyperspectral or multispectral imaging systems have the capability to
obtain the classiﬁcation map or visualize the distribution of these attri-
butes across the whole sample. The application of HSI or MSI has been
reported in the identiﬁcation of viable seed in the decades.
Viability of grains including barley, wheat and sorghum was investi-
gated by McGoverin et al. (2011) with near-infrared hyperspectral im-
aging technique. The prediction of viable and non-viable proportions
using PLS-DA may not be accurate but correlated well with the viable
proportion proved using the tetrazolium test. The classiﬁcation of corn
seeds based on their viabilities using HSI was explored by Wakholi
et al. (2018). In this study, 600 corn samples were selected, and half of
them were treated using microwave heat treatment while the rest sam-
ples were kept as the control group. HSI data of all the samples were
then collected using a NIR HSI system with a range of 1000–2500 nm
(Fig. 4). During data collection, the samples were placed on the con-
veyor belt, irrespective of whether the germinal or the opposite side
of each kernel was facing the camera. The reﬂectance spectra of the
seeds in the treated group were generally higher than those of non-
treated corn samples, this was because that the chemical composition
Table 1
Overview of applications using emerging technologies to detect seed viability.
No.
Seed(s)
Method(s)
Classiﬁer(s)
Result(s)
Reference
1
Corn
FT-NIR
PLS-DA
100%
Ambrose et al. (2016b)
2
Soybean
FT-NIR
PLS-DA
100%
Kusumaningrum et al. (2018)
3
Pepper
FT-NIR
PLS-DA
90.5%
Seo et al. (2016)
4
Cabbage
NIR
ECVA
94%
Shetty et al. (2011)
5
Radish
NIR
ECVA
98%
Shetty et al. (2011)
6
Juniperus polycarpos
NIR
PLS-DA
98%
Daneshvar et al. (2015)
7
Tomato
NIR
iPLS-DA
93.71%
Shrestha et al. (2017)
8
Barley/wheat/sorghum
NIR HSI
PLS-DA
–
McGoverin et al. (2011)
9
Corn
NIR HSI
PLS-DA
100%
Wakholi et al. (2018)
10
Muskmelon
NIR HSI
PLS-DA
94.6%
Kandpal et al. (2016)
11
Pepper
Vis/NIR HSI
PLS-DA
100%
Mo et al. (2014)
12
Wheat
Vis/NIR HSI
SVM, PLS-DA
88.1%, 89.5%
Zhang et al. (2018b)
13
Castor
MSI
Normalized canonical DA
96%
Olesen et al. (2015)
14
Spinach
Vis/NIR MSI
PLS-DA
60%–76%
Shetty et al. (2012)
15
Norway spruce
Vis/NIR, NIR HSI
SVM
83%, N93.3%
Dumont et al. (2015)
16
Corn
Vis/NIR, NIR HSI
PLS-DA
74.4–95.6%,
82.2–95.60%
Ambrose et al. (2016b)
17
Soybean
NIR HSI
PLS-DA
N95%
Baek et al. (2019)
18
Tomato
Vis/NIR HSI
PLS-DA
90.48%
Peng et al. (2018)
19
Pepper
RS
PLS-DA
94.4%
Seo et al. (2016)
20
Corn
RS
PCA, PLS-DA
93–100%
Ambrose et al. (2016b)
21
Pea
IRT
SVM
95%, 91.67%
Men et al. (2017)
22
Garden pea/wheat/rape
IRT
NetLogo
–
Kranner et al. (2010)
23
Lettuce
IRT
–
–
Kim et al. (2013)
24
Pepper
IRT
Pixel-based regression analysis
–
Kim et al. (2014)
25
Muskmelon
Soft X-ray imaging
LDA
98.9%
Ahmed et al. (2018)
38
Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35–47
of corn seeds was altered during heat treatment process (denaturization
of proteins, gelatinization of starch, lipid saturation, moisture reduction,
etc.). Therefore, the less light was absorbed which meant that more re-
ﬂectance was exhibited. Three classiﬁcation methods, LDA, PLS-DA, and
SVM, coupled with some preprocessing methods were tested to deter-
mine the most suitable method among them. The SVM model exhibited
the highest accuracies among all models with 100%, 100%, and 98% for
white, purple, and yellow corn seeds, respectively. The model also pro-
duced ﬂawless classiﬁcation images, suggesting that hyperspectral im-
aging can be used to classify corn based on viability accurately.
A viability evaluation method for pepper seeds based on Vis/NIR was
proposed by Mo et al. (2014). The application of images based on PLS-
DA model with ﬁrst-order derivative of a 31.5 nm gap for red LED illumi-
nation (600–700 nm) yielded 100% discrimination accuracy for both vi-
able and non-viable seeds. An algorithm of image acquisition and
characteristic identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of tomato seeds was pro-
posed based on HSI and image processing technology. The characteristic
wavelengths, including 535, 577, 595, 654, 684, 713, 744, 768, 809 and
840 nm for tomato seed viability were acquired by SPA. The images
under above characteristic wavelengths were preprocessed to gain the
seed eigen values including area, circularity and average grey. The clas-
siﬁcation thresholds were calculated according to eigen values and vi-
tality results of calibration set based on statistical regularity.
Classiﬁcation accuracy of calibration and validation sets was above
85% in eight characteristics wavelengths. 713 nm grey scale image
gave the best result with calibration and validation set accuracy of
93.75% and 90.48%, respectively (Peng et al., 2018). Viable and non-
viable soybean seeds were distinguished using a NIR HSI technique
and a PLS-DA classiﬁcation model built based on seven optimal
wavebands selected by VIP with the accuracy of over 95% (Baek et al.,
2019). Vis/NIR (400–1000 nm) and NIR HSI (1000–2500 nm) tech-
niques were compared to identify the seed viability of Norway spruce
(Dumont et al., 2015) and corn (Ambrose et al., 2016a). The results in-
dicated that the Vis/NIR range was not as informative as NIR range
with respect to seed viability sorting.
Although the application of MSI technique is carried out in seed via-
bility determination, there are much fewer studies reported than HSI.
The ultimate purpose of using HSI systems is to establish a MSI system
as an essential part of a computer-integrated machine vision system
for different on-line applications (Sendin et al., 2018). As MSI system
is equipped with fewer spectral channels, this means shorter acquisition
and processing time than HSI system. In general, fewer characteristic
wavelengths make great efforts to faster sensor systems and shorter col-
lection time (ElMasry et al., 2019). The viability prediction of castor
seeds was explored using MSI technique (Olesen et al., 2015). The spec-
tral imaging system was a VideometerLab instrument, which consisted
Fig. 2. Schematic of FT-NIR spectroscopy (a), single seed holder (b), raw spectra of soybean seeds (c) and average spectra of viable and non-viable seeds in spectral range of 1000–1900 nm
(d) (Kusumaningrum et al., 2018).
39
Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35–47
of a 5-mega pixel charge-coupled device (CCD) camera, mounted inside
the top of an integrating sphere and coated with highly white and dif-
fusing paint. The illumination set was consisted of 19 narrowband
high-power LEDs ranging from 375 to 970 nm placed at the rim to en-
sure a uniform and diffuse illumination of the sample at the bottom
port of sphere reﬂection (Fig. 5). In order to minimize the distance to
Fig. 3. Modules involved in acquiring, processing and analyzing hyperspectral images and spectral data (ElMasry and Nakauchi, 2016).
Fig. 4. The NIR HSI prototype used for corn seeds viability inspection (Wakholi et al., 2018).
40
Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35–47
achieve observations within the seed color classes and maximize the
differences between classes, the multispectral images were transformed
using normalized canonical discriminant analysis (nCDA). A speciﬁed
feature (Region MSI mean) combined with nCDA, which can calculate
a trimmed mean of MSI transformed pixel values within each single
seed, was employed and viable seeds were distinguished from dead
seeds with accuracy of 92%. This model resulted in 96% correct classiﬁ-
cation of seeds for validation set.
Moreover, a HSI or MSI system was also utilized to try to predict seed
vigor in terms of germination periods or germ length. Kandpal et al.
(2016) reported the vigor determination of muskmelon seeds using
NIR HSI. The samples were artiﬁcially aged to obtain seeds with differ-
ent viability and vigor. The spectra of seeds with 3 and 5 germination
days and non-geminate seeds were used for development of a PLS-DA
classiﬁcation model. The model yielded the highest classiﬁcation accu-
racy of 94.6% for a validation set based on 18 wavelengths selected by
selectivity ratio (SR). The possibility of using PLS-DA on feature extrac-
tion from multispectral images of spinach seeds to detect seed vigor in
terms of germ length was investigated (Shetty et al., 2012). Images of
300 seeds including small, medium, and large seeds were studied, and
the seeds were examined for germ length. The results indicated that
larger seeds had both a signiﬁcantly higher germination potential and
germ length compared with smaller ones. The classiﬁcation accuracies
of validation set for seed vigor according to germ length were 60%,
76%, and 68% for the small, medium, and large seeds, respectively. The
results indicated that larger spinach seeds had not only higher germina-
tion potential, but also bigger germ length compared with smaller
seeds.
2.3. Raman spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy (RS) is a form of analytical spectroscopy based
on Raman scattering, which was discovered by C.V. Raman in 1928. Ac-
cording to the principle that vibrational frequencies are speciﬁc to
molecule's chemical bonds and symmetry, Raman peaks are typically
obvious in most cases, which provide ﬁngerprints to identify molecules
and make the analysis of chemical compositions more precise (Yang
et al., 2018). However, due to the fact that technologies for detecting
Raman scattering effects and strong light sources were not developed
sufﬁciently, there were few applications of RS initially. Fortunately, RS
was found to be widely applied with the development of relative tech-
nologies in the recent decade (Li-Chan et al., 1994). RS can achieve ex-
tremely high detection sensitivity in various applications, such as
quality evaluation of meat and ﬁsh (Herrero, 2008), detection of bacte-
ria (Lee et al., 2017; Lu et al., 2011), ingredients prediction of agricul-
tural products (Kizil et al., 2002; Lee et al., 2013), classiﬁcation of oil
and fat (Baeten et al., 1998), viability evaluation of seed (Ambrose
et al., 2016b; Seo et al., 2016), etc. The advantages of RS techniques
over conventional methods in detecting seed viability include rapidity,
robustness, high accuracy and non-invasiveness.
Fig. 6a shows a RS system used to capture and analyze the scattering
signals of pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) seeds for viability assessment
(Seo et al., 2016). The Raman spectrometer (Raman workstation™, Kai-
ser Optical Systems Inc., Ann Arbor, MI, USA) consisted of a diode laser
and a CCD detector with a resolution of 0.3 cm−1. The diode laser wave-
length was 785 nm, and the CCD had a holographic transmission grating
that enabled the scanning of a plate with 96 square wells. The laser
Fig. 5. Picture of the VideometerLab instrument (a) and its schematic diagram (b), and overview of seeds of three classes based on visual color of seed coat: yellow, grey and black (c). Row
(1) shows RGB images of the intact seeds; (2) is images transformed by nCDA to divide dead and viable seeds (intact seeds); (3) is RGB images of cut seeds; (4) is images transformed by
nCDA to divide dead and viable seeds (based on cut seeds) and (5) is RGB images taken after the cut seeds has been immersed in tetrazolium (Olesen et al., 2015).
41
Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35–47
apparatus had a power of 100 mW, a spot size of 3 mm, and an exposure
time of 0.5 s. The spectral range was 150–1800 cm−1 and each plate was
scanned 32 times (Fig. 6).
In this study, the pepper seeds initiated germination in 4 days and
achieved germination in 168 h. Out of 144 untreated seeds, 141 seeds
were germinated and showed a seed viability of 97.9%, and 288 seeds
(141 viable and 147 non-viable seeds) were used for analysis in the ger-
mination test. Fig. 6d shows the mean plots of Raman spectra for viable
and non-viable seeds. Characteristic peaks associated with the basic
constituents of pepper seeds could be observed around 1520 cm−1
(C=C), 1440 cm−1 (=CH2), 1263 cm−1 (=CH), 1154 cm−1 (C\\C),
and 1090 cm−1 (C\\O) (Baranski et al., 2006; Reitzenstein et al.,
2007). A classiﬁcation model was developed using PLS-DA with RS
data in 1800–970 cm−1. A series of preprocessing methods were also
proposed to reduce the noise of spectra and compare the classiﬁcation
results. The results showed that RS with raw data (none-preprocessed
data) achieved the best classiﬁcation accuracy of 96.4%. Therefore, RS
was shown to be a reliable spectroscopic method to determine seed
quality.
In seed viability detection with RS, researches could also be found to-
wards corn seeds. The comparison between FT-NIR and RS methods to-
wards the classiﬁcation of viable and non-viable hybrid corn kernels
(Zea mays L.) could be diagnosed. It was observed that some speciﬁc
wavelengths at which the energy absorption was different between
the aged and normal seed groups. The major changes were observed
in the range of 1580–1640 cm−1. The variation in intensity at this region
was thought to be caused by the germination ability of seeds. The PLS-
DA results with various preprocessing methods on Raman spectral
data were analyzed, and the classiﬁcation model presented recognition
and prediction ability of 93–100% of three groups (white, yellow, and
purple corns). Especially, the mean normalization, MSC, and ﬁrst
derivative preprocessing methods showed the highest accuracy
(100%) in the calibration model, but a signiﬁcant number of seeds
were overlapping when using PCA (Ambrose et al., 2016b). In a word,
RS is useful and promising to be utilized for classiﬁcation of viable and
non-viable seeds instead of the traditional invasive seed quality detec-
tion and evaluation methods.
2.4. Infrared thermography
Infrared thermography (IRT) is a relatively young discipline with its
origin traced back to the 17th century when thermometers were devel-
oped (Ring, 2010). The discovery of infrared radiation by Sir William
Herschel in 1800 was closely followed by the recording of ﬁrst thermal
image by his son John Herschel (Ring, 2007). In 1934, Hardy established
the diagnostic signiﬁcance of temperature measurement by infrared
technique which made contribution to the application of IRT in medical
sciences (Hardy, 1934). However, the ﬁrst use was reported in 1960 due
to the non-availability of quality equipment and technical know-how
(Ring, 2010). Recently, IRT as one of the fast, non-contact and non-
destructive diagnosis methods has been used in various ﬁelds including
medical tests, fault diagnosis, remote sensing, plant diseases and insect
pest detection, fruit quality, seed viability evaluation, etc. (Fernández-
Cuevas et al., 2015; Picazo-Ródenas et al., 2013; Usha and Singh,
2013). Compared with hyperspectral imaging and Fourier transform
near-infrared methods, IRT shows the advantages of relatively low
cost and high assessment throughput. IRT also provides two-
dimensional (2D) thermal images, which makes a comparison between
areas of target possible (Usamentiaga et al., 2014). Infrared radiation is
the energy radiated by the surface of an object whose temperature is
above absolute zero (Meola, 2012). The fractions of the total radiant en-
ergy that are associated with each of these modes of dissipation are
Fig. 6. Schematic of Raman spectrometer used to capture and analyze scattering signals of seeds (a), Raman spectra without removed ﬂuorescence background signal (b), Raman spectra
with removed ﬂuorescence background signal (c), and mean spectra of viable and non-viable pepper seeds (d) (Seo et al., 2016).
42
Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35–47
referred to as the absorptivity, transmissivity and reﬂectivity of the ob-
jects (Howell et al., 2010). Three parameters are used to describe these
phenomena: the spectral absorptance αλ, which is the ratio of the spec-
tral radiant power absorbed by the object, the spectral reﬂectance ρλ,
which is the ratio of the spectral radiant power reﬂected by the object,
and the spectral transmittance τλ, which is the ratio of the spectral radi-
ant power transmitted by the object. These three parameters are wave-
length dependent (Usamentiaga et al., 2014). The sum of these three
parameters must be one at any wavelength, as in Eq. (2):
αλ þ ρλ þ τλ ¼ 1
ð2Þ
Fig. 7c shows the conﬁguration of a typical IRT system used to cap-
ture and analyze the thermal and visible images of Pisum sativum L.
seeds for viability assessment. As shown in Fig. 7c, an infrared thermog-
raphy system generally consists of an infrared thermal camera, a digital
color CCD camera, a directional light source, a constant temperature in-
cubator, a thermostatic water bath, and a computer. Thermal images
(320 × 240 pixels) were obtained by the infrared thermal camera Ti55
(Fluke, Everett, WA, USA) with a sensitivity of 0.02 °C and initially proc-
essed with the Smartview software (Fluke Systems). Visible images
(900 × 600 pixels) captured from the CCD were digitized to 8-bit (256
grey levels) data and stored. Thermal and visible images were simulta-
neously stored every 5 min and could be exported in time sequence.
Then, image processing, data analysis and numerical modeling were ap-
plied using MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA). As seen in Fig. 7d,
the temperature variations (relative seed temperature rT) of the three
categories of seeds mainly occurred in the ﬁrst 3 h (Men et al., 2017).
In this study, a total of 120 seeds were divided into two groups for
different aging process. The root length of each sample was measured
to evaluate the viability. Each individual seed area in the visible images
was segmented with an edge detection method, image fusion
technology was adopted to extract seed regions in the thermal images
with the disk areas in the visible images, and the average temperature
of the corresponding area in the infrared images was calculated as the
representative temperature for this seed at that time (Fig. 8). Thirteen
characteristic parameters extracted from the temperature curve were
analyzed to show the difference of the temperature ﬂuctuations be-
tween the seeds with different viability. Support vector machine
(SVM) was used to classify the seed samples into viable, aged and
dead according to the root length with 95% classiﬁcation rate. With
the temperature data of ﬁrst 3 h during the germination, another SVM
model was calculated with classiﬁcation rate of 91.67%. According to
these experimental results, it can be observed that there were obvious
differences between the parameters carried out for characterizing the
temperature variations of seeds depended on seed viability. Apparently,
infrared thermography can be applied for the prediction of seed viability
based on the SVM algorithm.
In seed viability detection with IRT, other applications could also be
found. The developmental stage of a geminating garden pea (Pisum
sativum) could be diagnosed using IRT by Kranner et al. They proved
the concept that IRT was applicable to other seed types such as wheat
(Triticum aestivum) and rape (Brassica napus) seeds. IRT was testiﬁed
to link biochemical and biophysical parameters with developmental
changes and visualize them noninvasively. Moreover, they developed
a computer model of “virtual pea seeds” that uses Monte Carlo simula-
tion, based on the heart production of major seed storage compounds
to unravel physic-chemical processes of thermogenesis by NetLogo.
They also found that IRT could visualize in real time of the earliest
physic-chemical events in pea seed germination and diagnose seed via-
bility long before radical emergence (Kranner et al., 2010). And the con-
clusion that non-viable seeds failed to degrade starch upon germination
was demonstrated (Kranner, 2013). Similarly, the lettuce (Lactuca sativa
L.) seed viability was evaluated using infrared lifetime thermal imaging
Fig. 7. Visible (a) and thermal images (b) of the experimental samples, schematic diagram of IRT system used to capture and analyze thermal proﬁles (c), and heat production during the
ﬁrst 5 h in the experiment (d) (Men et al., 2017).
43
Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35–47
technique, the results showed that the time-dependent thermal signal
decay characteristics, along with the decay amplitude and delay time
images, could be used to distinguish aged lettuce seeds from normal
seeds easily (Kim et al., 2013). The viability of pepper (Capsicum
annuum) seeds was also estimated using IRT and photothermal signal
and image reconstruction techniques, pixel-based regression analysis
was used to investigate the photothermal signal from seed and seed
groups was distinguished by the reconstructed images of regression co-
efﬁcients. Results showed that time-resolved photothermal characteris-
tic, along with the regression coefﬁcient images, can be used to
discriminate the aged or dead pepper seeds from the healthy ones
(Kim et al., 2014). Therefore, IRT can deﬁnitely be one of the promising
methods in the existing destructive and labor-intensive seed-sorting
situations.
2.5. X-ray imaging
X-ray computed tomography (CT), is electromagnetic radiation with
the wavelength range of 0.01–10 nm. The photon energy of an X-ray is
in the range of 0.1–120 keV, which leads to a strong penetrability. X-ray,
similar to other electromagnetic waves, can show the following phe-
nomena: reﬂection, refraction, scattering, interference, diffraction, po-
larization and absorption. X-ray CT evaluates the internal structure of
a sample by means of an X-ray source and a detector in order to obtain
information from a projected slice. The X-ray imaging inspection sys-
tem, mainly comprises a computer-controlled X-ray generator (i.e. X-
ray source tube), a line-scanning sensor for X-ray detection (i.e. an X-
ray CCD camera in which an enlarged radiograph (projection) can be
produced), conveying belt, stepping motor, image-acquisition card,
and computer (Chen et al., 2013). The differences in attenuation are at-
tributable to density and compositional differences within a sample.
During image acquisition, an X-ray beam, which is collimated, is di-
rected towards a sample, the detector measures the remnant attenuated
radiation and the response is transferred to a computer, resulting in a
2D image whose contrast is produced by variations in the X-ray attenu-
ation that includes absorption and scattering (Fig. 9). When a sample is
rotated on a translation stage while illuminated with X-ray, the X-rays
pass through the object in many different directions and along with dif-
ferent pathways to create an image illustrating variation in density at
numerous points in a 2D slice, acquiring a series of 2D radiographs or
projection images (Baker et al., 2012). Mathematical principles can
then be used to reconstruct the series of 2D radiographs into a 3D digital
image, which can be presented as virtual slices at various depths and in
multiple directions or the sample can be viewed as a whole. Image pro-
cessing and analysis is followed to visualize CT data and extract suitable
information from the image. In a word, the basic principles of X-ray CT
Fig. 8. Flowchart of a series of steps for analyzing thermal and visible images data. Visible images are used to acquire the edge regions information (green arrow). Thermal images are used
to extract the temperature information (red arrow). Fusion parameters are acquired from fusion image of viable image and thermography image (Men et al., 2017).
44
Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35–47
imaging are absorption physics (related to 2D projection images) and
reconstruction mathematics (relevant to the generation of a 3D volume
from a series of 2D images) (Schoeman et al., 2016). Nevertheless, char-
acterization analysis of seed morphology based on an X-ray CT system is
very limited.
A recent study reported the application of X-ray technology in the
evaluation of muskmelon seed viability by analyzing the morphological
characteristics of naturally aged seeds (Ahmed et al., 2018). The proce-
dure for developing the pattern classiﬁcation algorithm for muskmelon
seeds based on their internal structures (morphology) as determined
using CT imaging in connection with viability, is illustrated in Fig. 10.
The seeds were ﬁve years old (2012–2017) and were kept in storage
at ambient temperature. A total of 100 seeds were randomly selected
for scanning using X-ray CT image. After the preprocessing by re-
slicing, contrast enhancement, noise reduction, and segmentations, ﬁf-
teen preprocessed images were nominated from each sample, and fea-
tures of interest (i.e. local binary pattern, Gabor, local fast Fourier
transform (FFT), texture, contrast and Haralick textural features) were
extracted. Then, the sequential forward selection (SFS) method was ap-
plied as a search strategy to determine the most relevant features for
seed viability classiﬁcation from the features extracted above. A germi-
nation test was performed to evaluate the seed viability and the
Fig. 9. Schematic illustration of the measurement principle of X-ray CT. An object is exposed to collimated X-rays, generated by the X-ray tube and the detector converts the X-rays into
digital radiographs (Schoeman et al., 2016).
Fig. 10. The methodology applied to develop the pattern classiﬁcation algorithm to identify viable and non-viable muskmelon seeds using X-ray CT images (Ahmed et al., 2018).
45
Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35–47
information was used to construct the training and validation data set.
After that, the LDA classiﬁer could result in more promising results,
with the accuracy of 98.9% for 10-fold cross-validation using eighteen
selected features. The ﬁndings indicate that CT imaging is a potential
tool for the classiﬁcation of seeds based on the characterization of inter-
nal morphologically.
3. Technical challenges and trends
As a relatively mature technology, numerous NIR spectroscopy in-
struments are commercially available for research, laboratory and
industrial purposes, making the technique enjoy considerable advan-
tages in terms of use cost over other optical sensing techniques. With
the development of tumbling or spinning aid in calibration, scanning
seeds tends to obtain higher precision and overcome any other differ-
ences between instruments gradually (Agelet and Hurburgh, 2014).
The chemical composition information of seeds, such as lipids, proteins,
and carbohydrates, can be captured by NIR, however, it might be easily
affected by the uniformity with different sample distributions due to the
fact that only one a single spot of samples is applied (Ji et al., 2015). HSI
has been shown to be an effective tool for seed viability detection,
allowing a rapid and high-throughput analysis at single kernel basis.
One of the main advantages is that HSI provides both spatial and spec-
tral information and is suitable for both external quality classiﬁcation
and internal chemical composition prediction. However, a drawback
of NIR spectroscopy and HSI/MSI is that a new calibration model is re-
quired for each seed species and cultivar, and the calibration models
should be based on large datasets incorporating different orchards, sea-
sons, cultivation systems, etc. Furthermore, the prediction accuracy also
depends on temperature, spectrometer, noise and some other external
conditions which are hard to control by operators according to their
subjective wills. Optimization and customization of optical components
and sampling systems are required to ensure the success of an applica-
tion on a speciﬁc commodity. Owing to the growing interests from both
academia and industry, the Raman spectroscopy technology has been
evolved quickly during past decades. Challenges still exist for practical
applications of RS techniques for evaluating seed viability, such as
high ﬂuorescence interference from plant materials, poor repeatability
of SERS techniques, etc. (Qin et al., 2019). X-ray, which does not scale
to large operation, can only exhibit the structural integrity of seeds. Di-
rectly identifying whether seeds are dead or not can hardly be achieved
(Chelladurai et al., 2014). The application of thermal imaging and soft X-
ray imaging in seed quality assessment is very limited due to the high
use cost. In addition, the detection efﬁciency restricts the application
of those two techniques in practical detection requirement. The combi-
nation (fusion) of outputs of different instrumental techniques has
emerged as a means of promoting the reliability of classiﬁcation or pre-
diction of foodstuff speciﬁcations compared with using an analytical
technique separately (Borràs et al., 2015). Given that more non-
destructive methods have been successfully applied in seed viability de-
tection, it would be an interesting task to explore seed viability detec-
tion by fusing these different technologies based on data fusion
strategies. With the development in computer hardware with low cost
and high speed, and artiﬁcial intelligence, some of the mentioned
emerging techniques would be more commonly inexpensive, attractive
and realizable for promising applications in quality control and auto-
matic detection of seeds.
4. Conclusions
Optical-based and/or image-based non-destructive evaluation sys-
tems have been gradually investigated and employed in the external
and internal quality inspecting of seeds in recent years. Seed viability
is of great importance in seed quality characteristics reﬂecting potential
seed germination. This review summarizes emerging technologies and
their major applications in seed viability detection. These noninvasive
techniques are rapid, accurate, reliable and simple tools for evaluating
seed viability. The reasons why they might encounter problems in prac-
tical application are discussed. On the basis of the observed trends, the
technical challenges and potential future trends for these emerging
techniques are also presented.
Acknowledgements
This work was ﬁnancially supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (31801262 and 31871523) and National Key Re-
search and Development Program of China (2018YFD0101004).
References
Agelet, L.E., Hurburgh, C.R., 2014. Limitations and current applications of near infrared
spectroscopy for single seed analysis. Talanta 121, 288–299.
Ahmed, M.R., Yasmin, J., Collins, W., et al., 2018. X-ray CT image analysis for morphology
of muskmelon seed in relation to germination. Biosyst. Eng. 175, 183–193.
Ambrose, A., Kandpal, L.M., Kim, M.S., et al., 2016a. High speed measurement of corn seed
viability using hyperspectral imaging. Infrared Phys. Technol. 75, 173–179.
Ambrose, A., Lohumi, S., Lee, W.H., et al., 2016b. Comparative nondestructive measure-
ment of corn seed viability using Fourier transform near-infrared (FT-NIR) and
Raman spectroscopy. Sens. Actuator B-Chem. 224, 500–506.
Baek, I., Kusumaningrum, D., Kandpal, L.M., et al., 2019. Rapid measurement of soy-
bean seed viability using kernel-based multispectral image analysis. Sensors 19
(2), 271.
Baeten, V., Hourant, P., Morales, M.T., et al., 1998. Oil and fat classiﬁcation by FT-Raman
spectroscopy. J. Agric. Food Chem. 46 (7), 2638–2646.
Baker, D.R., Mancini, L., Polacci, M., et al., 2012. An introduction to the application of X-ray
microtomography to the three-dimensional study of igneous rocks. Lithos 148,
262–276.
Baranski, R., Baranska, M., Schulz, H., et al., 2006. Single seed Raman measurements allow
taxonomical discrimination of Apiaceae accessions collected in gene banks. Biopoly-
mers 81 (6), 497–505.
Borràs, E., Ferré, J., Boqué, R., et al., 2015. Data fusion methodologies for food and beverage
authentication and quality assessment – a review. Anal. Chim. Acta 891, 1–14.
Chelladurai, V., Karuppiah, K., Jayas, D.S., et al., 2014. Detection of Callosobruchus
maculatus (F.) infestation in soybean using soft X-ray and NIR hyperspectral imaging
techniques. J. Stored Prod. Res. 57, 43–48.
Chen, Q., Zhang, C., Zhao, J., et al., 2013. Recent advances in emerging imaging techniques
for non-destructive detection of food quality and safety. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 52,
261–274.
Cozzolino, D., Chree, A., Murray, I., et al., 2009. Usefulness of near infrared spectroscopy to
monitor the extent of heat treatment in ﬁsh meal. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 44 (8),
1579–1584.
Daneshvar, A., Tigabu, M., Karimidoost, A., et al., 2015. Single seed near infrared spectros-
copy discriminates viable and non-viable seeds of Juniperus polycarpos. Silva Fennica
49 (5).
Du, C.J., Sun, D.W., 2004. Recent developments in the applications of image processing
techniques for food quality evaluation. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 15 (5), 230–249.
Dumont, J., Hirvonen, T., Heikkinen, V., et al., 2015. Thermal and hyperspectral imaging for
Norway spruce (Picea abies) seeds screening. Comput. Electron. Agric. 116, 118–124.
ElMasry, M.G., Nakauchi, S., 2016. Image analysis operations applied to hyperspectral im-
ages for non-invasive sensing of food quality – a comprehensive review. Biosys. Eng.
142, 53–82.
Elmasry, G., Kamruzzaman, M., Sun, D.W., et al., 2012. Principles and applications of
hyperspectral imaging in quality evaluation of agro-food products: a review. Crit.
Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 52 (11), 999–1023.
ElMasry, G., Mandour, N., Al-Rejaie, S., et al., 2019. Recent applications of multispectral
imaging in seed phenotyping and quality monitoring – an overview. Sensors 19
(5), 32.
Engel, J., Gerretzen, J., Szymańska, E., et al., 2013. Breaking with trends in pre-processing?
TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 50, 96–106.
Fan, S., Li, J., Xia, Y., et al., 2019. Long-term evaluation of soluble solids content of apples
with biological variability by using near-infrared spectroscopy and calibration trans-
fer method. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 151, 79–87.
Fernández-Cuevas, I., Bouzas Marins, J.C., Arnáiz Lastras, J., et al., 2015. Classiﬁcation of
factors inﬂuencing the use of infrared thermography in humans: a review. Infrared
Phys. Technol. 71, 28–55.
Fu, X., Ying, Y., 2016. Food safety evaluation based on near infrared spectroscopy and im-
aging: a review. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 56 (11), 1913–1924.
Gowen, A.A., O'Donnell, C.P., Cullen, P.J., et al., 2007. Hyperspectral imaging – an emerging
process analytical tool for food quality and safety control. Trends Food Sci. Technol.
18 (12), 590–598.
Hardy, J.D., 1934. The radiation of heat from the human body. 2. A comparison of some
methods of measurement. J. Clin. Invest. 13 (4), 605–614.
Herrero, A.M., 2008. Raman spectroscopy a promising technique for quality assessment of
meat and ﬁsh: a review. Food Chem. 107 (4), 1642–1651.
Howell, J., Siegel, R., Mengüç, M.P., 2010. Thermal Radiation Heat Transfer.
Huang, H., Yu, H., Xu, H., et al., 2008. Near infrared spectroscopy for on/in-line monitoring
of quality in foods and beverages: a review. J. Food Eng. 87 (3), 303–313.
46
Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35–47
Huang, M., Wang, Q.G., Zhu, Q.B., et al., 2015. Review of seed quality and safety tests using
optical sensing technologies. Seed Sci. Technol. 43 (3), 337–366.
Hussain, A., Pu, H., Sun, D.W., 2018. Innovative nondestructive imaging techniques for rip-
ening and maturity of fruits – a review of recent applications. Trends Food Sci.
Technol. 72, 144–152.
Ji, G., Huang, G., Yang, Z., et al., 2015. Using consensus interval partial least square in near
infrared spectra analysis. Chemometr. Intell. Lab. 144, 56–62.
Kandpal, L.M., Lohumi, S., Kim, M.S., et al., 2016. Near-infrared hyperspectral imaging sys-
tem coupled with multivariate methods to predict viability and vigor in muskmelon
seeds. Sens. Actuator B-Chem. 229, 534–544.
Kim, G., Kim, G.H., Ahn, C.K., et al., 2013. Mid-infrared lifetime imaging for viability eval-
uation of lettuce seeds based on time-dependent thermal decay characterization.
Sensors 13 (3), 2986–2996.
Kim, G., Kim, G.H., Lohumi, S., et al., 2014. Viability estimation of pepper seeds using time-
resolved photothermal signal characterization. Infrared Phys. Technol. 67, 214–221.
Kizil, R., Irudayaraj, J.M.K., Seetharaman, K., 2002. Characterization of irradiated starches
by using FT-Raman and FTIR spectroscopy. J. Agric. Food Chem. 50 (14), 3912–3918.
Kranner, I., 2013. Mechanisms of seed ageing. S. Afr. J. Bot. 86 (3), 140.
Kranner, I., Kastberger, G., Hartbauer, M., et al., 2010. Noninvasive diagnosis of seed viabil-
ity using infrared thermography. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107 (8), 3912–3917.
Kusumaningrum, D., Lee, H., Lohumi, S., et al., 2018. Nondestructive technique for deter-
mining the viability of soybean (Glycine max) seeds using FT-NIR spectroscopy. J. Sci.
Food Agric. 98 (5), 1734–1742.
Lee, H., Cho, B., Kim, M.S., et al., 2013. Prediction of crude protein and oil content of soy-
beans using Raman spectroscopy. Sens. Actuator B-Chem. 185, 694–700.
Lee, H., Kim, M.S., Qin, J.W., et al., 2017. Raman hyperspectral imaging for detection of wa-
termelon seeds infected with Acidovorax citrulli. Sensors 17 (10), 11.
Li, J., Huang, W., Chen, L., et al., 2014. Variable selection in visible and near-infrared spec-
tral analysis for noninvasive determination of soluble solids content of ‘Ya’ pear. Food
Anal. Methods 7 (9), 1891–1902.
Li-Chan, E., Nakai, S., Hirotsuka, M., 1994. Raman Spectroscopy as a Probe of Protein Struc-
ture in Food Systems.
Lorente, D., Aleixos, N., Gómez-Sanchis, J., et al., 2012. Recent advances and applications of
hyperspectral imaging for fruit and vegetable quality assessment. Food. Bioprocess.
Tech. 5 (4), 1121–1142.
Lu, X., Alqadiri, H.M., Lin, M., et al., 2011. Application of mid-infrared and Raman spectros-
copy to the study of bacteria. Food. Bioprocess. Tech. 4 (6), 919–935.
Marcos Filho, J., 2015. Seed vigor testing: an overview of the past, present and future per-
spective. Sci. Agric. 72 (4), 363–374.
McGoverin, C.M., Engelbrecht, P., Geladi, P., et al., 2011. Characterisation of non-viable
whole barley, wheat and sorghum grains using near-infrared hyperspectral data
and chemometrics. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 401 (7), 2283–2289.
Mehmood, T., Liland, K.H., Snipen, L., et al., 2012. A review of variable selection methods
in partial least squares regression. Chemometr. Intell. Lab. 118, 62–69.
Men, S., Yan, L., Liu, J.X., et al., 2017. A classiﬁcation method for seed viability assessment
with infrared thermography. Sensors 17 (4), 14.
Meola, C., 2012. Origin and Theory of Infrared Thermography.
Mo, C., Kim, G., Lee, K., et al., 2014. Non-destructive quality evaluation of pepper (Capsi-
cum annuum L.) seeds using LED-induced hyperspectral reﬂectance imaging. Sensors
14 (4), 7489–7504.
Naes, T., Isaksson, T., Fearn, T., et al., 2002. A User Friendly Guide to Multivariate Calibra-
tion and Classiﬁcation.
Nicolaï, B.M., Beullens, K., Bobelyn, E., et al., 2007. Nondestructive measurement of fruit
and vegetable quality by means of NIR spectroscopy: a review. Postharvest Biol.
Technol. 46 (2), 99–118.
Nicolaï, B.M., Defraeye, T., Ketelaere, B.D., et al., 2014. Nondestructive measurement of
fruit and vegetable quality. Annu. Rev. Food Sci. Technol. 5 (1), 285–312.
Olesen, M.H., Nikneshan, P., Shrestha, S., et al., 2015. Viability prediction of Ricinus
cummunis L. seeds using multispectral imaging. Sensors 15 (2), 4592–4604.
Pasquini, C., 2018. Near infrared spectroscopy: a mature analytical technique with new
perspectives – a review. Anal. Chim. Acta 1026, 8–36.
Peng, Y., Zhao, F., Bai, J., et al., 2018. Classiﬁcation of tomato seed vitality based on image
processing. Transactions of the Chinese Society for Agricultural Machinery 49 (2),
327–333.
Picazo-Ródenas, M.J., Royo, R., Antonino-Daviu, J., et al., 2013. Use of the infrared data for
heating curve computation in induction motors: application to fault diagnosis. Eng.
Failure Anal. 35, 178–192.
Qin, J., Kim, M.S., Chao, K., et al., 2019. Advances in Raman spectroscopy and imaging tech-
niques for quality and safety inspection of horticultural products. Postharvest Biol.
Technol. 149, 101–117.
Rahman, A., Cho, B.K., 2016. Assessment of seed quality using non-destructive measure-
ment techniques: a review. Seed Sci. Res. 26 (04), 285–305.
Reitzenstein, S., Rosch, P., Strehle, M., et al., 2007. Nondestructive analysis of single rape-
seeds by means of Raman spectroscopy. J. Raman Spectrosc. 38 (3), 301–308.
Ring, E.F.J., 2007. The historical development of temperature measurement in medicine.
Infrared Phys. Technol. 49 (3), 297–301.
Ring, F., 2010. Thermal imaging today and its relevance to diabetes. J. Diabetes Sci.
Technol. 4 (4), 857.
Saranwong, S., Sornsrivichai, J., Kawano, S., 2001. Improvement of PLS calibration for Brix
value and dry matter of mango using information from MLR calibration. J. Near Infra-
red Spectrosc. 9 (1), 287–295.
Schoeman, L., Williams, P., du Plessis, A., et al., 2016. X-ray micro-computed tomography
(μCT) for non-destructive characterisation of food microstructure. Trends Food Sci.
Technol. 47, 10–24.
Sendin, K., Manley, M., Williams, P.J., 2018. Classiﬁcation of white maize defects with mul-
tispectral imaging. Food Chem. 243, 311–318.
Seo, Y.W., Ahn, C.K., Lee, H., et al., 2016. Non-destructive sorting techniques for viable
pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) seeds using Fourier transform near-infrared and
Raman spectroscopy. J. Biosyst. Eng. 41 (1), 51–59.
Shetty, N., Min, T.G., Gislum, R., et al., 2011. Optimal sample size for predicting viability of
cabbage and radish seeds based on near infrared spectra of single seeds. J. Near Infra-
red Spectrosc. 19 (6), 451–461.
Shetty, N., Olesen, M.H., Gislum, R., et al., 2012. Use of partial least squares discriminant
analysis on visible-near infrared multispectral image data to examine germination
ability and germ length in spinach seeds. J. Chemom. 26 (8–9), 462–466.
Shrestha, S., Deleuran, L., Gislum, R., et al., 2017. Separation of viable and non-viable to-
mato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) seeds using single seed near-infrared spectroscopy.
Comput. Electron. Agric. 142, 348–355 Part A.
Sun, Q., Wang, J.H., Sun, B.Q., 2007. Advances on seed vigor physiological and genetic
mechanisms. Agric. Sci. China 6 (9), 1060–1066.
Usamentiaga, R., Venegas, P., Guerediaga, J., et al., 2014. Infrared thermography for tem-
perature measurement and non-destructive testing. Sensors 14 (7), 12305–12348.
Usha, K., Singh, B., 2013. Potential applications of remote sensing in horticulture – a re-
view. Sci. Hortic. 153, 71–83.
Wakholi, C., Kandpal, L.M., Lee, H., et al., 2018. Rapid assessment of corn seed viability
using short wave infrared line-scan hyperspectral imaging and chemometrics. Sens.
Actuator B-Chem. 255, 498–507.
Xia, Y., Huang, W., Fan, S., et al., 2018. Effect of fruit moving speed on online prediction of
soluble solids content of apple using Vis/NIR diffuse transmission. J. Food Process Eng.
41 (8), e12915.
Xia, Y., Huang, W., Fan, S., et al., 2019. Effect of spectral measurement orientation on on-
line prediction of soluble solids content of apple using Vis/NIR diffuse reﬂectance. In-
frared Phys. Technol. 97, 467–477.
Yang, G.Y., Wang, Q.Y., Liu, C., et al., 2018. Rapid and visual detection of the main chemical
compositions in maize seeds based on Raman hyperspectral imaging. Spectroc. Acta
Pt. A-Molec. Biomolec. Spectr. 200, 186–194.
Yu, K., Zhao, Y., Li, X., et al., 2014. Identiﬁcation of crack features in fresh jujube using Vis/
NIR hyperspectral imaging combined with image processing. Comput. Electron. Agric.
103, 1–10.
Yun, Y.H., Li, H.D., Deng, B.C., et al., 2019. An overview of variable selection methods in
multivariate analysis of near-infrared spectra. Trac-Trends Anal. Chem. 113, 102–115.
Zhang, B., Huang, W., Li, J., et al., 2014. Principles, developments and applications of com-
puter vision for external quality inspection of fruits and vegetables: a review. Food
Res. Int. 62, 326–343.
Zhang, B., Gu, B., Tian, G., et al., 2018a. Challenges and solutions of optical-based nonde-
structive quality inspection for robotic fruit and vegetable grading systems: a techni-
cal review. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 81, 213–231.
Zhang, T., Wei, W., Zhao, B., et al., 2018b. A reliable methodology for determining seed vi-
ability by using hyperspectral data from two sides of wheat seeds. Sensors 18 (3),
813.
47
Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35–47
