Array 13 (2022) 100117
Available online 6 December 2021
2590-0056/©
2021
The
Authors.
Published
by
Elsevier
Inc.
This
is
an
open
access
article
under
the
CC
BY-NC-ND
license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Securing localization-free underwater routing protocols against 
depth-spoofing attacks 
Ayman Alharbi a,*, Alaa M. Abbas b,c, Saleh Ibrahim b,d 
a Department of Computer Engineering, Umm Al-Qura University, Makkah, 21955, Saudi Arabia 
b Department of Electrical Engineering, Taif University, Haweyah, Saudi Arabia 
c Department of Electronics and Electrical Communications, Faculty of Electronic Engineering, Menoufia University, Menouf, 32952, Egypt 
d Department of Computer Engineering, Cairo University, Giza, Egypt   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Underwater acoustic sensor networks 
Routing protocols 
Depth-based routing 
Secure routing 
Sinkhole attacks 
Depth-spoofing attack 
A B S T R A C T   
Localization-free depth-based opportunistic routing protocols are an energy efficient choice for underwater 
wireless sensor networks (UWSNs). However, most depth-based routing protocols are vulnerable to sinkhole 
attacks caused by depth spoofing. In this paper, we propose an energy-efficient depth-based probabilistic routing 
protocol (DPR) that is resilient against depth spoofing. By encouraging unqualified (suboptimal) relay nodes to 
randomly forward data packets, the adversarial effects of depth-spoofing can be mitigated. As the randomized 
forwarding probability increases, a better packet delivery ratio can be achieved when under depth-spoofing 
attacks. To keep energy consumption in check, we propose a simulation-based methodology for finding the 
optimal forwarding probability. By adjusting the unqualified node forwarding probability, the proposed DPR 
protocol can effectively resist depth-spoofing attacks with a reasonably efficient energy overhead. A delivery 
ratio exceeding 90% can be achieved under attack with energy overhead as low as 35% under normal conditions. 
In comparison with relevant existing protocols, the proposed protocol achieves better energy efficiency, resil-
ience efficiency, and scalability.   
1. Introduction 
Securing underwater sensor networks (UWSNs) has gain consider-
able attention in recent years. This is due to the fact that security vul-
nerabilities are continuously exploited by adversaries and third parties 
for political and financial advantages [1]. A wide variety of attacks exist, 
with objectives ranging from sniffing the network [2] to disrupting or 
totally disabling operations [3]. UWSNs Routing protocols have been 
exposed to variety of several attacks [4]. Such attacks may affect the 
performance of the routing lightly or even completely. In this paper, we 
focus on securing the depth-based routing protocol (DBR) [5] against a 
selected proven attack. DBR protocol and its recent variants, such as 
[6–11] are particularly favorable for UWSNs due to that fact that they do 
not require full node localization, which is a challenging task in the 
underwater environment. The original DBR protocol, as well as its many 
derivatives, determines routes using one-dimensional depth informa-
tion, which is easily obtainable by measuring pressure. In these pro-
tocols, the data generated by underwater nodes are collected by sinks 
placed at the water’s surface. Each routing hop attempts to minimize the 
packet depth until it reaches a surface sink. Relay nodes hold packets 
received from the channel and wait for other nodes, which may be closer 
to the surface, giving them a chance to forward first. Nodes closer to the 
surface go first and announce their depth in the header of forwarded 
packets. Upon learning that a neighbor has already forwarded the held 
packet, it is assumed to be closer to the surface, and thereafter, deeper 
nodes discard their held copies. 
One of the threats against DBR protocols techniques, the sinkhole 
attack. Unlike a denial-of-service attack that aims to overwhelm network 
resources, a sinkhole attack aims to inhibit the network from delivering 
valuable information [12]. It is considered one of the most critical and 
severe attacks, as it is very hard to observe [13] and can reduce the 
lifetime of the network by 70% [10]. 
Although the opportunistic behavior of DBR relay nodes saves en-
ergy, it enables a variant of the sinkhole attack called the depth-spoofing 
attack. An adversary can take advantage of the behavior pattern by 
convincing relay nodes in a certain neighborhood to drop their held 
packets prematurely. Since the work done by Ref. [14], it has been 
known that a carefully positioned adversary announcing a smaller depth 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: aarharbi@uqu.edu.sa (A. Alharbi).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Array 
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/array 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2021.100117 
Received 10 August 2021; Received in revised form 8 October 2021; Accepted 2 December 2021   
Array 13 (2022) 100117
2
can inhibit neighboring relay nodes from forwarding, thus causing a 
routing sinkhole. 
Naïve secure routing approaches to resist this attack, such as 
cryptography-authenticated routing, e.g. Ref. [15], can be circumvented 
by a compromised node. Trust-based secure routing, as mentioned by 
Refs. [16,17], requires the exchange of second-hand information, which 
exhausts additional resources in the already constrained UAN resources. 
Some physical layer techniques, such as the estimation of the angle of 
arrival using vector acoustic sensors [18], can potentially help avoid 
depth-spoofing attacks. However, the additional cost and complexity of 
such elaborate physical layer technologies contradict the philosophy of 
the DBR protocol, which seeks to provide a low-cost localization-free 
routing protocol. 
Motivated by the facts that (a) depth-based routing is one of the most 
successful classes of routing protocols in UANs, (b) depth-based routing 
is inherently susceptible to depth-spoofing vulnerability, and (c) the 
efficiency of existing countermeasures against depth-spoofing vulnera-
bility is limited, we propose a new approach to mitigate depth-spoofing 
attacks. Our contribution to this work can be summarized in two points:  
• We propose probabilistic forwarding as an effective countermeasure 
against depth-spoofing sinkhole attacks.  
• We minimize the energy overhead of the proposed protocol by 
adjusting the forwarding probability according to the specific 
network deployment. 
The protocol proposed in this paper attempts to achieve the 
following objectives: (a) to be simple to implement and analyze and to 
establish its effectiveness in thwarting the depth-spoofing attack; (b) to 
have minimal overhead when operating in normal conditions and also in 
the presence of a depth-spoofing attacker; (c) to be suitable for UANs 
with different node densities and traffic loads through proper setting of 
protocol parameters; and (d) to be applicable to a variety of opportu-
nistic routing protocols, including DBR and its variants. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we review 
relevant background and related work on depth-based routing and then 
illustrate the attack model. In Section 3, we present the proposed pro-
tocol. In Section 4, we detail the evaluation methodology and the 
simulation settings to be used for evaluation. In Section 5, we present the 
simulation results, discuss our observations, and highlight the main 
findings. Finally, in Section 6, we present the concluding remarks and 
future work. 
2. Background and related work 
In this section, we review the traditional DBR protocol and its de-
rivatives. We then present the specifications of depth-spoofing attacks 
and review previous attempts to secure DBR protocols against this type 
of attack. 
2.1. Depth-based routing protocols 
DBR [5] is a special class of geographic routing protocols. Instead of 
using nodes’ full location information, DBR only needs one-dimensional 
depth information. Depth information is readily available through 
simple pressure sensors, unlike the daunting task of underwater locali-
zation required for other protocols, such as vector-based forwarding and 
its variants [19,20]. Another advantage of DBR is that no additional 
control traffic is needed. Coordination between nodes occurs when 
nodes announce their current depths to their neighbors within a special 
field in the header of forwarded packets. 
2.1.1. Basic operation of DBR protocol 
Upon learning of a neighbor’s transmissions, a DBR node decides 
whether it is a qualified forwarder or not. A qualified forwarder is a node 
with a depth smaller than the sender’s depth marked on the received 
packet header. Unqualified forwarders immediately drop the received 
packet. Qualified forwarders, on the other hand, keep them in a priority 
queue for a holding time, TH, calculated by the following formula: 
TH = K(R − d),
(1)  
where K is the constant of proportionality, defined as K = 2τ/δ, τ is the 
maximum propagation time, defined as τ = V/R, V is the acoustic signal 
propagation speed, R is the node communication range, d is the 
advantage in depth due to this forwarder defined as d = dsender −
dforwarder, and δ ∈ (0, R] is a constant that determines the maximum 
holding time. The smaller the value of δ is, the longer the maximum 
holding time will be. 
This greedy strategy gives a qualified forwarder closer to the surface 
the chance to forward the received packet before the holding times of 
deeper qualified forwarders expire. If a packet is being held for later 
forwarding in a relay node and a duplicate of the same packet is received 
such that the node is no longer qualified to forward the recently received 
duplicate packet, the relay node drops the copy of the packet it held. 
To identify copies of the same packet, DBR packet headers contain 
the source ID and a source-unique sequence number. Each relay node 
keeps track of all received packets using a local cache of (source ID, 
sequence number) pairs. Once a node decides to drop a packet, all copies 
of the same packet received later hit the local cache and are immediately 
dropped regardless of the sender’s depth found in the header of the copy. 
Because of its low overhead cost, DBR is considered a practical answer to 
UAN challenges. 
2.1.2. DBR adaptations 
Due to the significant success of DBR, several adaptations of the 
protocol have been proposed in the literature. The energy-efficient 
depth-based routing (EEDBR) proposed in Ref. [21] aims to improve 
network lifetime by factoring nodes’ residual energy into the forwarding 
decision. However, nodes are required to exchange depth and residual 
energy information regularly, which adds extra overhead. To address 
this, nodes keep depth and residual energy information regarding those 
neighbors with lesser depth and use that information to select a next-hop 
forwarder. 
Similarly, the lightweight depth-based routing (LDBR) protocol 
proposed in Ref. [10] improves the overall lifetime of the network by 
following a similar strategy that lets nodes with residual energy lower 
than a preset threshold discard received packets, allowing other quali-
fied forwarders with sufficient residual energy to step forward. 
The interference-aware energy-efficient depth-based routing proto-
col proposed in Ref. [15] attempts to reduce potential interference be-
tween next-hop forwarders by factoring in node density in the 
neighborhood of each candidate relay node during the relay selection 
process. 
The energy-efficient cooperative opportunistic routing (EECOR) 
protocol in Ref. [22] uses a fuzzy-logic approach to select a forwarding 
node from among neighbors. In addition to depth information, the relay 
selection process uses packet delivery probability and energy con-
sumption ratio to determine the holding delay for each forwarder. 
The RE-PBR routing protocol [23] enhances DBR and EEDBR routing 
strategies by incorporating other parameters, such as link quality, to 
determine the best candidate link based on the sender’s neighboring 
node positions. In addition, to improve energy efficiency, RE-PBR selects 
only one neighbor to participate in the forwarding process and elimi-
nates the holding time upon receiving packets. 
The DBR forwarding decision was improved by considering the 
depth difference of two-hop neighbors in Refs. [6,24,25]. The 
WDFAD-DBR protocol proposed in Ref. [6] handles the uneven and 
sparse distribution of nodes by collecting two-hop depth information to 
guide relay selection. The protocol uses the history of neighbors in the 
neighbor’s table to predict the neighbor’s behavior and to improve 
network performance. Subsequently, RPSOR [25] enhanced the 
A. Alharbi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Array 13 (2022) 100117
3
WDFAD-DBR protocol by considering the depth differences, energy 
level, and the shortest path of forwarders. RPSOR calculates priority 
function, which is increased exponentially for small-depth differences of 
candidate forwarding nodes. 
SORP [26] was developed based on a depth-routing mechanism to 
avoid void areas, which might exist in some topologies. The stateless 
routing protocol detects void regions, as well as local trapped nodes, and 
then avoids including them in the routing process. 
Authors in Ref. [27] have proposed RSAR and CoSAR protocols based 
on depth information. RSAR reduces the burden of low-depth nodes by 
classifying nodes in the network into several energy grades. The deepest 
nodes will have higher energy grades, while nodes closest to the water 
surface will have smaller grades. Each source node calculates the weight 
based on depth, energy grade, and remaining energy of the next for-
warding node. However, RSAR transmits packets using a single link, 
which may lead to unreliable delivery. To mitigate this issue, the CoSAR 
protocol depends on a cooperative forwarding mechanism. 
To minimize end-to-end delay and achieve better network perfor-
mance based on the depth routing technique, the authors of [28] pro-
posed the DRADS, iDRADS, and Co-iDRADS delay sensitive routing 
protocols. Depth information is utilized in each protocol to assure a 
reliable link and short delivery time in the routing process. 
A recently proposed Energy Efficient Depth-based Opportunistic 
Routing with Void Avoidance (EEDOR-VA) [29] uses a reactive routing 
mechanism to acquire a node hop count from a sink and combine this 
information with node depth to determine the node priority in the for-
warding process. EEDOR-VA selects candidate forwarding sets to avoid 
routing voids and coordinates between nodes within the candidate set to 
reduce redundant transmissions. 
Unfortunately, all the abovementioned DBR-variant protocols are 
susceptible to depth-spoofing attacks, which will be explained in the 
next subsection. 
2.2. Depth-spoofing attack 
This attack against depth-based routing is intended to cause a 
sinkhole-like effect, which prevents packet delivery. We adopt the attack 
model presented in Ref. [14], which makes the following assumptions:  
a) Malicious and legitimate nodes have the same transmission range.  
b) The adversary can place malicious nodes at the most damaging 
location in the network. 
Fig. 1 illustrates how the depth-spoofing attack works. The source 
node S has one qualified forwarder R, which can transmit packets 
directly to sink D. The malicious node A is placed such that it can receive 
transmissions of S and all its neighbors, namely R. When S transmits a 
data packet, both R and A will pick it up, since they are all within the 
transmission range of S. The attacker will try to prevent R from for-
warding the packet received from the source. While R will hold the 
packet for a short while in its transmission queue, A will quickly 
retransmit its copy of the packet announcing a fake depth that makes it 
look closer to the surface than R actually is. Consequently, R will drop its 
copy of the packet, which will effectively be lost. 
The assumption that the malicious node has the same transmission 
range as the legitimate nodes can be justified: If the malicious node 
transmits the spoofed packets to a larger range than that reached by the 
source, the malicious node can inadvertently deliver the packet to the 
destination or at least to a relay node that is closer to the destination 
than the neighbors of the source. In this case, the malicious node will 
cooperate in the delivery process rather than disrupting it. Similarly, if 
the transmission range of the malicious node is smaller than that of the 
legitimate nodes, the depth-spoofed packet may not reach some of the 
neighbors of the source node, which allows them to successfully relay 
data packets to the destination. Therefore, the most effective depth- 
spoofing attack is possible when the transmission range of the attacker 
is close to the transmission range of the legitimate nodes. 
2.3. Depth-spoofing attack mitigation mechanisms 
A partial solution to the depth-spoofing attack was proposed by the 
resilient pressure-based routing (RPR) protocol in Ref. [8]. RPR, like 
DBR, uses depth information to determine packet holding times but 
employs cryptographic authentication and a sliding window threshold. 
During the forwarding decision, instead of comparing the depth 
advantage to a fixed minimum threshold, the received packet header 
will contain a lower bound threshold and an upper bound threshold. 
Only nodes within the threshold window are required to forward. Each 
sender determines the threshold window for the next hop by choosing 
two depths randomly from its neighbor list. The communication 
Fig. 1. Depth-spoofing attack. Attacker node A misleads relay node R into believing that the packet has already moved up towards the surface, thus inhibiting R from 
forwarding and causing a blackhole effect. 
A. Alharbi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Array 13 (2022) 100117
4
overhead of PRP is tremendous because randomized threshold windows 
tend to form routes with more hops than the purely opportunistic DBR. 
The increase in the number of packet transmissions per unique packet 
delivered can be up by 100%–300%, depending on the network density. 
The recently proposed depth-based secure routing (DBSR) [15] uses 
cryptography to sign depth information within the routing headers. To 
reduce the overhead, DBSR employs a cryptographic signature to protect 
the integrity of only the routing headers. The use of a cryptographic 
authentication mechanism eliminates depth-spoofing by intruders, but 
the protocol remains wide open to depth-spoofing attacks by adversaries 
that can compromise nodes. Moreover, DBSR assumes that private 
signing keys are configured manually on each node, which increases the 
maintenance cost of a UAN in case new nodes need to be added to an 
existing deployment. 
The SEECR [30] protocol was also developed to secure depth-based 
routing protocols. Each node compares its packet against a potential 
spoofed one using two queues. If the value of the attack threshold of any 
node is reached, then the protocol ignores this node in the routing 
process thereafter. However, since the attack model and relevant as-
sumptions have not been clarified in this work, we have decided to 
compare the RPR protocol with our proposed DPR protocol. 
3. Proposed protocol 
To mitigate the effect of the depth-spoofing attack, we propose an 
improved version of the DBR protocol, called the depth-based probabi-
listic routing protocol (DPR). In this section, we specify the proposed 
routing protocol and analyze its expected behavior under depth- 
spoofing attacks as well as under normal conditions. 
3.1. DPR specifications 
The DPR packet header format is adopted from DBR without 
changes. Specifically, the first two fields of DPR represent the source 
address and source-unique sequence number, which are used to identify 
unique packets. The third field—the depth—indicates the last sending 
node depth. 
Algorithm 1 
Receive Packet from MAC  
Inputs: received packet, P, current time, t, received packet cache, C, forwarding 
queue, Q, current node depth, D, and threshold for minimum depth advantage, dmin.  
Outputs: Updated cache, C, and forwarding queue, Q.  
Procedure: 
d ←P.depth – D ⊳ calculate depth gain  
if C.contains(P.srcID, P.seqNo) ⊳ if the received packet already exists in the cache  
if Q.contains(P.srcID, P.seqNo) ⊳ if the received packet is already queued  
P
′ ←Q.get(P.srcID, P.seqNo) ⊳ obtain the old packet  
if d > dmin ⊳ if depth gain above the threshold  
tH←calculateHoldingTime(d) ⊳ using equation (1)  
tF←t + tH ⊳ calculate the forwarding time  
if P
′ .timer.expires > tF ⊳ if the forwarding time is sooner than old forwarding 
time  
P
′ .timer.expires←tF ⊳ update queued packet forwarding time to the earlier 
time  
end if 
else if d < 0 ⊳ if the duplicate packet was received from a sender closer to the 
surface  
P
′ .dropFlag←true ⊳ mark the corresponding queued packet for dropping  
end if 
end if 
else ⊳ received fresh packet  
C.add(P.srcID, P.seqNo) ⊳ add received packet id to the cache  
if d > dmin ⊳ if depth gain above the threshold  
tH←calculateHoldingTime(d) ⊳ using equation (1)  
tF←t + tH ⊳ calculate the forwarding time  
P.depth←D ⊳ update the packet depth  
P.dropFlag←false ⊳ do not drop the packet yet  
(continued on next column) 
Algorithm 1 (continued) 
P.timer.expires←tF ⊳ set the packet forwarding time  
P.timer.start ⊳ start the holding timer for forwarding the received packet  
Q.add(P) ⊳ insert the received packet at proper place in the holding queue  
end if 
end if ∎  
Algorithm 2 
Holding timer expires.  
Inputs: held packet, P, forwarding queue, Q.  
Outputs: forwarding decision a ∈ {forward, drop}.  
if P.dropFlag ⊳ if packet is marked for dropping  
x ← random([0, 1))
if x < p  
a←forward ⊳ forward with probability p  
else 
a←drop ⊳ drop with probability 1 − p  
end if 
else ⊳ if not marked for dropping  
a←forward ⊳ forward unconditionally  
end if 
Q.remove(P) ∎∎   
The operation of DPR is controlled by a new parameter, p, which 
denotes the unqualified forwarding probability. The process of handling 
a packet received from the MAC layer and the process of finally for-
warding a held packet at the scheduled time are listed as Algorithm 1 
depicted in Fig. 2 and Algorithm 2 depicted in Fig. 3. 
The main difference in DPR operation compared to traditional DBR is 
the action taken when a node receives a neighbor’s retransmission of a 
packet that already exists in the node-forwarding queue. Traditionally, 
DBR drops a buffered packet when the newly received retransmission of 
the packet deems the node an unqualified forwarder, which allows an 
attacker to force forwarders to drop their packets. To solve this problem, 
the proposed DPR instead marks the buffered packet for future potential 
dropping. The final decision to drop the marked packet occurs after the 
holding timer of the marked packet expires. The proposed DPR makes a 
non-deterministic decision to forward the marked packet with proba-
bility p or to drop it with probability 1–p. The higher the value of p is, the 
more resilient the proposed protocol should be to depth-spoofing at-
tacks. The adjustment of p will be studied in the following subsection. 
3.2. Optimal unqualified forwarding probability 
To determine the optimal value of the unqualified forwarding 
probability p or the forwarding probability for short, we first study the 
effect of p on the performance of the network in two cases: (a) under 
depth-spoofing attack and (b) under normal conditions. 
When the network is under attack, each of the good forwarders 
within the attacker’s communication range are called vulnerable nodes. 
When the attacker retransmits a packet with a spoofed depth, copies of 
the same packets found in the forwarding queues of vulnerable nodes are 
called vulnerable packets. DPR causes vulnerable nodes to keep vulner-
able packets, which would have otherwise been dropped in DBR due to 
the depth-spoofing attack. Vulnerable nodes will only mark vulnerable 
packets for dropping but will eventually forward each of them with 
probability p. Therefore, the probability of dropping a vulnerable packet 
is (1 − p). When the number of vulnerable nodes with a path to the sink 
is n, the depth-spoofing attack is successful if all vulnerable nodes 
simultaneously decide to drop the vulnerable packets. Therefore, the 
probability of a successful depth-spoofing attack is reduced to (1 − p)n. 
On the other hand, when the network is operating normally, prob-
abilistic unconditional forwarding is expected to cause additional traffic. 
Namely, forwarders that become unqualified upon learning of their 
neighbors forwarding packets that already exist in their queues will still 
have a chance to forward each of these packets with probability p. The 
A. Alharbi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Array 13 (2022) 100117
5
resulting potential multiple forwarding of the same packet increases the 
overhead and negatively affects the efficiency of the routing protocol. 
Therefore, it is important to analyze the overhead. 
We estimate the communication overhead by finding the expected 
number of additional packets forwarded by DPR that would not be 
forwarded by DBR. If the qualified forwarder of a packet has m un-
qualified neighbors holding a copy of the same packet, then the expected 
number of additional forwarded packets is (p ⋅m) packet. Unqualified 
forwarding neighbors is a subset of all neighbors within a node’s 
communication range. Obviously, neighbors that have already for-
warded a specific packet are no longer considered unqualified for-
warders of that packet. Therefore, m can be much smaller than the 
node’s degree (number of neighbors). Other factors can affect the 
number of successfully forwarded packets, such as the contention level 
and the MAC protocol in use. For example, if the transmissions of two or 
more unqualified forwarders happen to interfere, some or all of them 
may fail, thus causing no further traffic and reducing overhead. There-
fore, the overhead caused by probabilistic forwarding is expected to be 
reasonably low. 
To sum up the effect of the probability parameter p, there seems to be 
a trade-off between the achievable delivery ratio and the overhead due 
to the additional packets forwarded. It is expected that a large p im-
proves delivery ratio when the network is under a depth-spoofing attack 
but also increases overhead when the network is not under attack. Due 
to the interplay between network topology, MAC protocol, and traffic 
load, we propose that the value of p be statically tailored for a given 
scenario using simulation. Given a specific UAN deployment, we simu-
late it with various values of p for each of the two cases: with attack and 
without attack. Two metrics are calculated—the delivery ratio rp, and 
overhead, wp—corresponding to each value of p. The delivery ratio rp for 
a given forwarding probability p is calculated as follows: 
rp =
D
′
p
D0
,
(2)  
where D
′
p is the number of packets delivered by DPR under attack with 
the given forwarding probability, and D0 is the number of packets 
delivered by DPR under normal conditions with p = 0, which is equiv-
alent to the behavior of the original DBR. The overhead, wp, is calculated 
as follows: 
wp = Fp
F0
,
(3)  
where Fp is the total number of packets transmitted by all the nodes 
using DPR under normal conditions with the given forwarding proba-
bility, and F0 is the total number of packets transmitted by all nodes 
using DPR under normal conditions with p = 0, which is equivalent to 
the behavior of the original DBR protocol. 
To measure the efficiency of the proposed protocol in resisting the 
depth-spoofing attack, we define the resilience efficiency metric as fol-
lows: 
ηp = rp
wp
× 100%.
(4) 
A higher resilience efficiency indicates the ability to achieve a higher 
delivery ratio when the network is under attack while keeping the 
overhead low when the network is operating normally. The forwarding 
probability p is chosen to maximize the network resilience efficiency. 
4. Evaluation methodology and simulation 
Since the main objective of an adversary launching a depth-spoofing 
black-hole attack is to cut off delivery, the delivery ratio should arguably 
be the key effectiveness indicator of the proposed countermeasure. The 
efficiency of the proposed approach can be demonstrated by showing 
that the additional forwarding overhead is limited. Excessive additional 
forwarding directly increases energy consumption and indirectly in-
creases delay and reduces throughput. Therefore, showing that the 
additional forwarding overhead is marginal is sufficient to indicate that 
the negative effect of the proposed approach on the subsequent metrics 
(delay, throughput, and energy) is limited. 
To evaluate the effectiveness and cost of the proposed probabilistic 
forwarding technique, we set up the following simulation scenario. We 
deployed the underwater nodes randomly in a volume of 500 m × 500 
m × 250 m, where 250 m was the maximum depth. A single sink was 
placed at the center of the surface area. When placing underwater nodes, 
special care was taken to guarantee that the resulting network topology 
was always connected and that the node degree did not exceed the de-
gree set for the corresponding network density. 
For this simulation, the underwater node that was the farthest from 
the sink node was chosen as the source of traffic. The total number of 
underwater nodes varied according to the target network density and 
maximum node degree, and 100 different network topologies were 
generated corresponding to each network density in order to increase 
confidence in the results. Fig. 4 illustrates three sample networks cor-
responding to each of the three network densities and node degrees. The 
blue dots represent underwater relay nodes, the red dot represents the 
source, and the green dot represents the sink. The dotted lines represent 
Fig. 2. Flowchart of Algorithm 1, performed when a packet is received from the MAC layer. The shaded area highlights the modification introduced in the proposed 
depth-based probabilistic routing protocol. 
A. Alharbi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Array 13 (2022) 100117
6
connectivity between nodes within each other’s communication range. 
One malicious node, performing a black-hole attack through depth- 
spoofing, was placed 1 m below the source node. This placement 
caused the attack to inhibit as many of the neighbors of the source node 
as possible from relaying source packets, thus enabling the attacker to 
launch a black-hole or gray-hole attack against the targeted source. 
The simulation settings are summarized in Table 1. We adopted the 
physical layer model used in Ref. [29], which includes the path loss 
model, the absorption model, the ambient noise model, and the BPSK 
modulation bit-error-rate model, which are defined in Equations (5)– 
(8), respectively. Path loss is defined as follows: 
A(f) = A0 + 10κlog 10(d) + d × 10−3α(f)
(5)  
where f is the center frequency in kHz, A0 = 30 dB is a normalizing 
constant, κ is the spreading factor, d is the distance in meters and a is the 
Fig. 3. Flowchart of Algorithm 2, performed when the timer for a packet held 
in the forwarding queue expires, in order to decide whether to forward or drop 
the packet. The shaded area highlights the modification introduced in the 
proposed depth-based probabilistic routing protocol. 
Fig. 4. Sample networks with different node densities.  
A. Alharbi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Array 13 (2022) 100117
7
absorption coefficient, which is further defined as follows: 
α(f) = 0.11f 2
1 + f 2 +
44f 2
4100 + f 2 + 2.75 × 10−4f 2 + 0.003 dB
/
km
(6) 
We simulated the spherical spreading by setting the spreading factor 
κ = 2 in Equation (5). The ambient noise can be approximated by the 
following power spectral density: 
N(f) = 50 − 18log 10(f)
(7) 
The signal-to-noise ratio can be calculated using the following 
formula: 
γ(f) = SL − N(f) − A(f)
where SL is the acoustic transmission power in dB. The electrical power 
transmission Pt in Watts is defined as 
Pt = 2π zd × 0.67 × 10−18 × 100.1 SL  
where zd is the ocean depth in meters. Assuming BPSK modulation, the 
average bit error probability is calculated as follows: 
ε = 1
2
⎛
⎝1 −
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
100.1 γ(f)
1 + 100.1 γ(f)
√
⎞
⎠
(8) 
Therefore, the probability of successful reception of a packet of 
length m bits is (1 − ε)m. Transducers were configured with a bit rate of 
12.5 Kbps. The transmission power was adjusted such that the nominal 
communication range is 150 m. 
In our simulations, we adopted a basic ALOHA MAC protocol, in 
which packets are transmitted immediately regardless of the state of the 
channel and frames lost due to collisions are not retransmitted. ALOHA 
is a practical alternative in acoustic underwater MAC, considering the 
extremely high propagation delay, which renders synchronized pro-
tocols impractical [34]; hence, ALOHA has been frequently employed in 
UAN literature, such as [31]. 
Traffic was generated at a rate of 10 bytes per second, whereas each 
packet held a 50-byte payload. Thus, one packet was generated every 5 
s. The source was configured to stop after transmitting exactly 100 
packets, and the simulation was run for as long as it took for all the 
traffic caused by these messages to disappear from the network. 
The number of packets delivered to the sink, D
′
p, was observed and 
divided by the corresponding ideal number of traditional DBR in the 
absence of the malicious attacker to obtain the delivery ratio, rp, as 
defined in (2). 
For each of the three network densities, four sets of scenarios were 
simulated: (a) DBR protocol with the attacker inactive, (b) DBR protocol 
with the attacker active, (c) DPR protocol with the attacker inactive, and 
(d) DPR protocol with the attacker active. When DPR was used, the 
simulation was repeated with various values of forwarding probability, 
ranging from p = 0.1 to p = 1. In each scenario, the experiment was 
repeated for each of the 100 generated network topologies and the mean 
result was reported. 
The simulation model was developed in Java with a MATLAB 
scripting interface. The software package, available online at [32], can 
easily be used to reproduce the results presented in the following 
section. 
5. Results and discussion 
In this section, we elucidate the effect of the forwarding probability 
parameter p on the performance of the proposed DPR under different 
network conditions. Then, we compare the proposed protocol with 
existing relevant protocols. 
5.1. DPR resistance to depth-spoofing attacks 
To demonstrate the resistance of the proposed DPR protocol against 
depth-spoofing attacks, we simulated the sample networks in the pres-
ence of an active attacker and observed the packet delivery ratio rp at 
each value of p. The results are shown in Fig. 5. The delivery ratios are 
calculated as a percentage of the ideal case of DBR under no attack using 
(2). In all three networks, depth-spoofing successfully created a sinkhole 
that hindered the delivery of packets. As the unqualified forwarding 
probability p increased, DPR successfully delivered more packets. The 
packet delivery ratio exceeded 90% when p ≥ 0.9, p ≥ 0.7 and p ≥ 0.4, 
for the sparse, medium density, and dense networks, respectively. In 
effect, probabilistic forwarding has the potential to reduce or even 
eliminate the sinkhole effect of depth-spoofing attacks. As observed in 
Fig. 5, the denser a network is, the lower will be the forwarding prob-
ability needed to achieve a certain delivery ratio. 
5.2. DPR overhead 
Increasing the forwarding probability p increased the overall number 
of packets transmitted by DPR. Fig. 6 shows the overhead of DPR wp as 
defined by (3), at various forwarding probabilities p. In all three net-
works, the overhead of DPR increased monotonically with p. The worst- 
case overhead in sparse, medium, and dense networks were less than 
39%, 66%, and 61%, respectively. Therefore, the overhead increased 
with network density, confirming our earlier analysis that a larger 
number of suboptimal unqualified nodes are involved in probabilistic 
forwarding. The results indicate that networks with lower node density 
can tolerate higher forwarding probabilities with lower overhead 
compared to higher density networks. 
Table 1 
Simulation settings.  
Parameter 
Setting 
Deployment space 
500 m × 500 m × 250 m deep 
Network density 
sparse 
medium 
dense 
— Number of nodes 
47 
75 
150 
— Max. node degree 
5 
8 
15 
— Number of simulated topologies 
100 
100 
100 
Channel model 
Spherical spreading, additive noise 
Communication range 
150 m 
Bit rate 
12.5 Kbit/s 
Data generation rate 
10 Byte/s 
Packet payload 
50 Bytes 
Total data transmitted 
100 packets 
MAC 
ALOHA  
Fig. 5. Without probabilistic forwarding, no packets can be delivered under the 
depth-spoofing attack. Using a higher forwarding probability p improves the 
packet delivery ratio for networks of all densities. The higher the network 
density, the faster the improvement in packet delivery ratio. 
A. Alharbi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Array 13 (2022) 100117
8
5.3. Adjusting the forwarding probability 
The performance of DPR exhibited a tradeoff between resistance to 
depth-spoofing attacks represented by the packet delivery ratio and the 
overhead represented by the delivery cost. The optimal forwarding 
probability should maximize the resilience efficiency defined in (4). 
Fig. 7 illustrates how the optimal resilience efficiency is affected by 
the network density. In the sparse network, where the overhead is 
significantly limited, it seems that the delivery ratio is the overwhelming 
factor affecting resilience efficiency. Therefore, the best resilience effi-
ciency was achieved at a very high forwarding probability, p = 0.9. In 
denser networks, however, the overhead played a more significant role 
and pushed the optimal forwarding probability lower. In the medium 
density network, the optimal forwarding probability was p =
0.5, 
whereas in the dense network, it was p = 0.3. From this observation, we 
can confirm that networks with higher node densities are expected to 
achieve better security/efficiency balance with DPR at lower values of 
forwarding probability p. 
5.4. Comparison with existing protocols 
In this section, we compare the proposed DPR protocol with existing 
relevant protocols. As mentioned earlier, DBSR [15] provides a partial 
solution to the depth-spoofing attack using cryptography but remains 
vulnerable in case of node compromise. Another limitation of DBSR 
comes from the key assignment problem, which causes a scalability 
issue. To demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed 
DPR protocol, we compare its performance with the existing RPR pro-
tocol [8] in terms of packet resilience efficiency, energy overhead, 
network lifetime, and end-to-end delay. 
5.4.1. Energy efficiency comparison 
Based on the assumption that all packets are transmitted at the same 
transmission power level, the energy efficiency of the network can be 
indicated by the number of delivered packets as a ratio of the total 
number of packet transmissions under normal conditions. Table 2 lists 
the average number of packet transmissions per delivered packet for 
each of the DBR, RPR, and the proposed DPR protocols for every 
simulated network. For instance, when the high-density network is 
operating normally, DBR costs the network about 47 packet trans-
missions per delivered packet, and RPR costs the networks 113 packet 
transmissions per delivered packet, whereas the proposed DPR costs the 
network only 50 packet transmissions per delivered packet. To compare 
the efficiency of the depth-spoofing countermeasures introduced by RPR 
and DPR, the energy efficiency of the original DBR is taken as a refer-
ence, and the energy efficiencies of DPR and RPR are calculated as a 
percentage of the DBR energy efficiency. The energy efficiency of the 
proposed DPR is compared to RPR in Fig. 8. Clearly, the proposed DPR 
has superior energy efficiency compared to RPR. The results also showed 
that the proposed DPR protocol has a slightly lower energy efficiency 
than the original insecure DBR protocol. This little energy overhead is 
justifiable by the significant security advantage of DPR against depth- 
spoofing attacks, as will be shown in the next subsection. 
5.4.2. Resilience efficiency comparison 
Resilience efficiency, defined in (4), indicates the energy efficiency 
of the depth-spoofing avoidance mechanism. The simulation results, 
shown in Fig. 9, indicate that when the proposed DPR protocol is 
operating at the optimal forwarding probability, the DPR resilience ef-
ficiency surpasses that of RPR. In both cases, the network under a depth- 
spoofing attack delivers a significant fraction of packets. However, due 
to the lower energy efficiency of RPR, a great amount of energy is spent 
delivering each packet even when the network is under normal condi-
tions. This indicates that the proposed DPR strikes a better balance be-
tween achieving a high delivery ratio when the network is under attack 
and the energy cost when the network is not under attack. 
5.4.3. Network lifetime comparison 
We adopted the network lifetime definition given by Ref. [21], which 
focuses on the first depleted node as an indicator of the network lifetime. 
We assume that the network is homogenous (all nodes have the same 
battery capacity and the same transmission power), and all packets have 
fixed sizes. Therefore, the node depletion rate is proportional to the 
packet transmission rate, and the first depleted node is the node that 
makes the most frequent transmissions. To facilitate the comparison, we 
define the node depletion rate as follows: 
Fig. 6. Effect of forwarding probability on delivery cost in the absence of 
depth-spoofing attack, with varying node densities. 
Fig. 7. Finding the optimal forwarding probability using the resilience effi-
ciency, η. In the sparse network (a), the maximum η is at p = 0.9. In the 
medium-density network (b), the maximum η is at p = 0.5. In the dense network 
(c), the maximum η is at p = 0.3. 
Table 2 
Number of packets transmitted per delivered packet under normal conditions.   
DBR 
RPR 
Proposed DPR 
Sparse network 
17.95 
41.74 
24.64 
Medium density Network 
28.02 
63.51 
32.73 
Dense network 
46.92 
113.34 
50.23  
A. Alharbi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Array 13 (2022) 100117
9
Node depletion rate = Numberof node transmissions
Number of delivered packets 
We take the node depletion rate of DBR as a reference and hence 
represent the network lifetime as a fraction of the corresponding DBR 
network lifetime. As shown in Fig. 10, the proposed DPR keeps the 
lifetime of the network above 95% of the DBR lifetime, whereas RPR 
reduces the network lifetime to approximately 40%. 
5.4.4. End-to-end delay comparison 
End-to-end delay is the time spent delivering an application message 
from a source to a destination/sink node. As shown in Fig. 11, the effect 
of the proposed DPR on end-to-end delay is insignificant regardless of 
the network density. 
6. Conclusion 
In this paper, we proposed a security improvement to secure DBR 
against depth-spoofing sinkhole attacks using non-deterministic for-
warding. The simulation showed that the proposed DPR protocol is 
potent against depth-spoofing sinkhole attacks. Since energy consump-
tion is of utmost importance in underwater networks, the proposed 
protocol was also shown to have a limited energy overhead. Compared 
to its main competitor, RPR, the proposed DPR has approximately 
double the energy efficiency. The DPR also has a negligible effect on 
end-to-end delay. Since the performance of DPR is determined by the 
forwarding probability parameter, we proposed a methodology for 
adjusting the forwarding probability for a specific network topology 
using simulation. However, using a constant forwarding probability for 
all nodes and for the entire duration of deployment may sometimes be 
suboptimal. Therefore, there is room for further improvement of 
network performance by dynamically adjusting the forwarding proba-
bility. Moreover, the proposed DPR can further be improved by 
considering the residual energy of each node to determine the for-
warding probability in order to attempt to extend the network lifetime. 
Recently [33], presented a Master-Slave Architecture for UAN routing to 
reduce channel contention by designating master nodes as the only 
potential forwarders. Incorporating such an architecture within the 
proposed DPR protocol can also be considered. These improvements are 
left for future research. 
Credit author statement 
Ayman Alharbi: Conceptualization, Investigation, Writing – Original 
Draft, Visualization, Funding Acquisition. Alaa M. Abbas: Validation, 
Writing – Review & Editing. Saleh Ibrahim: Conceptualization, Meth-
odology, 
Software, 
Investigation, 
Writing 
– 
Original 
Draft, 
Visualization. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Fig. 8. Energy efficiency of depth-spoofing countermeasures in the absence of 
an attacker. Energy efficiency is represented as a percentage of the energy ef-
ficiency of the original DBR. 
Fig. 9. Comparison of resilience efficiency.  
Fig. 10. Network lifetime comparison.  
Fig. 11. End-to-end delay comparison.  
A. Alharbi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Array 13 (2022) 100117
10
Acknowledgment 
This work was supported by the Deanship of Scientific Research at 
Umm Al-Qura University, grant code 19-COM-1-01-0019. 
References 
[1] Yang G, Dai L, Si G, Wang S, Wang S. Challenges and security issues in underwater 
wireless sensor networks. Procedia Computer Science 2019;147:210–6. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2019.01.225. 
[2] T. Dargahi, H. H. S. Javadi, and H. Shafiei, "Securing underwater sensor networks 
against routing attacks," Wireless Pers Commun, vol. 96, no. 2, pp. 2585-2602, 
2017/09/01 2017, doi: 10.1007/s11277-017-4313-1. 
[3] Signori A, et al. Jamming the underwater: a game-theoretic analysis of energy- 
depleting jamming attacks. Atlanta, GA, USA. In: Presented at the proceedings of 
the international conference on underwater networks & systems; 2019. https://doi. 
org/10.1145/3366486.3366546 [Online]. Available:. 
[4] Jiang S. On securing underwater acoustic networks: a survey. IEEE 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials 2019;21(1):729–52. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/COMST.2018.2864127. 
[5] Yan H, Shi Z, Cui J-H. DBR: depth-based routing for underwater sensor networks. 
In: NETWORKING 2008 ad hoc and sensor networks, wireless networks, next 
generation internet, vol. 4982. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 
2008. p. 72–86 (Lecture Notes in Computer Science. 
[6] Yu H, Yao N, Wang T, Li G, Gao Z, Tan G. WDFAD-DBR: weighting depth and 
forwarding area division DBR routing protocol for UASNs. Ad Hoc Netw 2016;37: 
256–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adhoc.2015.08.023. 
[7] Javaid N, Jafri MR, Khan ZA, Qasim U, Alghamdi TA, Ali M. iAMCTD: improved 
adaptive mobility of courier nodes in threshold-optimized DBR protocol for 
underwater wireless sensor networks. Int J Distributed Sens Netw 2014;10(11): 
213012. https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/213012. 
[8] M. Zuba, M. Fagan, S. Zhijie, and C. Jun-Hong, "A resilient pressure routing scheme 
for underwater acoustic networks," Dec 2014 2014, no. Conference Proceedings: 
IEEE, pp. 637-642, doi: 10.1109/GLOCOM.2014.7036879. [Online]. Available: 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7036879. 
[9] Shah M, Javaid N, Imran M, Guizani M, Khan ZA, Qasim U. Interference aware 
inverse EEDBR protocol for underwater WSNs. Conference Proceedings: IEEE; Aug 
2015 2015. p. 739–44. https://doi.org/10.1109/IWCMC.2015.7289175 [Online]. 
Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7289175. 
[10] Gul S, Jokhio SH, Jokhio IA. Light-weight depth-based routing for underwater 
wireless sensor network. Conference Proceedings: IEEE; Feb 2018 2018. p. 1–7. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICACS.2018.8333483 [Online]. Available: https:// 
ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8333483. 
[11] Ahmed T, Chaudhary M, Kaleem M, Nazir S. Optimized depth-based routing 
protocol for underwater wireless sensor networks. Conference Proceedings: IEEE; 
Dec 2016 2016. p. 147–50. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICOSST.2016.7838592 
[Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7838592. 
[12] Nithiyanandam N, Parthiban L. An efficient voting based method to detect sink 
hole in wireless acoustic sensor networks. Int J Speech Technol 2020;23(2): 
343–54. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10772-020-09700-3. 2020/06/01. 
[13] Kala PC, Agrawal AP, Sharma RR. A novel approach for isolation of sinkhole attack 
in wireless sensor networks. 29-31 Jan. 2020. In: 2020 10th international 
conference on cloud computing. Confluence: Data Science & Engineering; 2020. 
p. 163–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/Confluence47617.2020.9057981. 
[14] Zuba M, Fagan M, Jun-Hong C, Zhijie S. A vulnerability study of geographic 
routing in Underwater Acoustic Networks. Oct 2013. Conference Proceedings: 
IEEE; 2013. p. 109–17. https://doi.org/10.1109/CNS.2013.6682698 [Online]. 
Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6682698. 
[15] Alharbi A. DBSR: a depth-based secure routing protocol for underwater sensor 
networks. Int J Adv Comput Sci Appl 2020;11(9). https://doi.org/10.14569/ 
ijacsa.2020.0110974. 
[16] Jinfang J, Guangjie H, Lei S, Chan S, Kun W. A trust model based on cloud theory in 
underwater acoustic sensor networks. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 
2017;13(1):342–50. https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2015.2510226. 
[17] Han G, Jiang J, Shu L, Guizani M. An attack-resistant trust model based on 
multidimensional trust metrics in underwater acoustic sensor network. IEEE Trans 
Mobile Comput 2015;14(12):2447–59. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
TMC.2015.2402120. 
[18] Bereketli A, Guldogan MB, Kolcak T, Gudu T, Avsar AL. Experimental results for 
direction of arrival estimation with a single acoustic vector sensor in shallow 
water. Journal of Sensors 2015:401353. https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/401353. 
2015/05/19 2015. 
[19] Xie P, Cui J-H, Lao L. VBF: vector-based forwarding protocol for underwater sensor 
networks. In: Networking 2006. Networking technologies, services, and protocols; 
performance of computer and communication networks; mobile and wireless 
communications systems, vol. 3976. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg; 2006. p. 1216–21 (Lecture Notes in Computer Science. 
[20] Barenco Abbas CJ, Montandon R, Sandoval Orozco AL, Garcia Villalba LJ. EBVBF: 
energy balanced vector based forwarding protocol. IEEE Access 2019;7:54273–84. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2913026. 
[21] Wahid A, Kim D. An energy efficient localization-free routing protocol for 
underwater wireless sensor networks. Int J Distributed Sens Netw 2012;8(4): 
307246. https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/307246. 
[22] Rahman MA, Youngdoo L, Insoo K. EECOR: an energy-efficient cooperative 
opportunistic routing protocol for underwater acoustic sensor networks. IEEE 
Access 2017;5:14119–32. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2730233. 
[23] Khasawneh A, Latiff MSBA, Kaiwartya O, Chizari H. A reliable energy-efficient 
pressure-based routing protocol for underwater wireless sensor network. Wireless 
Network 2018;24(6):2061–75. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11276-017-1461-x. 
2018/08/01. 
[24] Zhang M, Cai W. Energy-efficient depth based probabilistic routing within 2-hop 
neighborhood for underwater sensor networks. IEEE Sensors Letters 2020;4(6): 
1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/LSENS.2020.2995236. 
[25] Ismail M, et al. Reliable path selection and opportunistic routing protocol for 
underwater wireless sensor networks. IEEE Access 2020;8:100346–64. https://doi. 
org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2992759. 
[26] Ghoreyshi SM, Shahrabi A, Boutaleb T. A stateless opportunistic routing protocol 
for underwater sensor networks. Wireless Commun Mobile Comput 2018:8237351. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/8237351. 2018/11/11 2018. 
[27] Ali M, Khan A, Mahmood H, Bhatti N. Cooperative, reliable, and stability-aware 
routing for underwater wireless sensor networks. Int J Distributed Sens Netw 2019; 
15(6). https://doi.org/10.1177/1550147719854249. 1550147719854249, 2019/ 
06/01. 
[28] Javaid N, Shakeel U, Ahmad A, Alrajeh N, Khan ZA, Guizani N. DRADS: depth and 
reliability aware delay sensitive cooperative routing for underwater wireless sensor 
networks. Wireless Network 2019;25(2):777–89. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11276- 
017-1591-1. 2019/02/01. 
[29] Mhemed R, Comeau F, Phillips W, Aslam N. Void avoidance opportunistic routing 
protocol for underwater wireless sensor networks. Sensors 2021;21(6). https://doi. 
org/10.3390/s21061942. 
[30] Saeed K, Khalil W, Ahmed S, Ahmad I, Khattak MNK. SEECR: secure energy 
efficient and cooperative routing protocol for underwater wireless sensor networks. 
IEEE Access 2020;8:107419–33. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3000863. 
[31] Torres D, Friedman J, Schmid T, Srivastava MB, Noh Y, Gerla M. Software-defined 
underwater acoustic networking platform and its applications. Ad Hoc Netw 2015; 
34:252–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adhoc.2015.01.010. 2015/11/01/. 
[32] Ibrahim S. Underwater acoustic network simulator (UANSim). Oct, https://github. 
com/Saleh860/UANSim; 2021. 
[33] Jan S, et al. Investigating master–slave architecture for underwater wireless sensor 
network. Sensors 2021;21(9). https://doi.org/10.3390/s21093000. 
A. Alharbi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
