Change points are abrupt variations in time series data. Detection of these points is useful in modeling and predicting time series [1]. Change point detection algorithms are designed to find a time point where a process evolving in time has experienced a change. This time point indicates a change in a process generating the data points. Change point detection is widely used in quality control [2], navigation system monitoring [3], seismic data processing [4], medicine, etc. [5].

Aminikhanghahi and Cook published a survey on algorithms for change point detection in time series data. The survey described appli- cation areas of change point detection algorithms, different supervised and unsupervised approaches, and accuracy metrics. For more details the reader is referred to [1].

An eNose is a set of gas sensors that measure the ambient gas atmosphere, for example, scents, flavors, or non-odorous chemicals. eNoses are based on the general principle where changes in the gaseous atmosphere alter the sensor properties in a characteristic way, de- pending on the eNose technology and chemical sensor or sensor ar- ray used [18]. The sensors often consist of metal oxides, conducting polymers composites and intrinsically conducted polymers [18].

We propose the matrix form CUSUM as a simple multivariate exten- sion of the classic CUSUM algorithm. All calculations are the same as in the classic CUSUM, but performed in matrix form. This approach shortens computation time significantly and has approximately the same accuracy as the one-dimensional CUSUM. The algorithm can be implemented in two ways, providing either a uniform change point that is the average of detected change points over all channels or separate change points for each channel. Averaging detected points over all channels can result in less precise change points but increases robustness to channels that did not react to a scent and do not contain

All scent sources were measured with a ChemPro100i both from an open plate and a sealed flask at 1 Hz. For each scent source 5 sets of 5 min were measured, meaning that the database contained a total of 30 data sets. Between measurements of two sets a break of 3 min was taken. The breaks were needed in order to flush the drift tube with ambient air until the IMS readings returned to the baseline. The ground truth points were selected manually by visual inspection of the time series plots.

points were marked and the detected change points contributed to the MAE-scores. Even so there are no change points, the algorithms still yield random points, which affects MAE-scores of a particular data set. To overcome this problem the five algorithms were modified. The modified algorithms calculated differences between the maximum and the minimum value for each channel based on the initial sample. If this difference was less than 0.05 pA then the channel was excluded from the calculation. The threshold value 0.05 was chosen based on an analysis of all the data sets, which can be found from the supplementary material.

The Shewhart Control charts, CUSUM and Bayesian Online Change Point detection algorithms performed reliably but must be run on each channel separately. The BOCPD generally worked well in the case of clearly visible change points. Thus, these algorithms suited our needs and may be used for change point detection of IMS readings. The Multivariate Max-CUSUM and Matrix Form CUSUM that calculate all channels simultaneously turned out to be the fastest and the most reliable of all considered algorithms.

