The common sorting and grading technique is manual sorting. How- ever, this technique suffers from several disadvantages, such as low pre- cision, labor-intensive, and subjectivity (Karlsson, 2016). Gould (1975) introduced the mechanical tomato sorting machine as a solution to the shortcomings of manual sorting. However, this grading system was limited to only size and weight classification. Presently, with the emergence and developments in machine vision technology, it has be- come possible to overcome these limitations accurately and non- destructively based on machine vision detection systems (Chen et al., 2002).

Color features are also referred to as statistical features (1st order spatial statistics measure). In this study, LAB color space was used due to its ability of limited variance due to sensor sensitivity (Shafiee et al., 2014). LAB color space is a 3-axis color system with absolute and pre-

Texture features are also referred to as a 2nd order measure. These features present the gray values of pixels in pairs. Thus, they capture the spatial dependence of gray values. In this study, Haralick textural features were computed from Gray-Level Cooccurrence Matrices (GLCM) (Haralick and Shanmugam, 1973; Moallem et al., 2013). A 2D GLCM matrix presented each image, and the textual features are the av- erage of this matrix using neighborhood of distance d = 1 towards the directions 00, 450, 900, and 1350 this is because defects have no specific direction. The extracted features were the contrast, correlation, energy, homogeneity and entropy.

fifteen features were extracted from each image. Based on the quality grading, a total of four models were developed for each recognition model explored. The recognition models were linear-SVM, quadratic- SVM, cubic-SVM, and radial basis function (RBF-SVM), ANN, decision tree, and random forest. These models were trained by a 10-fold cross-validation-based parameter search on the training dataset after which they were further evaluated on a testing dataset. A comparison

The developed ANN models had three layers; input layer, hidden layer, and the output layer. The input layer had fifteen inputs corre- sponding to the extracted features. The number of neurons in the hid- den layer was set to 10 after an exhaustive search with an increasing number of neurons to establish a minimum percent error during the validation phase. A hyperbolic tangent sigmoid transfer function was used in the hidden layer, while a linear transfer function was used in the output layer.

threshold method to discriminate unripe, ripe and spoiled tomatoes. Lee et al. (2008) developed near-infrared imaging system in the grading of date fruits at an overall accuracy of 95.0%, despite the high accuracy of high-quality images like the hyperspectral, multispectral and near- infrared imaging the costs involved are always much higher in the setup of such systems. Never the less this introduced system despite image quality is sensitive to ambient light conditions still achieved a high accuracy due to controlled lighting.

+ FN); where TP is True Positive, TN is True Negative, FP is False Positive and FN is False Negative. The result of the classification achieved a spec- ificity of 0.9613, precision of 0.9742, and sensitivity of 0.9775 on the testing dataset.

This study proposes a tomato defect detection system on image color, texture, and shape features. A relation of the tomato image LAB color space to defect was developed. The results obtained suggest that the proposed machine vision system can be used to detect defects in Cherry and Heirloom tomatoes. However, this system needs to be vali- dated on other varieties of tomatoes, despite these shortcomings, the

Naik, S., Patel, B., & Pandey, R. (2015). Shape, size and maturity features extraction with fuzzy classifier for non-destructive mango (Mangifera indica L., cv. Kesar) grading. Paper Presented at the 2015 IEEE Technological Innovation in ICT for Agriculture and Rural Development (TIAR).

