privacy within the network, information is secured. There is also no possibility for users to complain about privacy for communications in the network, which results in a great user experience when users are using the network services. This is how the user QoE is ensured in this work. We seek to improve the security of MEC architecture we proposed in [10]. We also provide the proof of concept of our proposed security scheme.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we present a literature review on security and data privacy management for MEC infrastructures. After that, we present our proposed solution for data security and privacy in a MEC architecture in Section 3. Section 4 presents the simulation results and finally, in Section 5, we conclude the paper.

In order to evaluate the effectiveness of our secured scheme, we use the AVISPA (Automated Validation of Internet Security Protocols and Applications) tool [31]. Formal methods which are validated using Avispa are efficient and mature for the design of secured protocols [22]. It helps to detect attacks such as Man in the Middle attacks (MITM). AVISPA implements multiple back-end techniques which are able to detect attacks on the input protocols. Among these implemented back- end techniques, we have (1) the On-the-fly Model-Checker (OFMC) that performs protocol falsification and bounded verification, (2) the Constraint- Logic-based Attack Searcher (CL-AtSe) that applies straint solving with powerful simplification heuristics and redundancy elim- ination techniques, (3) the SAT-based Model-Checker (SATMC), and which is not realistic in regards to the type of network (Mobile ad hoc Network-MANET). Furthermore, except the scheme by Mohammad et al. [5], none of the schemes considered the session key revocation after a given period, which may lead to a node being compromised. We conclude that our security scheme is superior to the evaluated schemes.

The aim of this paper was to propose a data security and privacy scheme for user QoE in a MEC-based autonomous vehicular network (AVNET) that uses the SDN-NFV-SFC-NS technologies as recommended by Filali et al. [6]. To achieve our goal, we presented a MEC ar- chitecture using the existing technologies for an AVNET, then we defined a secure scheme that ensures data security and user privacy in the MEC architecture. We then analyzed the properties that our secure scheme provides. Moreover, we used the AVISPA tool to prove the effectiveness of our secure scheme for security and data privacy. Finally, we performed simulations to evaluate the communicational and computational costs of our proposal. The behavior of our simulation results is consistent with those in literature. Furthermore, the simula- tion results show that our proposed scheme is the best outperforming scheme in terms of computational cost, but the opposite is observed for the communicational scenario. However, we recommend the use of our secured scheme for MEC infrastructures since, contrary to the ones we observed in the literature, our scheme does not consider the existence of a secure channel for the admission of AV and MS into the network, which is more realistic in regard to the type of considered network (MANET).

