Due to the influence of the fiscal crisis, the health of the local finance operation has been paid more and more attention. As a result, this essay puts forward a local fiscal health index model according to the problem of the operation of the local fiscal healthy operation. By describing the related concepts and application mechanism of the extenics and matter-element model, the extended matter-element evaluation model will be constructed, which will be used as the evaluation method of local fiscal health index model. With expert investigation and entropy weight method, the essay selects indicators from all kinds of indicator selections which affect the local fiscal health of the operation, establishing the local fiscal health index model, and use the extended matter-element evaluation model to evaluate the local financial. Results demonstrate that the local fiscal health index model, which is based on the extended matter-element evaluation, is a practical model.

At present, with the construction of local fiscal index model, there are many widely applied methods, such as expert research method, data mining and so on. Hana Polackova (1998) established the famous fiscal risk matrix--Polackova matrix[1], in which proposes the concept of direct debt, contingent debt, dominant debt, implicit debt. It is an effective tool to analyze and evaluate the local government debt. Lifeng Liu(2001) adopted some internal factors and external factors indicators to evaluate the sustainability and fiscal risk degree of the national debt policy[2]. However, these indicators on reflection of fiscal risk is partial and scattered, which have the certain capriciousness.

(3) Tax Elasticity C3, C3 = percentage increase in tax/percentage increase in GDP. (4) Proportion Of Budget Revenue To Government Revenue C4, C4 = budget revenue/government revenue. (5) Elasticity Of Financial Expenditure To Revenue C5, C5 = growth rate of fiscal expenditure/growth rate of financial income. (6) Fiscal Expenditure Offside Ratio C6, C6 = fiscal offside expenditure/fiscal total expenditure. (7) Deficit Ratio C7, C7

= annual fiscal deficit/annual GDP. (8) Dependence Degree Of Local Fiscal Debt C8, C8 = debt the same year/local fiscal expenditure. (9) Dependence Degree Of Local Government Fiscal Debt C9, C9 = debt the same year/government fiscal expenditure. (10) Proportion Of debt expenditure to debt revenue C10, C10 = debt service the same year/ debt revenue the same year. (11) Debt Servicing Ratio C11, C11 = debt service the same year/ fiscal revenue the same year. (12) Debt Burden Ratio C12, C12 = debt/GDP the same year. (13) Debt Borrowing Ratio C13, C13= debt occurred in the same year/ GDP that year. (14) Debt Repayment Ratio C14, C14 = the interest amount of the maturity debt /GDP.

{warning level}, {conservative level} and {sefety level}; Ci expresses the ith evaluation indicator. Vji = (aji, bji) is quantity value range of Nj about Ci , that is, data area classical domain of all items about their corresponding evaluation indicators. When j = 1, 2, 3, 4, the quantity value range is respectively (70, 100), (50.70), (20, 50), (0, 20). Besides, Np expresses all items, vpi is the quantity value rage of Np about Ci, which is the segment domain Np.

(p0) = 0.275210922. Because Max Kj (p0) = K3 (p0) = 0.376313759 belongs to the conservative level, although it don't have much risk, it's still far away from security level, it is necessary to pay more attention to the development of the local fiscal health K3 (p0).

The essay puts forward local fiscal health index model based on extended matter-element evaluation to ensure segment domain and classical domain through of indicators at all levels through the extended matter- element evaluation, calculating the weighting coefficient of indicators at all levels through entropy method, analyzing the association degree and finally arrive at the situation of local finance operation. Experiment shows that the local fiscal health index model constructed by extenics theory can make the complex uncertainty questions be abstracted as formalized model. It has clear concepts, simple calculation and high resolution of evaluation results.

This research is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 71071140), Technology Plan Project of Hangzhou(Grand No. 20102011A22) as well as Research on healthy index model facing the local finance (NO.1130XJ1711228) and Modern business centre of Zhejiang GongShang University. We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and constructive suggestions provided during the review process, which have greatly contributed to improve the quality of the original manuscript.

