Internet of things (IoTs) is a hot topic in recent years, and its various applications have been applied in several fields. The essence of IoTs is to connect all the things including the devices embedded RFID, sensors, etc. together, to help people utilizing the information from the things to improve their life. The things are always located at different places at different times, and the information of the thing may have different access right at different location during different time. Therefore, the access control mechanism in IoTs should consider location and temporary constraints in order to enhance the security of an application. In this paper, we propose a model that combines location and time with security level to control access to the information within the sensing layer of the IoTs. This model is called Location-Temporal Access Control Model(LTAC). The main principle of LTAC is its use of a lattice approach to decrease the size of policy bases. We show that how the different components in the model are related with location and how this location information can be used to determine whether a subject has access to a given object.

Internet of things (IoTs) is a hot topic in recent years, and its various applications have been applied in several fields[1] . The essence of IoTs is to connect all the things including the devices embedded RFID, sensors, etc. together, to help people utilizing the information from the things to improve their life. The things are always located at different places at different times, and the information of the thing may have different access right at different location during different time. Therefore, the access control mechanism[2] in IoTs should consider location and temporary constraints in order to enhance the security of an application.

The mainly existing access control schemes for the IoTs concentrate on authentication while ignoring more general models. To summarize, Benenson etc. provides a solution for defense against node capture through the collaboration of sensor nodes [3], while Shen proposes three access control schemes using the one-way key chain and the Merkle hash tree [4]. In [5], a solution to the problem of new node admissions is provided; however, the solution is not secure against replay attacks according to [6]. [7] lists influential works. These studies favor specialized schemes and show that few general access models are proposed for the IoTs.

In this paper, we propose a model that combines location and time with security level to control access to the information within the sensing layer of the IoTs. This model is called Location-Temporal Access Control Model(LTAC). The main principle of LTAC is its use of a lattice approach to decrease the size of policy bases. We show that how the different components in the model are related with location and how this location information can be used to determine whether a subject has access to a given object.

Let CT be a set of calendar times. Generally, any two calendar times are always comparable. That is, for any ctx and cty in CT, we have ctxcty, or ctyctx. In the IoTs, there exist different types of time constraints such as the earliest access time, the latest access time, the earliest finish time, and the latest finish time, etc. In this section, the earliest access time (eat) and the latest finish time (lft) are adopted. Now, we formally define time constraints.

