W	s coverage and capacity having reached a high level, providing the high-quality network services for users becomes the primary task of the network operation management. The worst cells having the worst quality are closely related with the network performance. In this paper, a mining model for digging out the worst cells in wireless networks comes up. It uses AHP to determine the index weights and introduces these weights into clustering algorithm. An example has verified its feasibility. Therefore, this model has certain significance on the development and optimization of wireless networks.

Mobile communication is one of the most advanced ways for communication in the world. With its network coverage and capacity having reached a high level, quality, cost and service are more concerned about [1]. How to make the communication network to run at their best and provide users with high-quality network services? They are the primary tasks of the network operation and management. The worst cells have become the key indicators to measure the wireless quality in the mobile communication networks. At present, one of the worst cells optimization problems is how to dig out the worst district efficiently. In the past, people queried the worst cells just to rely on their definition [2], and the results only were the worst cells lists, which couldn t show the extent of their "worst". In this paper, a mining model based on the clustering algorithm is established to query the worst cells. It can not only dig out the worst cells efficiently, but also reflect their "worst" and priorities of time so as to take optimization measures accurately. So we can say that it plays an essential role in the optimization of wireless networks.

The above indexes for the target layers have different importance, in another words, they have different weights. In this paper, use the method AHP (Analytic Hierarchy Process) to determine index weight. The method compare the importance between one index and another one, then establish the corresponding judgment matrix, at lastly, solve the eigenvalue of the matrix [9].

In this model, treat the worst cells as outlier and choose clustering algorithm. Cluster analysis as a quantitative method, gives a more accurate and detailed classification tool on the view of data analysis. K- means is a typical K-means algorithm based on distance, and take the distance as the similarity of the evaluation indicator, which thinks that the closer two objects are, the greater the similarity is. [11] The algorithm considers that clusters are composed of the objects with close distance, and take the Euclidean distance as the similarity measure, so its ultimate goal is to get the compact and independent cluster [4]. The specific approach is shown as follows:

This model is mainly divided into four modules, and respectively is the index module, data module, mining module and the optimization module. The index module is divided into index selection and index weight determination. In the process to determine the index weight, use the method AHP, relying on subjective experience. Data module includes related data collection and processing; Mining module is used to combine the index weight into the data mining algorithm and find out the worst cells promptly and accurately; the optimization module for the worst cells mainly includes the correlation analysis of the performance indexes, then takes the corresponding measures according to the different situations.

According to the clustering results, the cells in cluster 1 have good indicators, cannot be temporarily processed; the cells in cluster 4 have the worst indicators, so they are the worst ones. We need to find out the reasons and process them in time. The "worst" extent of the cells in cluster 2 and cluster 3 is between the cluster 1 s and the cluster 4 s, with different situations, so we need to take various measures to treat them.

The proposed mining model of the worst cells based on clustering algorithm, blending in the index weights, just offers a new idea to dig out the worst cells effectively. To some extent, it has certain significance on the development and optimization of wireless network, but still has a lot of problems. One is that only consider the congestion and interference problems when indicators are selected, but actually there are still many other performance indicators; another one is that K-means algorithm itself has many defects to improve and the method(AHP) has strong subjectivity. Therefore, we still need further studies to optimize and solve the worst cells problems.

