Border criminals and unauthorized immigrants are dramatically increasing within the last few years in globally due to the absence of proper authorization methods at the border locations. Usually, passenger controls done by trained immigration officers who compare the passport and the physical appearance at the border while some of the countries done by automated border control (ABC) systems. ABC is one of the applicable real-world appli- cations of the biometric domain which commonly implements with fingerprint and face (multimodal) biometric authorization. However, selecting an appropriate classification method is a challenging task at the decision- making stage. This paper proposes a novel architecture for multimodal biometric authorization engaged with the multi-agent system (MAS) to come up with the optimal solution by using the co-feature of MAS, such as coordination, corporation, and negotiation features. The experiment was done with four available multimodal datasets, namely, the National Institute of Standard Technology (NIST) multimodal, SDUMLA-HMT multimodal, BANCA and PRIVATE databases have been reported to demonstrate the efficiency of the proposed method. The experimental result delivers an excellent performance comparing with previous ABC systems at the authenti- cation phase and computationally fast.

Biometrics are measures of biological patterns belong to individuals such as fingerprint, iris pattern, voice, and face [1]. Face-biometric and fingerprint can be identified as cost-effective and easy access traits in the biometric domain. It has only become available over the last few years, due to significant advances in the field of computer security [2]. Furthermore, face and fingerprint biometrics do not need to be remembered and cannot be easily lost. This makes it much easier for the user and it cannot be easily stolen or loaned to a friend [3]. Biometric technologies consume those traits and authorize the person for a certain task called biometric authorization systems [4]. There are two types of biometric authentication systems; multimodal and unimodal. Most of the research has been conducted using multimodal systems as it has many improvements over the unimodal systems [4]. Even though there are spoofing attacks on single biometrics, multimodal biometric systems are still placing their strength at the upper level [5]. Passenger flow control using biometric traits can be identified as a significant advancement of the biometric domain [4]. Traditional border control is done by trained immigration officers who compare the passport or travel identity documents and physical appearance of the passenger at the border locations [5]. Rely on the passport face image is a vulnerable factor of the whole authorization process [14]. Due to this loop-hole drugs, frauds, crimes are on the rise in an uncontrollable level. Hence, these threats have severely affected many key sectors in the country, such as national security, finance, and tourism. On the other hand, illegal immigrants are a burning issue in some countries. Therefore, biometrics-based authorization methods are very popular in passenger flow control and significant trend in researchers since the last decade [12].

ABC at the border (e-Gates), is one of the main critical real-world applications in the biometric domain in recent years ([1,8,9]). Howev- er, few biometric traits can be used for automated border controls in border locations stated in the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) [1]. There are several organizations responsible for passenger control at border points such as ICAO, IATA, and CEN. These organi- zations specially ICAO recommend some features of biometric data such

Automated biometric authorization systems are significant advances with engaging the machine learning techniques within the last few years [6]. Even though many classification algorithms deliver high perfor- mance at the research level, there are not reliable results in real-world applications such as time-critical environments with large databases [7]. Obtaining a reliable result from one single classification and implement with real-world applications difficult task as it has influenced other factors. Therefore, combining classifiers (multi-classifiers) are more reliable and widely used [9]. However, the optimal choice of the combination method is another difficult task at the decision-making stage [10]. Simply, finding a fusion method for the final adopted version is a difficult process and there is no chance to change the final output after the fusion process is done. The basic idea is behind the strategy is to reach an optimal solution using different classification techniques. That inbuilt testing strategy is a very important part of the multi-classifier technique and the final decision-making process [17]. The balance between false-positive rate (FPR) and false-negative rate (FNR) is the most critical task among those issues [11]. Our approach is to negotiate a strategy using agent-based architecture and come up with an optimal result.

analysis (PCA) and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) with engaging the multi-agent paradigm to recognize the face (unimodal) and authorize the passenger [13]. However, there are many difficulties in unimodal biometric with a large database in the practical case, hence it was implemented with classical algorithms [6]. To overcome such issues, we proposed a multi-classifier, multimodal, multi-agent-based architecture in this paper. Agents can carry out classification task and a multi-agent concept gives the direction of the final decision of the multi classifier agents [47]. This can be identified as a novel concept to make the decision-making process in biometric authorization systems and it overcomes the inabilities of other combination methods as well as effi- cient handling problems of the fusion [6]. There are many multimodal biometric recognition systems available at the moment to authorize the persons in different real-world scenarios [8]. However, while main- taining optimum results in time-critical applications are considerably difficult (e-Gates) [2]. Combination of fingerprint and face traits are the main ingredient of our research and relatively applicable when

investigate the sensitivity of the classifier. To evaluate the experiment four databases have been used namely: National Institute of Standard Technology (NIST) multimodal dataset [2], SDUMLA-HMT multimodal database [18], BANCA database [42] and PRIVATE database. Two ex- periments have been carried out. One for measure and compare the accuracy with previous fusion models and others for comparison with existing ABC system using private dataset.

The remaining sections of the paper organized as follows. Section 2 describes related works. Section 3 delivers the proposed methodology. Section 4 discusses the design and implementation of hardware. Section 5 discusses the experimental results. Finally, conclusions are drawn in section 6.

[19]. The photo id is widely used in the security domain. Passport of- ficers are highly training people who can compare the photo id and physical appearance at the borders. The researchers concluded that passport officers have poor performance at each level. In some cases,

This section focuses on the proposed multi-agent-based multimodal concept. Multi-agent negotiation strategies are first discussed and then the multi-classifier and base classifier in outline. The system includes main three parts such as face and fingerprint capturing, MAS negotia- tion, and output of the authentication results. First, the images of the face and fingerprints of a passenger is captured. Then the preprocessing is applied to introduce the images to CNN from the captured face images and fingerprints. Then those pre-processed image data is used to detect the identification and authorization of the passengers. The passenger authorization is done by comparing with the previously stored face and fingerprint image data with the currently captured image data using multi-classifiers. In this paper, the selecting a most appropriate result from fusions is done based on a multi-agent method and is the main novelty of this work.

Input interface used for capturing two biometric traits and then preprocessing done before start the classification. Four classifiers have been selected for recognition and verification agents such as Convolu- tional Neural Networks (CNNs) with SoftMax [15], Support Vector Machine (SVM) [34], Linear Regression (LR) [33], and Radom Forest (RF). Comparison of two classifiers done by statistical significance of error mean of classification rate on test data sets. After that, we evaluate fingerprint, iris, and face images are linked together to identify the individuals. All individuals are formally consented to use their bio- metrics to advance research purposes [2]. This data gathered during Nail to Nail Fingerprint Challenge [8] from several hundreds of people. Front angle face images and fingerprints (lift and right) have been selected.

implemented in Australia and Portugal. Both systems have a lot of user comments regarding the flexibility and recognition time on survey re- sults [4]. Furthermore, Spreeuwers et al [28] system commonly known as Frontex, and it was acquiring high costs at the implementing stage as well as higher time delay at authorization [1]. El Mehdi Cherrat et al.

