Central Asian Orogenic Belt is a huge accretionary orogenic belt located between the Tarim Plate, the Siberian Plate and the North China Plate, which is one of the most intensely accretionary regions in the Phanerozoic in the world (Xiao et al., 2003). The Xingmeng orogenic belt belongs to the eastern part of the Central Asian orogenic belt. It is an important suture zone between the North China Plate and the Siberian Plate, mainly located in Inner Mongolia and Northeast China. Since the early Paleozoic, it has undergone a series of evolutionary processes such as the subduction, closure and collision orogeny of the Paleo-Asian Ocean. Among them, the Carboniferous was the period when the tec- tonic activity in this area was relatively active; therefore, constraining the geological tectonic process in this period is of great significance for understanding the evolution of the Xingmeng orogenic belt. However, geochemical indicators often have multiple solutions, because they are often affected by the nature of the magma source area and partial melting degree, and the influence of magma evolution processes such as crustal contamination. Previous studies have usually explored the origin of basalt according to one or several specific traditional geochemical indicators, and these studies often reached different conclusions on the analysis of tectonic background. It is not possible to invert regional tectonic evolution only by using volcanic rock geochemical indicators. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a new method to infer the tectonic setting of basalt more comprehensively.

Machine learning methods have been widely used in earth sciences (Ueki et al., 2017; Zhao et al., 2019). Compared with the traditional geological method, the machine learning method is to establish a training model based on a global database, and then use the model to predict the tectonic setting of the predicted samples in the study area. This method not only considers more variables, but also uses the quantitative tectonic setting probability to measure the qualitative structural environment discrimination problem; so it has more advan- tages over the traditional method.

from all over the world, and established a training model. Then 31 basic carboniferous rock samples from Xingmeng orogen in Inner Mongolia were collected to predict the tectonic setting. The prediction results show that most of the samples are of island arc tectonic setting, and the predicted probability distribution of island arc is between 0.65 and 1. This result provides new evidence for the existence of a ditch - arc - basin system in the Carboniferous of Xingmeng orogenic belt.

In terms of tectonic location, the Xingmeng orogenic belt is located in the southeastern part of the Central Asian Orogenic Belt between the North China Plate and the Siberian Plate, which is an important part of the Central Asian Orogenic Belt. Since the Early Paleozoic, the region has experienced multiple periods of oceanic slab subduction and colli- sion, until the Paleo-Asian Ocean closed (Xu et al., 2018). There are many ophiolitic melange belts developed in the Xingmeng orogenic belt, from west to east, from south to north, the order is Suolunshan-Mandula,

The exposed strata in this area includes the Lower Permian Dashizhai Formation, the Upper Permian Linxi Formation, the Upper Jurassic Manketou Ebo Formation, the Upper Jurassic Manitu Formation, and the Lower Cretaceous Baiyingaolao Formation, etc.. In addition, Carbonif- erous tectonic melanges and Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous granites are also developed in this area. The fault structures in the area are mainly NE - trending and NNE -trending, followed by NW - trending and NNW -trending. The Paleozoic strata in the study area are generally superimposed with different degrees of ductile deformation.

The exposed range of Carboniferous strata is limited, and only a small area of Hongliuyuan Formation is exposed in the southeast corner of the study area. Its lithology is mainly a set of normally deposited clastic rocks intercalated with carbonate rocks and volcanic rocks. The lower part is dominated by volcanic rocks with a small amount of clastic rocks, and the lithology is gray-black basalt, gray-green almond-shaped spilite, light gray-light gray-green rhyolite mixed with gray thin-layered feldspar sandstone and siltstone; the upper part is a a rhythmic depo- sition composed of gravel-coarse sandstone, sandstone, siltstone, etc.

The whole rock composition data used in this paper to train the Random Forest (RF) and Deep Neural Network (DNN) models are extracted from basalt data downloaded from the GEOROC Geochemical Data website http://georoc.mpch-mainz.gwdg.de/georoc/. A total of 28,366 samples of global island arc basalt and rift basalt were obtained. The predicted samples in the study area are all samples of Carboniferous basic rocks (including amphibole, basalt and spilite).

Deep neural network (DNN) is a framework of deep learning. It is a neural network with at least one hidden layer. Similar to shallow neural networks, deep neural networks can also provide modeling for complex nonlinear systems, but the extra layers provide a higher level of abstraction for the model, thus improving the ability of the model. A deep neural network is a discriminant model that can be trained using a back propagation algorithm.

The whole rock composition data used in this paper to train Deep Neural Network (DNN) models are extracted from basalt data down- loaded from the GEOROC Geochemical Data website http://georoc. mpch-mainz.gwdg.de/georoc/. The training sets and prediction sets of deep neural network model and random forest model are consistent.

In recent years, scholars have made a lot of progress and achieve- ments in the research on the evolution of the Xingmeng orogenic belt. However, the evolution of geological structures has become extremely complex in the Xingmeng orogenic belt, due to the possible influence of the superposition and transformation of the Paleo-Asian Ocean, the Mongolian-Okhotsk Ocean and the Paleo-Pacific tectonic domain. Among them, the most controversial issue is the time limit for the closure of the Paleo-Asian Ocean. There are mainly two different views. The first view is that the Paleo-Asian Ocean developed two branches, the south and the north. The north branch subducted NW from the Early Paleozoic to the Late Carboniferous, and then closed gradually; the southern branch developed bidirectional subduction from the Early Paleozoic to the end of the Late Paleozoic and finally closed. (Liu et al., 2017). Some scholars believe that the Paleo-Asian Ocean developed continuously from south to north subduction to the end of the early Triassic and finally formed the Sauron - Sylamulun suture belt (Liu et al., 2006; Xiao et al., 2003; Xiao et al., 2009; Xiao et al., 2015). Although there are disputes over the subduction model, both views show that a trench - arc - basin system existed in the Paleo-Asian Ocean during the Carboniferous period.

during this period, and entered the orogenic belt stage; that is, it was in an extensional tectonic environment (He and Shao, 1983; Shao, 1989; Tang, 1990; Shao, 1991; Tang, 1992; Xu et al., 2014; Zhao et al., 2015; Zhao et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2017). In the newly compiled 1:5000000 International Geological Map of Asia, Ren Jishun et al. Ren Jishun proposed that the Carboniferous Permian volcanic rocks in Central Asia were formed in an extensional rift environment rather than an island arc environment. Therefore, the key to the above debate is whether the ocean was closed, and whether there was still subduction during the

used to train 27 major and trace elements in 5367 basalt samples from island arc tectonic environments and 1187 from continental rift valleys in GEOROC geochemical data. Based on the training model thirty-one basic rock samples from four regions of the Central Asian Orogenic Belt and the Xingmeng Orogenic Belt were used for prediction. Among them, the prediction results in the Dongwuqi area and Keyouzhongqi area of Inner Mongolia show that the island arc probability is relatively high and relatively concentrated, which clearly indicates that these basic rocks have a high probability of forming in the island arc envi- ronment. The Beishan area in southern section of Central Asian orogenic belt also shows a high and uniform island arc probability, indicating that the subduction is probably not over yet, and it is also in the tectonic environment of the island arc. The age of the samples in this paper spans

the early and late Carboniferous period, and the region spans the Xingmeng orogenic belt and the southern section of the Central Asian orogenic belt. This temporal and spatial distribution indicates that there was still extensive subduction in the Paleo-Asian Ocean during the Carboniferous period. Therefore, the results of this paper support the view that oceanic subduction existed in the Paleo-Asian Carboniferous. This is also supported by the following two aspects: 1. More and more research results have confirmed the existence of Carboniferous- Early Permian ophiolite (Xiao et al., 2009), indicating that the Paleo-Asian Ocean still existed in the Carboniferous to Early Permian (Early Mid- dle Permian); 2. The pattern of the late Carboniferous adakite in the Erlian-Hegenshan suture zone indicates that the Paleo-Asian Oceanic Carboniferous-Early Permian was in the process of oceanic subduction and extinction characterized by intra-ocean subduction (Wang et al., 2021).

the eastern segment is relatively late (Xu et al., 2019). The research in this paper has important implications for the subduction age and in- tensity of the eastern and western segments. The predicted area is from west to east, from the Beishan area in the southern part of the Central Asian Orogenic Belt to the Dongwuqi area in Inner Mongolia. and the island arc probability has a downward trend from the early Carbonif- erous to the Late Carboniferous. The island arc probability mainly re- flects the degree of fluid participation in the source area, while the magma source area of continental rift basalt often has less fluid partic- ipation. Therefore, the magmatism in the Beishan area of the southern part of the Central Asian orogenic belt in the Early Carboniferous may have formed in the heyday of subduction, while the Xingmeng orogenic belt in the Late Carboniferous may have been in the late subduction stage to the collision or even the early rifting stage. This temporal and spatial evolution shows that the subduction of the Paleo-Asian Ocean is different from west to east.

settings, and the island arcs probabilities of most of the predicted sam- ples are all between 0.65 and 1. Therefore, it is inferred that the Carboniferous Xingmeng orogenic belt was formed in an active conti- nental margin environment and belongs to the island arc tectonic setting.

