All in all, this study takes the uniqueness of hydrogen-electric motorcycle into account and treats green consumption attitude, perceived risk and perceived value as the antecedent variables. This research attempts to reveal the influence of recognition on perceived risk and perceived value have on the hydrogen-electric motorcycle purchase intention. The result may serve as a reference to the government or relevant industries and researchers for further studies.

The formal survey starts from January to February in 2012 covering the major five urban regions in Taiwan (including Taipei, Hsinchu, Taichung, Tainan and Kaohsiung). The investigated subjects are adults with age above 18. The number of samples for each region is determined proportionally in accords to the regional population. There are 500 questionnaires dispensed in total with 468 responded. There are 431 valid questionnaires after the removal of 37 invalids; the response rate is 86.2%.

direct effect is 0.18. As for indirect effect, the perceived risk (through consumption attitude) has positive influence on purchase intention toward hydrogen-electric motorcycle; the effectiveness is 0.09. Also, perceived value (through consumption attitude) has positive influence on purchase intention toward hydrogen- electric motorcycle; the indirect effect is 0.24. The total effect of perceived value and consumption attitude on hydrogen-electric motorcycle purchase intention are 0.15 and 0.42 respectively.

The hypothesis of the indirect effect of perceived value on hydrogen-electric motorcycle purchase intention (H3) verifies MaCarthy and Shrum (1994) value-attitude-behavior theory. Therefore, perceived value is a determining factor of consumption attitude; the two have positive relationship. In regards to the direct influence of perceived value on hydrogen-electric motorcycle purchase intention (H4), Monroe and Krihnan (1985) states that consumers' perceived value influences hydrogen-electric motorcycle purchase intention. The researches reveal that perceived value has direct influence on purchase decision (Dodds et al., 1991; Agarwal and Teas, 2001). The result supports that perceived value is positively related to hydrogen-electric

In the trend of green consumption and rising waves of the global environmental awareness, government should educate the consumers by broadcasting messages through news and promotion campaigns to communicate its policies. With appropriate plans and policies, a communication mechanism between the government, businesses and consumers in facilitating consumers' trust and understanding. On the other hand, clear rules can be enforced to protect green products, which often have less competiveness with higher prices. After all, consumers are more likely to purchase green products with motivation of competitive price. As time progresses, the supply of recycled materials will increase, therefore vendors will gain more bargain power in negotiation with the suppliers. Green product price is expected to be more competitive with refined cost structure and economic scale. Hence, only if government, businesses and consumers work together, the society may progress toward the sustainable development.

