Internet-of-Things (IoT) has gained quick popularity with the evolution of technologies such as big data analytics, block-chain, artificial intelligence, machine learning, and deep learning. IoT based systems provides smart and automatic framework for the efficient decision making and automation of various task to make human life easy. Meta-heuristic algorithms are self-organized and decentralized algorithms used for solving complex problems using team intelligence. Recently, meta-heuristic algorithms has been widely used for solving a number of IoT based challenges. This paper presents a systematic review of meta-heuristic algorithms used for unfolding the IoT based applications. The broad classification of existing meta-heuristic based algorithms has been documented. Further, the prominent applications of IoT based system using the meta-heuristic algorithms are presented. Moreover, the current research questions are included to illustrate the new opportunities for the researchers. Finally, the current trends in IoT and possible future directions are documented. This paper will provide new directions to the researchers working in the field of meta-heuristic algorithms and IoT based system.

employed till date [5]. The objective of the current study is in three folds. First, a comprehensive overview of algorithms and their usage in various applications have been provided. In the next phase, differ- ent applications of meta-heuristics in IoT based systems is illustrated. Finally, important features of meta-heuristics in IoT, recent trends, challenges, research questions, and improvements to be addressed in future work are mentioned.

The physics based methods are inspired by physical rules present in the universe such as cooling and heating of materials, newtons law of gravity [14,15]. Simulated annealing based algorithms shows different behaviour at different temperature. During the physical process, first it warms the material and then gradually decrease the temperature for decreasing the defects, which reduces the energy of system. Simulated annealing gives better performance in finding the optimal solution. Further, their is no starting point strategy in such algorithms. Some of the popular algorithms in simulated annealing are ray optimization, black hole algorithm [16], gravitational local search algorithm [17], find fix finish exploit analyze [18], electron search algorithm [19], harmony search [20] and shuffled frog leaping algorithm [21]. These algorithms has shown the promising results in dealing with the real world problems. Further, experimentation has been performed to check

The impact of new technologies, especially in urban areas has shown tremendous affect in developing countries. Furthermore, rapid advancement of these technologies has overthrow the time and space that the people are now familiar today [72]. In recent years swarm in- telligence based IoT systems have been introduced in the infrastructural development like smart cities. However, ensuring reliability, security, efficiency, and scalability in smart cities is a challenging task. In these conditions swarm intelligence is a promising techniques which focuses on self organised and collective behaviour of decentralized systems. Smart infrastructures can be modelled by using latest software, digi- tal communication networks, sensors and embedded intelligence. The modern infrastructures are developed, taking care of natural hazards, tornadoes, earthquakes, and floods which causes the severe damages and may lead to destruction of electricity, bridges, and communication systems. To overcome these challenges different algorithms have been proposed for the proper infrastructural development like a parallel military-dog-based algorithm [73] and enhanced grey wolf optimizer algorithm [74]. Further, these algorithms are used to early access the damage and provide the rapid solutions to avoid the substantial damages.

Reasoning: With the current growth of technologies, meta- heuristics techniques has been witnessed as the crucial asset. Optimization is everywhere, from economic to en- gineering design, for planning holiday to internet routing. As time, money, and resources are limited, the absolute utility of these resources are important. As real world optimization problems are non linear, to select an optimal model in not an easier task. Therefore, meta-heuristic helps in solving these computationally complex problems.

Reasoning: Swarm intelligence has been involved with IoT based system. As IoT based systems are complicated, it contains smart objects, SI based decentralized algorithms are preferred to resolve these issues. Therefore, several intelligent SI algorithms can be used to solve these critical issues of IOT based systems because of its device mobility, information provision, dynamic properties, and wireless communication. SI based algorithms such as artificial bee colony, ant colony optimization, and social spider opti- mization has been applied to solve several real world problems in normalizing IoT process.

Reasoning: Analyze the frameworks and technologies adopted from different domains for designing meta heuris- tics algorithms. Design pattern conquer the crucial factors of adopting the key practices in an abstract form. Different computer scientists and researchers has used pattern based perspectives which includes methodological, structural, behavioral, and component-based patterns for designing the optimization algorithms.

financial risk management and its allied sectors smart. How- ever, real time implementation of meta-heuristic with IoT based framework has two significant challenges. Firstly, the lack of professional sensors is the major hurdle to develop smart specially in agriculture sector. Secondly, the lack of networking commu- nication, specially in rural areas affecting the entire system with the unreliable data transfer. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a feasible system for examining the performance of computationally complex problems in different situations.

Functional & interoperability challenges: In the recent times, there is no single organisational structure developed which can handle the dynamic and high dimensional data. Furthermore, during the data transfer several security challenges such as data tampering, wiretapping, and replay attacks may be attempted causing security threat. For getting the best results several factors such as authenticity, data integrity, and confidentiality must be ensured during data acquisition and data transfer. However, some optimization techniques has been developed which can handle some problem up to certain extent. Capital investment in different applications mentioned in the literature may hinder the growth of this industry.

