science in South Africa conducted a series of geochemical surveys that lasted into the early 2000s and are now expanding the survey using modern methods that better cover trace elements and particularly energy-transition and battery metals (Council for Geosciences, 2022). Viewing the GEM program as a prototype, the downstream purpose of the data resulting from these programs seems to be: construction of digital maps; provision of information that may be relevant to assess mineralization potential; and provision of information necessary to make informed decisions on general land use (GEM-GeoNorth, 2022). Depending on the natural landscape of the region being surveyed and the capability of the surveyor, many types of sample media could be available, such as: bulk rock, lake sediment, glacial till and water. Each type of media has its strengths and weaknesses, collection and pro- cessing methodology. A primary decision criterion in choosing sample media is its abundance and accessibility within a target area. For every type of sample media, in general, the resulting data (including legacy data) is produced by applying a highly rigorous and standardized methodology from collection to instrumental analysis. This greatly aids data usage, including data fusion.

This proof-of-concept study uses lake sediment data from the GEM program. Lake sediment geochemical data has been generated for de- cades to explore surficial geology in Canada, because of its good spatial coverage. Re-analyses have to date, produced two fully modernized datasets in 2016 and 2021 respectively: a portion of the southeastern Churchill Province in Labrador (McCurdy et al., 2016); and a portion of the southwestern Churchill Province and Trans-Hudson Orogen in Sas- katchewan (Bourdeau et al., 2021, 2022). Initial sampling was con- ducted in 1978 and 1982 (southeastern Churchill Province), and 1984 and 1986 (southwestern Churchill Province and Trans-Hudson Orogen).

As part of a re-analysis campaign in the 1990s, the southeastern Churchill Province in Labrador area was also re-analyzed. In this fashion, the GEM program intends to re-analyze its collection of lake sediment samples to modernize its surficial geochemical data. However, GEM does not currently make use of predictive prioritization in its program execution in any capacity and targets that may be of interest to a modern economy (e.g., mineral deposits containing critical raw ma- terials) are best prioritized on a partial basis of a-priori knowledge of the geology of target areas (knowledge-driven). To the best of our knowl- edge, there is no geochemical exploration program that is currently performing predictive data generation.

modelling using machine learning. In the past, various machine learning algorithms have been demonstrated to be able to predict elemental concentrations (Zhang et al., 2021a, 2022). In particular, for our pur- pose, machine learning algorithms can be used to model the relation- ships between elements for matching samples in old and new geochemical datasets. The models can then be deployed to infer prob- able concentrations of yet unanalyzed elements in other areas ahead of their actual re-analyses.

graphic areas immediately above or below the unconformity between the basement and Athabasca Group rocks is well known for Athabasca unconformity-type uranium deposits (Jeanneret et al., 2016). Legacy geochemical data for this region similarly did not contain many ele- ments, such as the REEs.

nature of the analyses facilitates the comprehension of sampling and analytical methodologies. This should be as applicable for GEM data as it is for similar data, wherever conditions are met (e.g., fusable legacy and modern datasets). The availability of common standards enables data levelling in the future, where its effects are intolerable. Where the pre- dicted elemental concentration maps are used qualitatively (e.g., to plan re-analysis or sampling campaigns) instead of quantitatively (e.g., to substitute for re-analyses in an exploration campaign or to be used with scientifically reductive methods downstream), quantitative matching of data levels may be unnecessary depending on the application context and the extent of its impacts.

Predictive data generation can play a pivotal role in the moderni- zation of exploration programs by providing probable data in advance of actual data. We have demonstrated that by using legacy data, modern data and leveraging the extensive standardization of data and its gen- eration processes within existing geochemical survey programs, it is possible to generate probable and often quantitatively or qualitatively reliable modern data. In this manner, our proposed method not only extracts additional value from otherwise outdated (legacy) data, but also serves to assist with both upstream data generation and downstream data usage. For exploration geochemistry, the rate-limiting step is data generation. This context is mismatched with the data-hungry and automation capacity of data-driven techniques, which are becoming key downstream consumers of exploration data and can quickly exhaust existing data. In this case, our method serves to enable data users, such as prospectivity mappers, with valuable and timely information that otherwise may be completely absent or may be untimely. This would enable the generation of advanced probable knowledge of target areas. An effect of this advanced knowledge is that it can potentially make future upstream exploration activities, such as data generation more targeted and fit-for-purpose for downstream data analysis. This would obviously facilitate timely resource discoveries, which is important for critical raw materials. Additionally, focusing on targeted areas may lead to the detection of fainter geochemical anomalies, which increases the probability of resource discovery. Although knowledge derived using predicted data is unlikely to be as accurate or selective as those using actual data, the accuracy of predicted data is only likely to improve as more modern data becomes available for training. As data is becoming the currency of digital societies, then in the manner of financial dis- counting, advanced knowledge available now may be worth more than more accurate knowledge that is available later.

The data used in this study are open source and are hosted at the Canadian Database of Geochemical Surveys Portal: https://geochem.nrc an.gc.ca/cdogs/content/main/home_en.htm, an open-source portal managed by Natural Resources Canada (NRCan). The authors would also like to thank two anonymous reviewers for providing insightful comments that have greatly improved the readability and scope of this manuscript. The authors thank Dr. Hua Wang for editorial handling.

