Many frameworks have been proposed for Grid scheduling system. Agents are able to behave autonomously, intelligently, learn from environment, and adaptability. Agent-based Grid scheduling is concerned with the design and development of software agents for the resource discovery, job scheduling, resource management, and allocation of computing resources on a computational Grid. This paper presents a new Agent based Grid scheduling framework which possesses high degree of robustness, performance, efficiency, scalability and heterogeneity.

To achieve this, we need to develop a Grid infrastructure which will be flexible, scalable, and adaptive in nature and will enable dynamic composition of loosely coupled heterogeneous resources. One way of implementing these Grid capabilities is to use multi-agent system. Agents have the ability to adapt themselves according to prevailing circumstances in a Grid environment. Agents also provide services that are robust and scalable. Because of these characteristics agents are the natural choice for achieving our goal. In our research; we propose a framework named Agent-based Robust Grid Scheduling Framework for Grid infrastructure. It will satisfy the efficiency, performance, Quality of Service (QoS) provisioning and robustness objectives.

Grid scheduling is a process of ordering tasks on compute resources and ordering communication between them. It is also known as the allocation of computation and communication over time [6]. Grid scheduling can be divided into two phases. The first stage is the selection of proper resources for job allocation, and the second stage is the placement of jobs onto the selected resource queue for execution [7].

A number of initiatives have been taken to improve the efficiency of computational Grids but this research is still in early development. [10] proposes a resource management system for scheduling jobs on heterogeneous and distributed resources (Nimrod-G). In Nimrod-G, resource agents manage the execution of jobs on resources, and a central resource broker performs the different functions like resource discovery, trading and discovery.

In [11, 12], authors have proposed an agent-based resource management system (ARMS) for Grid computing. In this proposed system; each agent represents a local Grid resource and acts as a service provider for high performance computing power. Agents cooperate and collaborate with each other using a technique of service advertisement and discovery.

effective solution for the efficient utilization of resources. The framework is also a robust one because it handles uncertain runtimes of applications intelligently. However, there are shortcomings with this framework. Firstly, it has not been integrated into any Grid toolkit and so no real-time performance tests have been undertaken. Secondly, it does not support dynamic scheduling.

In [14], a novel multi-agent reinforcement learning method named ordinal sharing learning (OSL) method is proposed for job scheduling in Grid environment. This method has been proposed to resolve the issues of load balancing in computational Grids. The approach supports the scalability issue by using an ordinal distributed learning strategy, and realizes multi-agent coordination based on an information-sharing mechanism with limited communication. Simulation results show that the OSL method can attain the goal of load balancing effectively, and its performance is even comparable to some centralized scheduling algorithm in most cases. The convergence property and adaptability of the proposed method are also explained. But inter-task synchronization, dynamic scheduling and robustness features have not been considered in the proposed method.

[15] proposed an agent-based approach to integrate services and resources. In this proposed approach, service and resource agents contain behavioral rules and can modify these rules based on their interaction with other agents and with the environment in which they operate. In [16] authors also proposed an economic models for resource allocation and to manage supplies and demands in Grid computing environments.

Most of these agent-based Grid scheduling systems are centralized. Grid scheduler agents manage only the execution of jobs on resources. In a true Grid environment, resources are geographically distributed and owned by different parties. It is not practical that a single point in the virtual system retains entire Grid information that can be used for job scheduling.

Grid consumer is the user of the grids. Each consumer needs computational power for execution of their jobs. Consumers belong to various organizations and access the Grid resources in a decentralized way. Each consumer demands computing resources based on nature of jobs. A user job is submitted to the Grid scheduler in the form of application.

This agent partitions user application into several computational tasks depending upon the nature of application, resource demands and resource availabilities. Tasks will be dependent in nature. This agent will be responsible for producing tasks of variable sizes while considering the reliability, robustness and availability of computing resources.

Robustness agent ensures the reliability of job execution. Robustness agent will coordinate with our developed robustness services to ensure the correctness, reliability and completeness of computational task execution. Few robustness parameters such as tasks duration, communication delays will be gathered by the robustness agents to ensure any uncertainties will not affect the task executin.

This layer comprises the core Grid management related services. We will implement our agent oriented robustness services in this layer. These services will be comprised of the agents. Agents will monitor the running of the individual tasks and status of Grid resources. Agents will predict any faults during task execution on a Grid. These services will also influence scheduling the computational tasks in Grid by directly interacting with Robustness agent.

This framework is proposed with the main aim to provide a robust Grid scheduler that can deal with uncertainties in a Grid computing environment. The uncertainties are normally caused by fluctuations in availability of resources, network bandwidth and job demands. Reducing and minimizing uncertainties can contribute to more efficient and effective job computation since jobs are able to be computed and delivered despite the constant changes of Grid environment (due to heterogeneity of resources, jobs and networks).

which three agents working as peers coordinating among them to provide input for Task Control Agent. The advantage of such architecture is that if any of the agents fail to deliver specific results, other agents can still continue to provide input. This is one of the essential features for a robust scheduler.

In this paper, the architecture of an agent-based scheduling framework of the Grid computing is proposed. This framework is based on a hierarchical multi-layer and hierarchical agent-based architecture and is designed to offer a robustness feature to a Grid scheduler. A robust Grid scheduler will compute and deliver jobs effectively and efficiently despite the constant changeability of Grid computational environment such as heterogeneity of jobs, resources and network conditions.

