Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) covers a range of chronic medical conditions varying from hepato- cellular inflammation which characterizes nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) to steatosis, as the key element of a nonalcoholic fatty liver (NAFL). It is globally linked to the increasing prevalence of obesity and other com- ponents of metabolic syndrome and is expected to be the main indication for the existence of the liver disease in the coming years. Its eradication has become a major challenge due to the difficulties in clinical diagnosis, complex pathogenesis and the lack of approved therapies. In this study, an automated image analysis method is presented providing quantitative assessments of fat deposition in steatotic liver biopsy specimens. The meth- odology applies image processing, machine learning and evolutionary algorithm optimization techniques, pro- ducing a 1.93% mean classification error compared to the semiquantitative interpretations of specialized hepatologists.

several studies over the years have shown the importance of automated fat quantification through computer software for the accurate prediction and exclusion of false-positive results. Initially, Zaitoun et al. [3] concluded that Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) is the ideal histological stain for stereological and morphometric steatosis quantification in chronic hepatitis C (CHC) patients. Marsman et al. [4] demonstrated that image analysis systems can successfully automate the determina-

The next step attempts to detect white areas of interest in the segmented binary tissue region, by applying morphological filtering with a circular structural element consisting of a 5-pixel radius value. More emphatically, a morphological opening process within a loop in- creases the radius of the circular mask by 2 pixels in order not only to smooth the boundaries of each filtered object but also to eliminate un- necessary artifacts with a radius of fewer than 5 pixels, which are considered as noise. Thus, only pure circular white structures that characterize fat cells are included. Finally, active contours are once again called upon to detect the boundaries for each filtered circular structure, as well as to calculate a series of histological features for them in the green channel of the initial RGB biopsy image. This extracted feature vector at a later stage leads to the separation of these detected into a series of integers which are mapped onto predefined rules and form the computer program. The mapping procedure from genotype to phenotype is one of many processes mimicking the biological procedure where the same genetic material is utilized in different genes. The goal of GE is to adapt a computer program to an objective function for a specific problem using an iterative evolutionary process. This process is inspired by biology and includes procedures like descent with variation, mutation, crossover, genetic transcription and gene expression. The al- gorithm begins with a set of computer programs named population. The

It is stressed that the proposed GE-based GenClass method has reduced the mean fat ratio up to 0.27% (18.21% compared to 18.48%). The decrease in mean value comes from the fact that tissue findings relating to balloon cells, sinusoids and veins, which in the image

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and its progression to non- alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) are major causes of cirrhosis and he- patocellular carcinoma (HCC) worldwide, eventually leading to end- stage liver disease. The prevalence of NAFLD is determined by the quantitative degree of steatosis (accumulation of fat droplets in the hepatic tissue) without significant necroinflammatory injury, whereas NASH refers to more complex and active lesions ranging from tissue inflammation to hepatocellular ballooning and necrosis [34]. This spectrum of NAFLD and NASH complications prevents the definition of an accurate pharmacological treatment, an obstacle that has led re- searchers to develop automated quantification and staging tools based on image analysis, with histology being the gold standard in recent clinical trials.

Based on the complete methodology, the classification stage presents a 1.93% mean fat quantification error, which indicates the degree of deviation from semiquantitative estimates of physicians in the 28 testing samples. The classification method presents also a smaller mean abso- lute error than the circular structures segmentation stage (2.08%) before their characterization. The following sections further analyze the diag- nostic results, which are then compared with those derived from other classification algorithms.

error (GEerr = 1.93%) compared to the Naive Bayes (NBerr = 2.01%), k- NN (k-NNerr = 2.18%), C4.5 Decision Tree (C4.5err = 2.01%) and SVM (SVMerr = 1.99%) algorithms. It is pointed out that k-NN is the only image   segmentation   method   (Serr   =  2.08%). classifier that produces a larger mean absolute error compared to the

In recent years the medical field has been experiencing a revolution in intelligent diagnostic systems with the advent of deep neural net- works. Deep learning architectures, such as Convolutional Neural Net- works (CNNs) and Autoencoders, have been successfully applied to medical image analysis tasks, as they filter the most informative path- ological structures directly from the image data. As a result, they have also offered innovative solutions in the analysis of NAFLD and NASH pathogens without the necessary inclusion of manual annotations.

