Attaining good quality education is the ideal dream of all learners, institutions and nations across the world Pumilia [6], Meusburger [7]. The United Nations identifies good quality education as the foundation for creating sustainable development, naturally leading to improved quality of life, innovation and creativity. In the modern era where we generate more data than we can process, the issue becomes both a challenge and an opportunity. In a typically academic environment where thousands of multilateral demographic students study multiple modules at different levels, the underlying and resulting data attributes are highly correlated sources of Big Data [8,9]. Just what type of data, how much of it and how fast it changes are questions that researchers have to deal with routinely. A key motivation of this paper is to expand pathways for educationists and researchers in attaining unified efforts to uncover and analyse such factors in interdisciplinary contexts. It is ex- pected that this work will contribute to the work of the Center for Higher Education Data and Statistics (CHEDS) that collects vital educational data for the MoE. CHEDS [10] makes evidence-based decisions, influencing higher education policies and planning at both institutional and national levels. This helps the educational sector to enhance their strengths and ranking in the increasingly competitive world of higher education. Re- ports and analyses will help in advancing students learning experiences and curriculum designs.

the merged clusters as exemplars that maximize the levels of average similarity. By repeated sampling and validation, we shall gain a better understanding of the influential factors in the formation of clusters. In the next exposition, we describe the mechanics of propagated clustering as deployed via Algorithm 1 [8,9]. If we let

Mwitondi K, Munyakazi I, Gatsheni B. Amenability of the united Nations sustainable development goals to Big data modelling. In: International workshop on data science-present and future of open data and open science, 12-15 nov 2018, joint support centre for data science research. Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan: Mishima Citizens Cultural Hall; 2018.

