In dynamic environments, it is difficult to track a changing optimal solution over time. An improved univariate marginal distribution algorithm (IUMDA) is proposed to deal with dynamic optimization problems. This approach is composed of the diffusion model, which uses the information of current population, and the inertia model, which uses the part history information of the optimal solution. After an environment changed, the strategy is changed by a detecting operator to guide increasing the population diversity. Finally an experimental study on dynamic sphere function was carried out to compare the performance of IUMDA and mutation UMDA. The experimental results show that the IUMDA is effective for the function with moving optimum and can adapt the dynamic environments rapidly.

About this problem, the designed aim is that the algorithm must track a changing optimal solution over time when environments are changed. So we must use intelligence optimization algorithm to solve this problems. As the tradition evolutionary algorithms, the continue version of univariate marginal distribution algorithm (UMDA) is one sort of Estimation of Distribution Algorithms and has been applied to many optimization problems [6-7].

attractor, which attracts the other individuals move towards the attractor to find the promising region of the optimum. However in the dynamic environments, when the problem changes at the end of generation t , the next optimal solution may move away from x* (t) . In order to find the new optimal solution, the algorithm needs increase the diversity and search new space which is different from the region presented by current population. That is to say the promising region of optimum is away from x* (t) . If the environment changes at the end of generation t corresponding to the k -th change, the optimal solution of the current population is denoted by x* (t)( x* (t) is the optimal solution of generation t ), it is applied with the following formula to generate new individual xnew .

In dynamic environments, it is important that the optimization algorithm is able to continuously track the moving optimum over time. In this paper, we proposed a new approach algorithm to tackle dynamic environments. The objective of the approach is to increase the diversity in a guide fashion after a change. In a dynamic environment, it will be effective to predict the new optimal position by previous optimal solution.

