restore the healthy expression of genes deregulated by a disease, the drugs with signatures most enriched in disease-related genes should also be the most promising ones in treating such disease. In order to gain this knowledge, an Inverted Gene Set Enrichment Analysis [10] (IGSEA) on the datasets (drug signatures) of LINCS was performed, looking for the disease-related genes under study. For each analyzed dataset, the nor- malized enrichment score and the p-value (estimated comparing the en- richment score with those of a null distribution generated from 100 000 permutations) were computed for measuring the enrichment magnitude and its statistical significance, respectively. The resulted p-values were then corrected for multiple comparison using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure [32], obtaining the FDR. If the dataset was significantly en-

An important aspect in investigating drug combinations is to eval- uate whether the two drug-target modules are overlapped (overlap- ping exposure) or separated (complementary exposure) on the human protein-protein interactome [6]. In the case of overlapping exposure, there is a higher similarity in chemical, biological, functional, and clin- ical profiles. The desired combinations, instead, are those with comple- mentary exposure, both drugs being topologically and pharmacologi- cally distinct. In the latter case, the two drugs synergistically cooperate in treating the disease, yet each one in its own way.

(A) and multiple sclerosis (B). On the horizontal axis, the fold enrichment is shown. The color encodes the negative of the false discovery rate logarithm, and the size represents the gene ratio (computed as the ratio of the percentage of genes in the study set related to a specific term, divided by the corresponding percentage in the background, i.e., the entire human proteome).

respectively. In order to evaluate whether these genes were representa- tive of the investigated diseases, we performed an enrichment analysis on GO and HPO terms. This allowed us to check if the most enriched biological processes, molecular functions, cellular components and phe- notypes were in accordance with previous knowledge.

In order to evaluate the impact of a drug on the disease, we examined the effect of its administration on the expression of the disease-related genes in relevant cell lines (see Methods). We pursued this objective by performing an Inverted Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (IGSEA) on 896 drugs, observed in 6 212 LINCS expression datasets for HD and 960 drugs in 5 579 datasets for MS. This analysis resulted in 843 and 600 significantly enriched drugs, for HD and MS respectively.

Unfortunately, only a small portion of the proximal drugs has data in the LINCS database (21.9% for HD and 13.7% for MS). Even though the IGSEA analysis increases the reliability of the results, it dramatically reduces the number of molecules that can be investigated and possibly proposed. This has to be taken into account when evaluating the out- comes of the study.

Selisistat was found to be safe, well tolerated, and capable of reach- ing a plasma concentration compatible with the SirT1 inhibition, which has been shown to restore transcriptional dysregulation in models of HD [48]. Lisuride is able to induce a temporary yet significant improvement in the motor performance of patients with hyperkinesia caused by HD [49]. Valproic acid was shown to be a possible alternative treatment for HD patients suffering from myoclonic hyperkinesia [50]. Risperidone of the inspected drugs, color coded from blue (no separation) to red (strongly separated). The upper-right portion, instead, displays the kind of exposure: violet if overlapping and green if complementary. At the leftmost part, the ATC codes of the drugs are reported along with a dendrogram of their hierarchical clustering.

A complete characterization of all available drugs and human pro- teins is surely not at hand, and this has repercussions on many aspects of the study, like, e.g., the human protein-protein interactome con- struction, drug association to biological processes, cellular components, molecular functions and phenotypes, and drug induced gene expression profiles retrieval. Only sometimes, this issue could be partially mitigated by an extensive integration of data from a wider variety of databases. Noteworthy, puzzling examples could be the drug-target association and the availability of expression data in LINCS. The number of targets as- sociated to a specific drug could considerably depend on the amount of research carried out on that medicine rather than on the actual bi- ological interactions it has. This influences the drug-disease proximity evaluation. Additionally, as stated above, the LINCS database does not provide expression profiles for all the drugs selected by network prox- imity, limiting by far the choice space for drug repurposing.

Here, we extended an unsupervised computational framework for drug repurposing with a network-based analysis for screening the pos- sible drug combination therapies. Applying this pipeline to HD and MS, we identified several repurposable drug candidates, some of which have already been studied in humans. Eventually, we ended up with 138 po- tential drugs for HD and 38 for MS. Their plausible combinations are numerous, but this work can help to prioritize them. While these re- sults are exploratory and should be experimentally verified before fur- ther consideration, they could provide valuable clues for improving the management of HD and MS.

