Neural network was also applied to predict CO2 solubility in ionic liquids (Baghban et al., 2015). Using 728 experimental data from 14 different ionic liquids, a solubility model was built as a function of the critical properties of the pure components, pressure and temperature. The network correlation coefficient was R2 = 0.9336, better than the ones obtained using PR-EOS (Robinson and Peng, 1978) (R2 = 0.7323) and the SRK-EOS (Soave, 1972) (R2 = 0.6989). Baghban et al. (2016a,b) developed several models to predict air dew point and hydrate formation in different scenarios. The enthalpy of vaporization of pure substances based on its boiling temperature, specific gravity and the molecular weight was also modeled using neural networks (Eghtedaei et al., 2019). Artificial intelligence can be trained with a particular numerical reservoir model generating a proxy that is much faster to evaluate. This proxy model is used to optimize production alternatives and to evaluate uncertainty through Monte Carlo simulations, where thousands of runs are needed to achieve satisfactory results (Mohaghegh et al., 2012; Ala- keely and Horne, 2021b). Multiphase flow rate in producing wells can be estimated using deep learning techniques (Tian and Horne, 2017; Li et al., 2019; Alakeely and Horne, 2021a). These artificial intelligence

methods are trained using the production history, and are accurate enough to be used in real-time monitoring tools. A Physics-Informed Neural Network (PINN) can be used to create a meshless reservoir model that can provide accurate results in higher dimensional problems when compared to traditional simulation techniques (Cheung et al., 2018; Coutinho et al., 2021, 2022; Almajid and Abu-Alsaud, 2022).

Wang et al. (2019a,b) created a neural network model to predict the bubble point of hydrocarbon mixtures and provide an initial guess for the two-phase flash algorithm. The total reservoir simulation time was reduced in 30%, mainly because the stability test algorithm was replaced by the comparison between the cell pressure and the bubble point pre- dicted by the neural network.

solution, and reducing the number of flash iterations. On the other hand Wilson correlation provides poor estimates at high pressures causing divergence when applied directly in the flash algorithm. Note that there is a discontinuity in the calculations using the stability test.

Gas injection is a recovery process of liquid hydrocarbons that changes the global composition of the reservoir fluid. It increases nu- merical simulation complexity because of the mass transfer. For example, the composition and pressure variation in small cells close to injection well may change the phase from oil to gas in one time step. So, it is necessary to perform the stability test every time step using liquid-like and vapor-like estimates.

