Maintenance of appropriate hydration status can be crucial during endurance exercise. While excessive dehydration has been associated with an impairment of exercise performance, exercise-associated overhydration and hyponatraemia can lead to loss of consciousness and be life-threatening (Sawka et al., 2007; Noakes et al., 2005).

Following approval by the relevant institutional research ethics committee, raw data were obtained from 4 separate field studies (Singh and Peters, 2013; Tam et al., 2009; Tam et al., 2011; Rose and Peters, 2010) and 3 separate laboratory studies (Pillai, 2009; Cheuvront et al., 2010; Cheuvront et al., 2013).

All variables were analysed using SPSS version 19 software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, Ilinois). Bivariate correlation analyses were used to determine the relationship between the various physiological and environmental factors and post-exercise hydration status. Statistical significance was accepted at the 0.05 level.

Randomisation of the classification and prediction model datasets as well as the designing, validation and testing of the ANN models were achieved using MATLAB (R2011b, The Mathworks, Natick, Massachusetts). All possible combinations of the input variables were used to create classification and prediction models using feed forward multilayer perceptron (MLP) and radial basis function (RBF) ANNs with single hidden layers. The classification and prediction test data sets were used to assess the performance of the classification and prediction ANN models, respectively.

In 87% of the classification models (n=13), MLP networks were superior to the RBF networks, producing lower values of mean squared error (MSEval), and higher correlations (r), sensitivities, specificities and AUC. The best performing model was an MLP network with 5 neurons in the input layer, 19 tansig neurons in the hidden layer and 1 linear neuron in the output layer. Taking as inputs fluid intake (FI), environmental stress index (ESI), exercise intensity (EI), gender (G) and body mass (BM), this model had the lowest MSEval (0.09) and it resulted in the highest AUC (0.89) and correlation (r=0.78) between actual hydration status of the athletes in the test data set and the estimated hydration status generated by this model.

The MLP estimation models performed better than the RBF networks in 80% of the cases (n=12), by producing lower MSEval, coefficient of variation (CVRMSE) and larger coefficient of determination (R2). The input variables to the best performing model were ESI, EI, G and BM. This was an MLP network with 4 input neurons, 10 tansig neurons in the hidden layer and 1 linear neuron in the output layer. When comparing the fluid estimates generated by this model with the fluid intake of athletes in the test data set, in comparison to the other models, this had the highest R2 (0.80), lowest RMSE (0.24 L.h-1) and CVRMSE (42.20%).

When athletes drink ad libitum, they have been shown to replace no more than 75% of their total water losses (Cheuvront and Haymes, 2001). As the currently existing hydration models designed for athletes, are based on complete replacement of the sweat output and total water losses are primarily made up of sweat when exercising in the heat, these existing models therefore provide an exaggerated estimate of fluid intake of athletes. Instead of estimating sweat rate alone, we used the complete set of physical, performance, training and environmental variables, to both classify the hydration status of athletes and predict their fluid intake using the ANN.

This study supports 3 of the factors regarded as primary factors governing fluid loss during exercise identified by previous studies viz. body mass, exercise intensity and ambient temperature (Cheuvront et al., 2002). However, the filtering algorithm applied to the input data set as well as the results of the ANN modelling technique identified gender as a fourth primary determinant of fluid intake needs in endurance athletes. Physiologically this could be attributed to the fact that women typically have lower sweating rates and electrolyte losses than men due to their smaller stature and lower metabolic rates when performing the same task as men.

