Artifacts in migrated seismic data can be caused by acquisition ge- ometry, noise or non-primary wavefields in the data, the migration al- gorithm itself or errors in the velocity model. Abma et al. (2007) discuss artifacts generated by the Kirchhoff migration algorithm and the effects of irregular azimuth distributions and holes in the acquisition. Aliasing and non-uniform sampling both cause artifacts during seismic data processing. Other sources of errors are listed in Ongkiehong and Huizer (1987), who state that the most important error in seismic acquisition is the error due to binning as a correction for non-uniform sampling. Although Kirchhoff migration will accept irregularly spaced traces, ar- tifacts occur when the sampling is not regular in all dimensions. The obvious solution is to acquire more data, but this is not always practical or economical. Nemeth and Schuster (1999) discuss how least-squares migration can help reduce Kirchhoff migration artifacts due to irreg- ular sampling. At the time, this was prohibitively expensive and

Apart from expensive solutions (improved sampling, least-squares migration), there are cheaper processing solutions to remove migra- tion artifacts. Hale (2011) proposed a structure-oriented bilateral filter to handle migration noise. Masjukov and Shlyonkin (2015) propose a 6D filtering approach to suppress migration artifacts based on a dip decomposition in common offset volumes and a semblance-type mea- sure computation via offset for all constant dip-gathers. Lou and Simp- son (2019) present a dip filter consistent with the local velocity model in VSP migration, which preserves true dip structures and suppresses migration artifacts.

actually correlations), the overview given by Dumoulin and Visin (2018) will benefit the reader that is interested in the practical details. The original U-net was used for segmentation of biomedical images and has been used in geophysical segmentation applications such as salt seg- mentation (Shi et al., 2019), first break picking (Yuan et al., 2020), diffraction recognition (Markovic et al, 2022) and reflection-diffraction separation (Zwartjes and Yoo, 2022).

We apply our workflow to migrated common offset sections or sim- ply to the pre-or post-stack migrated stack, where reflections resemble local geology and migration artifacts have an upward convex hyperbolic shape. The aim is to train a neural network that finds and extracts the hyperbolic migration artifacts and suppresses the smoothly varying background reflectivity. In essence, this means that we are following the same philosophy as Fomel et al. (2007), who aimed to remove the smooth reflection data with plane-wave destruction filters for separation (downward convex) diffractions from the migrated common offset sec- tions. The advantage of the deep neural networks is that they are much more powerful than plane-wave destruction filters in performing this task, provided we are able to create a diverse enough training dataset. The novelty of our approach is that all synthetic events are network that also tends to predict steep slopes as migration smiles sig- nals, even where they actually originate from reflections. To overcome this, we added additional characteristics of migration smiles to the synthetic data. The additional characteristics for the smile are (1) a weak amplitude relative to the reflection, (2) and a location of the apex tangential to the reflection. We hypothesized that a signal can be considered a migration smile when it has these two features plus the upward convex hyperbolic shape. In our training dataset the migration smile aperture and amplitude are varied randomly but consistent with these assumptions.

Conventional techniques for separation of migration smiles can be computationally expensive and difficult to parameterize. A workflow based on deep learning can be a simple and fast alternative, but a common challenge with deep neural networks is generalization to data different form the training dataset. A conventional approach to create training data is to use physics-based modelling, followed by an actual migration, in order to create physically realistic migration smiles. We feel that this is not helpful for generalizing beyond the training data, because this approach provides, by design, a dataset that is limited in variation. For example, wavefield modelling is performed with a single, fixed wavelet which explicitly limits the variation in the data. To miti- gate this lack of diversity one would have to repeat the modelling with many different wavelets. However, this conventional modelling work- flow is computationally demanding due to the finite difference based wavefield modelling and seismic migration algorithms used. In practice this means that it becomes prohibitively expensive to create a diverse training dataset, which runs counter the argument that deep learning can provide a simple and fast alternative.

hyperbolae generated with various wavelets, amplitudes and fre- quencies, we have trained the network to deal with migration smiles at near and far offsets. By mixing various narrow and wide hyperbolae within the same training example we have in fact deviated from what is physically realistic, but this appears to have a positive effect on the generalization of the network. This approach is also taken in other machine vision problems, where it is observed that non-physical dis- tortions applied to the input data, such mixing of different images, geometric transformations and random erasing of samples, actual help make the trained neural network better in predicting in data that was not used during training.

