At present, the planning of transmission lines mainly relies on human decision-making and lacks intelligence. This paper combines the advantages of GIS in processing spatial data with the advantages of genetic algorithm to explore the optimization method of transmission line planning. The combination of GIS and genetic algorithm can minimize the interference of human factors and quickly solve the path planning problem of transmission lines. According to the theoretical model of genetic algorithm, this study constructs the transmission line opti- mization model based on genetic algorithm, and realizes the Add-ins plug-in development of the transmission line planning model based on genetic algorithm with the help of C # language. Taking 500 kV overhead

Genetic algorithm is a method to search the optimal solution by simulating the natural evolution process. This algorithm converts the solving process of the problem into the process of crossover and muta- tion of chromosome genes in similar biological evolution, and can quickly obtain better optimization results when solving complex combinatorial optimization problems. Therefore, it is widely used in optimal transmission, path planning and other fields.

condition of transmission line construction, which automatically gives the reasonable planning of power grid transmission lines in short dis- tance [11]. The grid value searched by this scheme is converted from the cost index, which will change with the change of geographical and time conditions, and is uncertain, so there are shortcomings. This study will consider the geographical conditions of natural formation (such as topography, rivers and lakes, nature reserves, floating ice, meteorology, seismic belt, etc.) and social conditions of artificial formation (such as transportation, land use types, regional planning, etc.). These factors determine the difficulty of reasonable planning of power grid path and the construction cost of transmission lines. The shortest path is not necessarily the most reasonable path, and seeking the most reasonable path is the purpose of this study.

algorithms of power grid line planning experiments are carried out. One group only considers the single factor cost of traffic. The other group considers the comprehensive cost after the superposition of multiple influencing factors, and uses the genetic algorithm model constructed in this paper and Dijkstra algorithm in ArcGIS to plan the transmission line path. It is concluded that the path optimized by genetic algorithm is the best when considering various factors.

Transmission line path planning area is divided into grids. In the area, the influence factors involved are transformed into cost to repre- sent, and the influence degree of each influence factor is determined. After superposition, the cost value falls into each grid, so that all grids in the planning area have grid values.

these genes are chromosomes or individuals to be solved. Due to the complex conditions and large amount of calculation involved in solving transmission lines, the genetic operator will be designed by a knowledge-based operator. The operator is not only a numerical expression but also carries spatial and attribute information, so the floating-point coding method is used to encode genes. Floating-point coding is easy to design knowledge-based genetic operators for special problems, and can deal with decision variables with complex con- straints. It can represent a larger number, obtain higher precision values, and improve the efficiency of the algorithm.

as the problem of minimizing the total cost of the line, and the influence factors involved are transformed into cost to represent. The cost value is dropped into each grid, and the points along the line are selected ac- cording to a certain accuracy (the model is selected according to the grid size of the layer) to obtain the cost value of the grid corresponding to the point. The grid cost value carried by these points is the grid cost passed by the line, and the sum of points is the total cost of the line. The lower the total cost of the line, the better the target. According to the principle of the lowest total line cost, the fitness function is defined as:

ted. A pair of individuals are randomly selected at each time, and then the two individuals are allowed to compete. The better individuals enter the next generation, and the inferior individuals are directly eliminated. This not only ensures that the better individual can be inherited, but also retains the diversity of the population, and it is easier to evolve to the

influence factor obtained after preprocessing. According to the existing research, when the DEM resolution is 150 m, the calculation time effi- ciency is higher and the loss of terrain information is less [15]. There- fore, the grid resolution of each layer is set to 150 m.

When only the single factor of traffic is considered, the results ob- tained by either genetic algorithm or Dijkstra algorithm are not ideal. Therefore, we need to establish a comprehensive and objective evaluation system. Under the premise of synthesizing many factors, the algorithm is applied to optimize, so as to obtain the reasonable results as far as possible.

The transmission line optimization model based on genetic al- gorithm is designed. According to the structural characteristics of genetic algorithm, the floating-point coding method is used to design the appropriate genetic operator, and the planar linear model of transmission line is constructed after considering the generation mode of initial population and the fitness function. Develop the Add-ins plug-in. With the help of C # language, a plug-in that can realize the optimization function of genetic al- gorithm is developed.

