This research and development of office automation systems, has been successfully applied to the actual good results, the system e-mail, process management, information dissemination, project management, remote office and other functions, greatly improving the level of internal management and office efficiency, has a broad application prospect. The reason it occupies such an important position in the field of commercial office. In addition to the workflow itself has perfect control, a powerful database replication technology and other factors, another important reason is that it provides advanced and reliable security mechanism. Focused on several security technology used in Lotus Domino / Notes.

Based on Lotus Domino / Notes office management information system "is an application in the College office management information systems, system architecture for the B / A / S three-tier architecture, the main technology: front-end using the browser Browser, (such as IE 6.0); application layer based on the Lotus Domino / Notes R5.0.8, integrated LotusScript, Java, SQL JavaScript technology; database service layer using SQL Server2000. The business logic of the system structure, including data management, application control layer and user interface layer of three parts.

Note: secretary of general administration office is authorized to: modify document, edit document No., confidentiality, degree of urgency, Principal receivers, carbon copy, report, subject terms etc.; staff in print room is authorized to: typeset documents, edit document No., confidentiality, degree of urgency, principal receiver, carbon copy, report, subject terms etc.

Two-way design is employed at four steps. Two-way design means the relevant procedures are reversible and you can repeat your operation between one step and its previous step or next step, which offers a chance for improvement and coping unexpected changes. In the work flow, sectary of general administration office is the central link, because he/she is responsible for document issuing management. Because of this two-way design, sectary of general administration office is able to cope with all rising problems in document issuing flexibly in accordance with work demand.

