best models were implemented in the publicly available BeeToxAI web app (http://beetoxai.labmol.com.br/). The outputs of BeeToxAI are: toxicity predictions with estimated confidence, applicability domain estimation, and color-coded maps of relative structure fragment contributions to toxicity. As an additional assessment of BeeToxAI performance, we collected an external set of pesticides with known bee toxicity that were not included in our modeling dataset. BeeToxAI classification models were able to predict four out of five pesticides correctly. The acute contact toxicity model correctly predicted all of the eight pesticides. Here we demonstrate that Bee- ToxAI can be used as a rapid new approach methodology for predicting acute toxicity of chemicals in honey bees.

provides both a short and long-term strategy to assess the risks posed against honey bees by pesticides [16]. These animals can be exposed to pesticide residues by indirect contact on plant surfaces, via oral intake with contaminated water or food, or by direct contact during their ap- plication in standard farming practice. If the proposed use pattern of a pesticide indicates a possible exposure of honey bees, acute contact and oral toxicity studies are necessary for pesticide registration [16].

Hence, this manuscript describes the development and application of an easily accessible, open-source, public-facing web application (Bee- ToxAI: http://beetoxai.labmol.com.br/) to democratize access to these predictive QSAR models for a wide range of stakeholders, including reg- ulators, regulated industry, research scientists, and the public. BeeToxAI is the first web app for the prediction of acute contact and oral toxicity in honey bees fully compliant with the stringent predictive modeling practices [35] and OECD guidelines [31].

Classificatory QSAR models: (i) if duplicates presented discordance in toxicological outcomes (e.g., toxic vs nontoxic), both entries would be excluded; and (ii) if the reported outcomes of the duplicates were the same, one entry would be retained in the dataset and the other excluded. After duplicate removal, the contact exposure dataset had 382 compounds (toxic: 112, nontoxic: 269), while the oral exposure dataset had 169 compounds (toxic: 71, nontoxic: 98).

QSAR models were developed using the Support Vector Machine (SVM) [63] and Random Forest (RF) [64] algorithms implemented in Scikit-learn v.0.24.2 [65]. Since the performance of ML is closely related to its hyperparameters, the models were optimized using a Bayesian ap- proach implemented in Scikit-Optimize v.0.7.4 [66]. Details of hyper- parameters explored in this work are available in the Supporting Infor- mation. The Bayesian optimization may be defined as follows: sualize the fragments and atoms contributing to acute contact and oral toxicities. Here, the "weight" of an atom was considered as a predicted- probability difference (classification models) or pLD50 difference (re- gression models) obtained when the bits in the fingerprint correspond- ing to the atom are removed. Then, the normalized weights were used to color the atoms in a topography-like map in which green indicating negative contribution for toxicity (i.e., predicted probability or pLD50 in- creases when the bits are removed), and red indicating a positive contri- bution for toxicity (i.e., predicted probability or pLD50 decreases when the bits are removed) [73].

On the other hand, for the datasets to develop regression models, af- ter data curation and duplicate removal, the contact exposure dataset had 218 compounds while the oral exposure dataset had 142 com- pounds. After splitting the datasets into modeling (80%) and external (20%) sets, 174 compounds of the contact dataset were used for the model development and 44 compounds were used to validate the mod- els. In the same manner, 114 compounds of the oral dataset were used for model development and 28 compounds were used to validate the models.

MCC = 0.78) showed higher performance compared with those gen- erated by Como et al. (ACC = 0.84, MCC = 0.67) [37], Venko et al. (ACC = 0.77, MCC = 0.48) [38], Wang et al. (ACC = 0.83, MCC = 0.59) parisons should not be interpreted rigorously, as different compositions and sizes of the training and test sets were used to build models. In ad- dition, Carnesecchi et al. [30]. developed externally predictive QSAR models to assess the acute contact toxicity of mixtures to honey bees

also showed predicted probability values, which are useful for estimat- ing the confidence of classification outcomes [70]. When a compound is classified as toxic by acute contact or oral toxicity classification model, then the prediction by the respective regression model is activated and the predicted LD50 is displayed on the screen. All predictions are fol- lowed by the AD estimates and mechanistic interpretation using color- coded maps of fragment contribution [72,73]. For the maps, atoms or fragments promoting positive toxicity contributions are highlighted in red, while structural moieties decreasing the toxicity are highlighted in green. Also, the predicted pLD50 is shown on the respective contribution map.

Furthermore, BeeToxAI provides the user with the following out- comes: (i) toxic/nontoxic classification for acute contact toxicity and acute oral toxicity honey bees endpoints; (ii) confidence of the pre- dictions; (iii) applicability domain estimation; and (iv) color-coded contribution maps illustrating the relative contribution of chemical fragments for toxicity. The web app, designed to openly share the aforementioned predictive models, is freely available to the public at http://beetoxai.labmol.com.br/. We propose these models as a valu- able contribution to the scientific community that enables regulators and regulated companies to rapidly evaluate the risk of chemical harm to honey bees (Apis mellifera) for the registration of the new pesticides. Future directions of the BeeToxAI include the implementation of Quan- titative Activity-Activity Relationships (QAAR) [102], Mode of Action (MoA) predictors, multi-task (species) models, and read-across (nearest neighbors) [23]. In this context, the ongoing BeeToxAI project aims to implement new predictive models to assess the acute toxicity of active ingredients and mixtures [30] against multiple stages (adult and larvae) of honey bees and bumble bees.

The authors declare the following financial interests/personal rela- tionships which may be considered as potential competing interests: Rodolpho C. Braga is CTO of InsilicAll. The remaining authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal re- lationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

The authors appreciate the financial support from the Brazilian fund- ing agencies, CNPq, FAPEG, FAPESP, and CAPES. We gratefully ac- knowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporation with the donation of the Titan Xp GPU used for this research and ChemAxon for providing us with an academic license for their software. The authors gratefully thank Ms. Zoe Sessions for her kind help with editing the manuscript.

Carnesecchi E, Toma C, Roncaglioni A, Kramer N, Benfenati E, Dorne JLCM. Integrating QSAR models predicting acute contact toxicity and mode of ac- tion profiling in honey bees (A. mellifera): data curation using open source databases, performance testing and validation. Sci Total Environ 2020;735:139243. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.139243.

