Blockchain implementation in agriculture has begun. Blockchain is recognized as an emerging technology in the agri-foods industry which may provide an efficient and robust mechanism for enhancing food traceability and a transparent and reliable way to validate quality, safety, and sustainability, of agri-foods. However, the technology is in its nascency, therefore, this review was written to foster discussion and encourage the application of blockchain technology, especially in the agri-food industry. In this review, the working principle of blockchain for data recording and tracking is briefly described. The collaboration models for the current blockchain applica- tions on agri-foods are summarized. Furthermore, the specific utilization of blockchain to enhance safety and quality of agri-foods is discussed in four aspects: enhance the data transparency, realize data traceability, improve the food safety and quality monitoring, and reduce the cost of financial transactions. A case study on a Walmart pork traceability system has been provided to demonstrate how blockchain may be used to enhance the food traceability. Finally, challenges and future trends of blockchain technology in agri-foods concerning data/cost management, data security, and data integration are discussed. Blockchain technology reveals a promising approach to foster a future of agri-foods system in a way that is safer, healthier, more sustainable, and reliable.

The safety of agri-foods is of paramount importance for global food distribution. Safety issues may arise for agri-foods during the pre/ post-harvest processing and production (Lin et al., 2018). For example, during pre/post-harvesting, the quality/safety of agri-foods may be compromised by, excessive use of pesticides, fertilizers with additive chemicals, or heavy metal residues caused by irrigating with wastewa- ter (Tse et al., 2017). During production, the quality/safety of agri-foods may be compromised by, the adulteration of inferior products, inten- tionally mislabeling the origin of a food product, mislabeling the production and/or expiration date, and the like. Most often, these safety issues are caused by the lack of an efficient monitoring or tracking sys- tem and pose a great threat to the health of human beings. We are not guaranteeing that blockchain technology is a panacea for all these

Blockchain represents an emerging technology in the field of agri- foods, which may improve the safety and quality of agri-foods and transform many aspects of the agricultural industry. This review seeks to define blockchain technology and provides a comprehensive analysis of blockchain technology applications in the agriculture-foods area. The current model for implementing blockchain in the agri-foods industry is summarized, case-studies representing diverse applications of blockchain technology are discussed, and the opportunities and chal- lenges of blockchain in the food industry are presented. The information presented in this study would contribute a better understanding of how blockchain technology could be implemented in agri-foods to realize a better performance of food safety, quality, and sustainability.

The name Blockchain was first introduced in 2008 to describe the distributed ledger technology underlying Bitcoin. Briefly, Bitcoin is a type of virtual currency for digital transections, which bypasses the need for intermediaries (e.g. banks, payment gateways, etc.) (Tripoli and Schmidhuber, 2018). The main problem solved by Blockchain tech- nology is bypassing the need for trusted third parties (e.g., banks, insur- ance companies, etc.) by building a trustless decentralized ledger which enables secure peer-to-peer (P2P) transactions based on cryptographi- cally secure methods such as Hash functions (Steiner et al., 2016).

unique hash value (consisting of a string of numbers and letters) is assigned to the transaction. At the same time, the validity of each trans- action must be approved or checked by other computing systems exe- cuting the blockchain protocol (also referred to as nodes), and if a transaction is changed, the nodes are able to detect the change by read- ing the hash value. Once approved, the transactions can be stored in a block of the blockchain. As each block includes both a hash value for its contents, as well as the hash value of the immediately preceding block, a chain of blocks is thus formed, and a change in the contents of any previously recorded block would change the associated hash value for the block and thus break the chain. The contents of blocks are no longer changeable once they are uploaded to the blockchain. However, new blocks can be appended to the blockchain to incorporate further transactions since blockchain can update itself periodically (e.g., every 10 min).

proactive contributors to bettering the food system as a whole (Trust). IBM has built specialized modules for particular use cases. The Trace module provides the ability for supply chain participants to trace food products from upstream sources to downstream destinations. The de- tailed tracking information provided by the trace module gives consumers and partners access to a history of agri-foods products' origin and destination. The Data Entry and Access modules provide the ability to upload, manage, and access data to the blockchain. The Certification module provides an easy way to manage the entire supply chain. All the modules can strengthen brand trust, increase supply chain effi- ciency, and improve food safety. Moreover, blockchain technology may enable instant food recalls by designating the original contamina- tion in the food supply chain, which could result in greater consumer confidence in the quality and safety of food products (IBM, 2019).

Many food companies have collaborated with IBM to increase food safety by developing tracing systems. Each step in the life of a food prod- uct, including where a particular food product was produced and where/how the food product was processed, may be recorded via blockchain, enabling the consumers to be better informed regarding the food products they consume, as well as preventing unsafe foods from being consumed. The companies currently developing such systems are generally large-scale enterprises or raw ingredient supply companies, such as Walmart, Carrefour, Nestle, Tyson Foods, Kelloggs, Raw Seafood Inc., etc. (Armonk, 2017).

as temperature, time, relative humidity, are recorded automatically via sensors. The worker needs to manually enter the product information and other relevant information, such as production date, time, location, and packaging information and food safety data, such as temperature, grade assigned by an inspector, or any other lab results. During the transportation, all the vehicles are installed with sensors that can test temperature and relative humidity during shipment, the alarm system will help to correct if conditions exceed established thresholds. The change of locations and shipping details have been monitored by global position systems (GPS). Similarly, geographic information systems (GIS) have been successfully applied to tracing crops (Qu et al., 2007).

One example of how blockchain technology may beneficially impact food quality is provided by the mango pilot program in the United States. The mango pilot program monitors the quality or maturity of mango slices during international transportation from Mexico using blockchain technology (Kamath, 2018). This can be applied to other fresh fruits that have perishability issues during production and trans- portation. The environmental factors (temperature, moisture), and the quality-related characteristics, such as appearance (color, size, etc.), physical damages (bruise, etc.) or biological damages (worms, etc.) will be critical for monitoring or estimating the quality of supply.

Blockchain technology can realize rapid and real-time payments for agricultural financial services, and thus, reduce the transaction costs and risks while increasing cash flow and working capital (Tripoli and Schmidhuber, 2018). Blockchain technology, such as Ripple, can be used to solve the problem of cross border payments. Since Ripple uses virtual currency, such as Bitcoin and Ethereum for financial transactions, Ripple has drawn much attention from both investors and developers in the past 10 years. The use of cryptocurrency on a blockchain network as a uni- versal currency for use in the agri-foods supply chain can greatly reduce exchange fees among different currencies, transaction fees, and time.

In 2016, the retail giant Walmart established the Walmart Food Safety Center in Beijing and invested $25 million to build global food safety using IBM's blockchain solution (Kamath, 2018). Proof of concept (POC) and blockchain pilots have been established for two products: mango slices, and fresh-cut pork products, in the U.S. and China, respec- tively (IBM, 2017). Because of the differences between these two coun- tries, different information is used in each system. One difference between the pork pilot and mango pilot is that the pork pilot focuses more on product traceability within the nationwide. In the mango pilot, the product traceability is international due to the transitional transpor- tation of mango products between Mexico and the United States, also, the quality or maturity of the mango slices is the focus. While in China, Chinese consumers are more interested in the source of the products, and thus the location for pork production is recorded. In this review, we will discuss the Walmart pork traceability system in China.

China is the world's largest pork importer and producer, with an an- nual pork consumption of 12.7 million tons (Gale, 2017). Several scan- dals have occurred in China, challenging the public's perception of the quality and reliability or indicated origin of the pork products, such as water-injected pork, or pork products contaminated with clenbuterol, a banned drug that causes pigs to shed fat (Leng et al., 2019). For these reasons, Chinese consumers are eager to know the provenance of the meat products, and the inspection information during the pro- cessing steps. However, due to the lack of regulation and quality inspec- tions, the source and the quality of most pork products are not easy to monitor. Therefore, there is an urgent need to increase meat quality and safety during the pork production process. Blockchain technology

Tracking factor identification: the first step is to identify the factor for traceability. This is likely to the critical control point in Hazard analysis and critical control point (HACCP). At this early stage, the source of the products or the inspection information during the pork processing line is the tracking identification point.

ID build-up: the geographical location information can be collected by creating a vendor ID. For each item, the specific item number should be created, which is linked with product information, such as production data and time, location, source, inspection data, etc. The amount of the same item is also recorded by applying the same amount of code segment. In this case, each item will have a dif- ferent barcode number for tracking.

First-connection to blockchain: then, when the products are proc- essed and ready for shipment, the barcode number for each product is recorded and linked with the vehicle. This step is the first time at which product information is uploaded to the blockchain, which provides the location of the shipping information. In this case, the origin or the source of the product is recorded.

conventional systems. Currently, the successful model built by Walmart has received much attention and is being further developed. More work is needed before sufficient connectivity between supply chain partici- pants is achieved. In this case, an international community should be built to monitor or manage the participants and provide policies or guidance on the proper usage of blockchain technology.

Another issue is the blockchain system built by different companies or countries might not be compatible for data sharing with other dis- tinct blockchains. This will raise a challenge if a certain product has been transported between countries using separate blockchains. Thus, issues exist regarding which country or company's blockchain system should be adopted as the central blockchain, or how information may be transmitted between blockchains. Thus, how to make the whole blockchain accessible for all sectors is hard to solve.

The blockchain itself is trustless, however, the information that gets recorded on the blockchain could be falsified, so how the data that gets incorporated into the blockchain is ensured to be accurate is of critical importance. Currently, most of the data uploaded in the blockchain is manually uploaded. However, there are very lim- ited measures in place to ensure this manually reported information is valid.

Currently, the data stored by blockchain is not completely open to the consumers. In this case, the use of blockchain to track products is more like a supplier self-inspection tool. That means, when out- breaks occur, the suppliers can use the data as a proof to provide to the inspectors or governmental regulators. In this case, consumer- friendly scan systems should be created to make the data more ac- cessible to consumers. The consumer can use the scan function of their cell phone to trace the source of products of interest. No special devices are needed to get the origin or transportation data from the consumer end.

Concern of the manufactures. Once the data has been uploaded to the blockchain, there is no way to change it. The consumers can check the information through the number stored in the blockchain. It de- pends on how the manufactures would like to be open to the con- sumers. For some big companies with sufficient regulations and management, it might be easy, but for some small-scale industries, which do not have good manufacturing practices, they might not be willing to share all the information to the consumers.

Moreover, the safety of transactions using capital currencies (e.g., non-crypto currencies) is still a major challenge. The system might be hacked by someone. Since there are no regulators or super- vision systems for blockchain system management, more work is needed to improve the safety of the blockchain transaction system in general.

The current challenge facing blockchain systems is how to extend these use cases to benefit other products. Since different products have different properties, and concerns of the consumers may be differ- ent for each distinct product. For example, for fresh fruits and vegeta- bles, the consumers might care more about the pesticide residues instead of their origin; for frozen seafoods, the consumers care more about their authenticity and provenance, and if they have been thawed or re-frozen during transportation; for high-quality fresh-cut meat, such as Kobe beef, or high-value fruits, such as jackfruit or dragon fruits, the quality change during shipment is of great concern. In this case, more tracking factors should be identified according to the product types. Monitoring each of these different parameters will provide a challenge for the data uploader as well as the blockchain system. Training and technical issues might occur when dealing with other food properties.

How to use the blockchain system to combine with the pre-existing data is another challenge. Currently, each manufacture has their own data system, which have large volumes of information on the details of the products. The current challenge for blockchain technology is how to bridge the gap between local farms or manufacturers and upload the pre-existing data to the blockchain or cloud to create a larger data set.

There is much excitement surrounding blockchain technology in both the public and private sectors. Recently, there have been efforts to adopt blockchain technologies in the agri-foods area, yet there is still a great deal of unrealized potential. Decentralized, distributed blockchain technology enables better agri-foods management with bet- ter traceability and transparency. Digitally tracking products from farm to consumer presents an opportunity for companies to then apply blockchain technologies to improve food safety and quality. However, many challenges, both technical and regulatory, remain to be solved be- fore more large-scale adoption of blockchain technology for a diverse range of agri-foods is realized.

