Duck virus enteritis(DVE), also known as duck plague(DP), is an serious and contagious disease, and highly lethal in all ages of birds from Anseriformes, such as ducks, geese, and swans. Since the first report of DVE in domestic ducks in 1923, more outbreaks were reported in many countries, and it has become a significant threat to the commercial duck industry in global [1-2]. Duck enteritis virus (DEV) is the causative agent of DVE, and which is one of the members of the subfamily Alphaherpesvirinae, but it has not been grouped into any genus [3].

In this paper codon usage bias in the UL21 gene of DEV was analyzed and also compared with those of 27 other herpesvirus. In addition, the codon usage bias of DEV UL21 gene was compared with those of E. coli, yeast, and humans. All these analyses might provide some reference for future study of the UL21 gene.

Codon adaptation index (CAI ), it is a simple and effective measure of the overall synonymous codon usage bias of genes. The CAI value, ranging from 0 to 1.0, which is much closer to 1, the codon usage is much stronger.Customarily highly expressed genes correspond to high CAI values[25-26]. The CAI values of DEV UL21 gene and relational herpesvirus vary from 0.613 to 0.768, with a average value of 0.681, and we infer UL21 gene is lowly expressed gene in DEV genome. Moreover, the SD of CAI value is 0.0579, indicating that there is small variation in codon usage pattern among different herpesvirus UL21 genes.

In order to investigate whether existing UL21 gene synonymous codon usage bias difference among different DEV strain, we compared UL21gene of DEV strain with those of DEV strain VAC and DEV UL21- like strain. Interestingly, all of them are same in the value of CAI, there was no difference or little difference in the codon usage bias parameters of the UL21 gene indicated by ENC, coding GC content. we conclude there is little different codon usage pattern of UL21 gene in different strains of DEV. It is reported that

In summary, we can conclude that the UL21 gene of DEV is lowly pressed and weak codon usage bias. Meanwhile, our work also has provided a basic understanding of the evolution of herpesvirus UL21 gene and predicted effective expression system for DEV UL21 gene. All these analyses might provide some reference of future study of UL21 gene.

