This paper proposed a Convex Optimization method which is called Co-SRL and is used to localize sensor location in Wireless Sensor Networks.Co-SRL can be used to help the node to localize a friendnode or mobile node using anchors. In Co-SRL, convex optimization algorithm is used forthe estimationof malicious nodeposition.Simulation result shows that Co-SRL is both secure and robust, in an environment without colluding, Co-SRLcan identify more than half of the malicious nodes; and in an environment with colluding, no more than 15% of malicious nodescan escape from the identification of our methods.

technologies, now there are more and more people working, studying and entertainment from Internet via wireless network. But as the openness of wireless network, there are many security events occurred which lead great loss of money for users using wireless network. So for security consideration and being served as the evidence of computer crimes and further to finder the location of the crimes, the localization technique is very important in wireless sensor networks.

Currently, there are mainly the range based localization methods and the range free localization methods in wireless networks. The rangebased localization methods as proposed in [10][8][4], localize nodeswith property measurement.On the other hand, the rangefree localizationmethods proposed in [5][2][3][9]localize anchors without property measurement. We can tolerate that the website with bad content such as sex and violence are banned for the common good of society[5], but it may be a big pity that some websites with academic disputations are banned so not reachable only for political reason. [6]Moreover, one path may be broken down resulting in some websites not available to certain people, but actually they can still visit the webs after many attempts of trying other way only if the websites have other paths. In addition, sometimes though the websites are still available to us, we can always find a best way, i.e. with the highest speed to use.In one word, we need a put up way which can make the accessibility of the wireless sensor network more robust with better performance.

This paper is arranged as follows: In section 2, we first introduce some basic principles of localization in wireless sensor networks and the optimization method, and then talk about the Co-SRL. In section 3, we present the simulation results of Co-SRL.And finally, we give the conclusion of this paper.

This paper gave a convex optimizationbased method to help node to localize anchors, given that at most M of them are malicious in a network. Our enhanced protocol, named Advanced Distance Bounding (AAD) protocol uses the high-speedDBtechnique.By Using of AAD, it can preventfrom many network attacks aiming at wireless sensor networks such as wormhole attacks [1],Sybil attack [1] and Distance reduction attacks etc., because in this case, malicious anchorswith faked position information will be detectedimmediately by a Malicious Node. Why? The reason can be seen as follows.

The proposed methodhas been implementedusingthe Matlab software. We apply the algorithm into the design the Co-SRLsystem which is an application overlay of the physical networks. It is constructed by the nodes and their accessible parts of the Internet. every peer in the system is a proxy which voluntarily relay the traffic of pass through it . Each node of Co-SRLis composed of 4 subsystems: The Functional-Module, the Calculation-Engine, the Friends-List and the Evaluation-Engine. Where, the Functional-Module is used for transferring traffic, registering and other functions. Our policy model for admission control is implemented in the calculation engine. When a new node comes, the calculate engine is responsible to calculate its trust value

We alSo Studied the effectiveneSS of our method with different valueS of LP. When there is no measure- menterrors, the reSultS were averaged over 100 iterationS for a given total anchors number in therange of the  Malicious  Node. For all the runS, the number of maliciouS anchorS iS no more than M. Our method localized the MaliciouS Node correctly in 100% of the caSeS and alSo caught the maliciousanchors fully success. We do not preSent the reSult here becauSe it iS guaranteed by theory aS well.

