High-throughput screening (HTS) assay technologies are a corner- stone of modern drug discovery. They allow the biological testing of large numbers of compounds on targets of interest within a short pe- riod of time [1]. A major challenge faced in high-throughput screening is false-positive hits resulting from different types of assay interference [2].

biomacromolecules [5]. Several computational approaches have been reported for the assessment of small molecules with regard to their risk of forming colloidal aggregates. These tools include Aggregator Advi- sor [11], ChemAgg [12] and SCAM detective [13]. Aggregator Advi- sor flags potential aggregators based on their molecular similarity to a set of 12,000 known aggregators, taking logP into account. ChemAgg and SCAM Detective are machine learning models for the classifica- tion of small molecules into aggregators and non-aggregators. Whereas ChemAgg is based on a XGBoost model, SCAM detective utilizes a set of random forest models.

A second important cause of assay interference is the chemical re- activity of compounds, in particular that related to electrophilicity [14]. Chemically reactive compounds may bind covalently to biomacro- molecules or interact with the assay screening technology in an un- desired way. Computational approaches for identifying reactive com- pounds are mostly based on sets of rules which describe substructures that have been linked to chemical reactivity [15].

Each of the models is derived from a new, large, high-quality data set that we extracted from the PubChem Bioassay database and annotated manually. In addition to the extra tree (ET) classifiers employed previ- ously, we are now exploring also k-nearest neighbors (KNN) classifiers as baseline models, as well as random forest (RF) and multilayer percep- tron (MLP) classifiers. The best models presented in this work are avail- able via a free web service at https://nerdd.univie.ac.at/hitdexter3/ and information on the assay data sets is provided as Supporting Informa- tion.

the six assays with the highest hit rates are all measuring CYP P450 enzyme activity. In the case of the cell-based assay data set, this concerns four assays, with hit rates of 59%, 55%, 17% and 15% (note that for approximately three quarters of the assays included in the cell-based assay data set their hit rates are below 1%). For the extended cell-based assay data set the seven assays with hit rates above 16% were removed.

specific bioactivity	Assays designed to measure a specific biological property such as the activity of an enzyme. Cytotoxicity assays are not included in this category. Counterscreen assays are included if they measure a specific biological effect. An example of a counterscreen assigned this label value is a luciferase counterscreen that is commonly employed to identify compounds which can cause interference in luciferase-based (bioluminescence) assays

In order to ensure the consistency of predictions, compounds with identical Morgan2 fingerprints [39,40] (1024 bits) but differing promis- cuity labels (e.g., symmetric molecules) were removed from the respec- tive training set. For any compounds with identical Morgan2 finger- prints only one instance was kept in the respective training set.

To obtain a training set and a test set (separately for all three data sets), a stratified random split was performed to obtain 90% training data and 10% test (hold out) data. Following a fingerprint-based data merging procedure (i.e. merging of instances having identical finger- prints and identical class labels, and removal of any instances hav- ing identical fingerprints but conflicting class labels; see Materials and Methods for details) the target-based, cell-based and extended cell-based training sets contain 243,949, 256,873 and 265,049 compounds, respec- seems surprisingly high. However, a closer look reveals that the agree- ment stems primarily from compounds consistently labeled as NPROM. Among the 20,481 compounds present in both data sets and labeled as PROM in at least one of them, only 6616 (32%) have identical class labels. This indicates that target-based and cell-based assays perform indeed differently and that they should be represented by dedicated models.

ences in model performance were observed with respect to the type of assay modeled: the best setups yielded comparable MCCs for the target- based assay set (MCCs 0.679 and 0.592 for HPROM-NPROM and PROM- NPROM classification, respectively), cell-based assay set (MCCs 0.602 and 0.577, respectively), and extended cell-based assay set (MCCs 0.631 and 0.599, respectively).

Methods for details) were tested on the holdout data (i.e. 10% of the data that was set aside prior to model building). The 24 mod- els result from the combination of three different training sets (i.e. target-based, cell-based and extended cell-based assay data set), four machine learning algorithms (KNN, ET, RF, MLP), and two differ- ent types of classification (i.e. HPROM-NPROM and PROM-NPROM). All of these models are built on Morgan2 fingerprints and utilize the

Importantly, a substantial decrease in performance was observed for the HPROM-NPROM KNN classifiers for all three assay data sets (for example, the KNN classifier of the target-based assay data set; three nearest neighbors; cross-validation MCC 0.624; test set MCC 0.376) and also the PROM-NPROM KNN classifiers for all three assay data sets (for example, the KNN classifier of the target-based assay data set; three nearest neighbors; cross-validation MCC 0.587; test set MCC 0.421). This decline in the performance may be related to model overfitting.

In the test of the Hit Dexter 3 models on the DCM data set, any test compounds also present in the training set of the respective mod- els were disregarded (leaving 24,111 to 37,711 DCM compounds for testing, depending on the individual training set). The target-based, cell-based and extended cell-based HPROM-NPROM MLP models cor- rectly assigned 99.0%, 98.6% and 98.7% of the DCM compounds to the NPROM class. In comparison, the percentage of correct assignments of the PROM-NPROM models were 95.4%, 93.7% and 93.6%, respectively. This result corroborates the validity (in particular the specificity) of the models.

The MLP classifiers turned out to obtain the best classification per- formance and robustness in most cases, with MCCs of up to 0.648 in dis- criminating HPROM from NPROM compounds, and MCCs of up to 0.580 in discriminating PROM from NPROM compounds. Use cases that re- quire models with high sensitivity or high specificity can be approached by adjusting the decision threshold applied in classification.

The best models presented in this work are available via a refined, free web service at https://nerdd.univie.ac.at/hitdexter3/. This web service offers many additional features, encrypted communication via HTTPS and the possibility for users to immediately and permanently delete their data from the web server.

In: Auld DS, Inglese J. Interferences with Luciferase reporter enzymes. Assay Guid- ance Manual. Markossian S, Grossman A, Brimacombe K, Arkin M, Auld D, Austin CP, editors. et al., editors. Eli Lilly & Company and the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, Bethesda (MD); 2016.

