In this context, it is too crucial that the pilot develops Situation Awareness (SA) that is not specific to a particular type of aircraft and mission, but general- izes across many types of aircraft systems [9]. Many researchers recognize the essential role of attention in SA [8,16,18], as an example Schriver et al. [14] inves- tigated the behavior of pilots with different experience levels and presented results that support the link between greater attention and more effective decision mak- ing of aviation pilots. Recently, Carretta [4] confirmed that attention is among factors that have consistently shown a relation to flying performance in a study of the Pilot Candidate Selection Method (PCSM), while King et al. [11] proved that tests of cognitive functioning, that include attention, can predict the training outcomes.

Previous work demonstrated that computerized tests are ideal to assess pilot aptitude [2] and, in particular, to measure attention factors [3]. In fact, many dif- ferent computerized instruments to measure attention factors are available, but to the best of our knowledge none of these instruments was designed and tested specifically for aviation pilots with validation results published in the scientific lit- erature. Moreover, commercially available computerized tests for aviation pilots usually measure attention indirectly, e.g. via simplified flight maneuver simula- tions, which involve several factors at the same time, and cannot give a specific attentional profile that can highlight strengths and weaknesses of the candidate pilot. Indeed, the attentional profile can be useful for ad-hoc training as theoretical and empirical evidence exists in support of the argument that both the control of attention and the ability to establish better attention management can be devel- oped with training [10].

for each course, because the limited resources for the training (i.e. aircrafts or cer- tified simulators). For this reason, the selection processes are of fundamental importance and aim to favor those candidates that have the highest attitude, i.e. that show the highest potential to be successful.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the tests bat- tery and details the software implementation. Section 3 reports and discusses the experimental results of the empirical validation of the proposed instrument through a trial with 50 experienced aviation pilots and 50 untrained people as a control group. Finally, Section 4 presents our conclusions.

The test of simple reaction measures a purely psycho-physiological attention. The parameter identified in this way defines a useful baseline for the analysis of subse- quent tests. The test is composed of two parts: the first part (1A), in which the visual stimulus is proposed in the central part of the screen, thus stimulating the use of the focused vision; in the second part (1B) of the test the same stimulus is proposed randomly in one of the four corners of the screen, to activate the Far-peripheral vision only.

3B. In the second task, which is the real test of interference, words that indicate a color appear filled with a different color (e.g. RED in blue), the subject should neglect the automatic recognition of the word semantic and press the button corresponding to the color in which the word is filled (i.e., in the example, blue).

The experimental study was conducted in computer rooms, where the battery was administered to several subjects at the same time. All subjects were in good health, rested and comfortably seated in front of a computer monitor at such a distance that the lateral area of the monitor coincided with the peripheral area of their vision. Finally, in order to avoid auditory interference all subjects wore a headset during the whole duration of the test. Before each session, a collective briefing was done to answer the general questions of the test battery.

In this paper, we presented a battery of seven tests specifically designed for the assessment of the attention factors of aviation pilots. The battery was imple- mented in a computer software and validated by an experimental trial with 50 experienced aviation pilots and 50 untrained people as controls. t-test analysis showed the potential of all the tests in the battery to distinguish between untrained normal people and experienced aviation pilots, while discriminant analysis con- firmed the validity of the battery as an instrument that can effectively measure all the distinctive attention factors that characterize aviation pilots. Finally, the stepwise discriminant analysis identified several attention factors that can be used to assist the selection of candidate aviation pilots and to focus their training.

In practice, the software presented in our paper allows setting a benchmark for one of the distinctive cognitive functions of aviation pilots. Candidate pilots can be assessed against this benchmark and the results, along with other psycho- attitudinal tests, can be used to select the most promising candidate pilots. The results prove that our battery of tests addressed all the distinctive attention factors of the aviation pilots as they are significantly different than controls and they are enough to efficiently discriminate between the two groups. Furthermore, the soft- ware derives an attention profile of the candidate that can be used to train those factors that are not fully developed at the level of the aviation pilot. Indeed, the computer software presented here is currently used in the evaluation of candidate pilots in several flight schools where it is integrated with standard selection proto- cols and it is employed to develop personal training programs.

