The modern sports techniques (cars, motorcycles, bicycles) is drove in motion with use of transmissions with the controlled variable transfer ratio. The transmission provides variable speed of movement depending on external loading. The modern transmission has the step transfer ratio (4 - 5 steps). At each step the transfer ratio constant, and speed of movement is regulated by change of engine power. Achievement of the maximum speed of movement demands optimum control of switching of steps and the engine power.

Control of steps switching (both manual, and automatic) almost always is not the best. The moment of switching either lags, or advances optimum time of switching which depends on controlled power of the engine. Therefore achievement of the maximum speed of movement substantially depends on individual abilities of the driver. But even the big practical experience of the driver does not allow receiving the greatest possible result.

The tooth gearing is reliable and durable but it is not stepless transfer. The automatic gear box provides only automatic switching of steps which is not optimum. Besides, the automatic gear box is heavy and bulky. Such transmission cannot be established on a motorcycle or a bicycle.

Here introduce the paper, and put a nomenclature if necessary, in a box with the same font size as the rest of the paper. The paragraphs continue from here and are only separated by headings, subheadings, images and formulae. The section headings are arranged by numbers, bold and 10 pt. Here follows further instructions for authors.

Action of the animation model: Press key W - you will see motion of cogwheels if external loading is increasing. Press key Q - you will see motion of cogwheels if external loading is decreasing. Speed of rotation of the engine shaft is constant. Speed of rotation of the output shaft depends on loading.

Adaptive gear transmission in the form of gear differential mechanism with closed contour provides the best variant of control with the transfer ratio of sports transport. The adaptive tooth gearing independently and continuously brings vehicle speed into accord to movement resistance without any control system. It leads automatically to achievement of the maximum speed of movement. Absence of control excludes subjective factors and provides ideal conformity to a variable mode of movement.

Ivanov K.S. The theory of continuously variable transfer (CVT) with Two degrees of freedom. Paradox of mechanics. Hearings of the American Society of Mechanics of Engineers (ASME) the International Congress of Engineering industry and the Exhibition (IMECE 2012). Houston, Texas, USA. 2012. P. 543.

