A framework is proposed for an aquaponics system based on image processing and decision tree methodology that performs disease detec- tion of four leaf species, eggplant, chilli, citrus, and mandarin, and auto- matically generates a report which is sent to the owner through the mobile application if the disease is detected (Barosa et al., 2019). Like- wise, a CNN-based approach for detecting plant disease in smart hydro- ponics provides a tool to the farmers capable of doing the task of an agricultural extension worker with even better accuracy (Musa et al., 2021). An application based on image processing and SVM is developed to classify apple diseases (Lisha Kamala and Anna Alex, 2021). Yudha et al. proposed a model based on Faster R-CNN with Inception V2 algo- rithm to recognize the diseases in hydroponic lettuce (Yudha Pratama et al., 2020).

The literature survey has revealed that researchers have extensively used deep learning techniques for plant or crop disease detection and classification. The analysis shows that most disease detection systems are developed for open-air farms. Only a few systems are developed for modern farming systems, such as aquaponics or hydroponics. Most models are developed considering multiple diseases of only one crop. Moreover, to the best of the authors' knowledge, no comprehensive and unified disease detection system is proposed for identifying dis- eases of multiple leafy green crops grown in aquaponics facilities.

This study considers four leafy green crops, lettuce, basil, parsley, and spinach. The dataset consists of healthy and diseased images of these crops, which are acquired from different sources such as NFT based aquaponics facility built in AllFactory 4.0 Lab (University of Al- berta, Canada), Google search engine, and Ecosia3 (a search engine based in Berlin, Germany). The diseases considered for the four crops while developing the dataset are listed below.

Data annotation is one of the vital steps for the successful devel- opment of object detection models. The process is manual and in- volves labeling the desired objects in an image with a label or tag that refers to a particular class. The labeled data is used during the training of the model. There are various open-source annotation tools, but in this study, LabelImg4 is used. LabelImg is a python based graphical annotation tool that supports a variety of deep learning algorithms (Qi et al., 2022). In this study, the annotations categories: i) two-stage detectors based on region proposal and ii) one-stage detectors based on regression or classification (Nguyen et al., 2020). The popular two-stage detectors are Fast-RCNN, Faster- RCNN, and Mask-RCNN, and one-stage detectors involve YOLO (You Only Look Once) family (Liu et al., 2021).

Khan et al. conducted a research where they ran three different models, Faster-RCNN, YOLOv4, and EfficientDet, to solve a similar kind of problem for apple crops (Khan et al., 2022). It has been observed that Faster RCNN with mAP (mean average precision) of 42.1% outperformed YOLOv4 (mAP of 41.4%) and EfficientDet (mAP of 38%). As per these results, Faster-RCNN seems the right choice for this study. But YOLOv5 model developed by Ultralytics (Glenn, 2023) has substan- tially improved the detection speed while maintaining the detection ac- curacy. Therefore, both approaches are tested in this study.

NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 is used to train all the models in three phases of the disease detection system. The classification model devel- oped in stage 1 is implemented in PyTorch (an open source machine learning framework based on the torch library developed by Meta AI5). Using the transfer learning (TL) approach, ResNet-50 pre-trained on ImageNet is used (Russakovsky et al., 2015). The pre-trained model

After model selection, an image is uploaded which is used by all the models. Once the disease is detected and classified, the causes and treat- ments of the disease are extracted from the ontology model automati- cally and displayed on the application panel. This kind of information is useful as it will allow agricultural practitioners to determine the causes of diseases and take precautionary steps in the early stages to avoid crop wastage and economic loss.

This section presents the results of experiments performed in the current research work. First, the performance evaluation of deep learn- ing models in three phases of the disease detection system is discussed. Next, the trained and validated system is tested on new data. In the end, the significance of the complete system is presented.

The performance evaluations of models in three phases have shown that detection models are not as straightforward as classification models. This is because an image consists of many objects which belong to either the same class or different classes. Hence, three things must be verified during evaluation, including object class, bounding box (object location), and confidence.

detection speed of 52.8 FPS (frames per second) is faster than Faster- RCNN with a detection speed of 43.2 FPS. Moreover, it is also observed that YOLOv5s accurately detect objects of varying sizes with little to no overlapping boxes. All the comparisons between the two detection models show that YOLOv5s have a clear advantage in terms of accuracy and run speed. Therefore, in this study, YOLOv5s is used for developing the disease detection system.

maintaining optimal humidity and temperature levels in accordance with Parsley crop and indoor aquaponics environment throughout the growth cycle, treating seeds before germination with hot water or Clorox bleach, using conventional fungicides if the disease is spread out in multiple plants. Downy Mildew disease is one of the most com- mon diseases observed in different crops (McGrath, 2021). In the greenhouse or indoor farming environment, the potential causes of this disease are the same irrespective of crop type, which includes: high humidity, cool temperatures, infected seeds, and leaf wetness (Margaret Tuttle McGrath, 2021). Therefore, the methods to treat Downy Mildew in lettuce, basil, and spinach are also similar. This means that the classification of Downy Mildew disease with respect to crop type does not impact the results related to disease treatments. De- spite this independence, it is still significant to perform the classification of Downy Mildew for each crop individually as its symptoms for three crops, lettuce, basil, and parsley, change later in the growth cycle. This might cause confusion for the detector to distinguish Downy Mildew from other diseases. For instance, the lettuce tissue affected with Downy Mildew eventually turns brown in later stages and these symp- toms are similar to the Bacterial Leaf Spot symptom in lettuce, and both diseases have different treatment methods.

and treatments of diseases. Moreover, this study will also promote the introduction of new implementations, such as research on the complex relationship between dynamic parameters (environmental and water) and diseases in aquaponics farms and self-adapting farms in case of dis- ease detection. These smart technologies in the aquaponics system will reduce crop wastage and ensure both economic and environmental benefits.

For future work, the system will be extended to include other leafy green crops. Moreover, the dataset will also be extended, and more real-field images will be incorporated. Moreover, a mobile application will be constructed, reducing the latency, and providing data privacy, which normally occurs in cloud-based systems.

