Efficient irrigation management of urban landscapes is critical in arid/semi-arid environments and depends on the reliable estimation of reference evapotranspiration (ETo). However, the available measured climatic data in urban areas are typically insufficient to use the standard Penman-Monteith for ETo estimation. Therefore, smart landscape irrigation controllers often use temperature-based ETo models for autonomous irrigation scheduling. This study focuses on developing deep learning temperature-based ETo models and comparing their performance with widely used empirical temperature-based models, including FAO Blaney & Criddle (BC), and Hargreaves & Samani (HS). We also developed a simple free and easy-to-access tool called DeepET for ETo estimation using the best-performing deep learning models developed in this study. Four artificial neural network (ANN) models were developed using raw weather data as inputs and the reconstructed signal obtained from the wavelet transform as inputs. In addition, long short-term memory (LSTM) recurrent neural network (NN) and one-dimensional convolution neural network (CNN) models were developed. A total of 101 active Cal- ifornia Irrigation Management Information System (CIMIS) weather stations were selected for this study, with

Abbreviations: ETo, Reference Evapotranspiration; BC, FAO-24 Blaney and Criddle model; HS, Hargreaves and Samani model; Tmin, Tmax, Tav, Daily minimum, maximum, and average temperature, respectively.; RH, Relative Humidity; U, Wind Speed; Rs, Global solar radiation; Ra, Extraterrestrial solar radiation; ML, Machine Learning; DL, Deep learning; WA, Wavelet analysis; ANN, Artificial neural network; ANN_all, Artificial neural network model with Tmin, Tmax, Tav, Ra, RH, and U as inputs.; ANN_T, Artificial neural network model with Tmin, Tmax, Tav, and Ra as inputs.; WA-ANN_all, Artificial neural network model with inputs (Tmin, Tmax, Tav, Ra, RH, and U) preprocessed using wavelet analysis.; WA-ANN_T, Artificial neural network model with inputs (Tmin, Tmax, Tav, and Ra) preprocessed using wavelet analysis.; LSTM, Long Short-Term Memory Recurrent Neural Network; CNN, Convolutional neural network; CIMIS, California Irrigation Management Information System.

The aridity index, which can quantify precipitation availability over atmospheric water demand, was created following the classification recommended by the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) and using the CGIAR-CSI Global-Aridity Database (Trabucco and Zomer, 2018). Most of the selected CIMIS stations belonged to the arid (n = 48) and semi-arid (n = 39) classes, while 4, 9, and 1 CIMIS stations belonged to hyper-arid, dry sub-humid, and humid classes, re- spectively. The spatial dataset of the seven climate divisions of California was obtained from the National Climatic Data Center- National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NCDC-NOAA). The climate division data were used to perform a region-specific performance assessment of the models evaluated in this study.

In real-world applications, when all the necessary input variables are available, the application of FAO-56 Penman-Monteith as the standard physically based model is suggested for estimating ETo. Therefore, the main focus of this study was to develop and evaluate temperature- based deep learning ETo models. However, DL models with extra input variables, including relative humidity (RH) and wind speed (U) were developed to compare the maximum achievable performance of each DL approach.

(Kingma and Ba, 2015) was used to train the DL models and the best weights and biases were automatically loaded for testing. The Python library TensorFlow (TensorFlow Developers, 2021) was utilized to de- velop the ANN models. Two different combinations of input variables were used for each method, resulting in four DL models evaluated in this study. One model used inputs Tmin, Tmax, Ta, RH, U, and Ra, while the other model only had Tmin, Tmax, Ta, and Ra as input, as described in the previous section.

HS model can be regarded as a truly temperature-based model since extraterrestrial solar radiation can be estimated based on the location and time of the year. Global solar radiation is known to be a more critical parameter than relative humidity and wind speed in estimating daily ETo, based on a machine learning study conducted in China (Fan et al., 2018). However, daily ETo anomalies strongly correlate with net radiation anomalies, relative humidity (RH), and cloud cover, and less with average daily air temperature (Hidalgo et al., 2005). The temperature difference used in the HS model is an indirect measure of cloud cover and RH at a location (Hargreaves and Samani, 1985). Clear sky conditions result in high maximum day temperatures and low minimum night temperatures, whereas cloudy days result in relatively lower maximum day temperatures and higher minimum night temperatures.

