The organization of the paper is stated below. Related works are given in Section 2. The problem to be solved is described in Section 3. The proposed algorithm with consider- ation of the first transaction appearance period is presented in Section 4. The performance of the proposed approach is shown in Section 5. Conclusions and future works are finally given in Section 6.

Chang et al. considered the temporal mining problem of products exhibited in a store [5]. They proposed the concept of common exhibition to find patterns. In a common exhibi- tion period, all the items in an itemset need to be on the shelf at the same time. Lee et al. then used it to discover general tem- poral association rules for publication databases [20]. Ale and Rossi then considered the transaction periods of products [4], instead of their exhibition periods, for finding temporal associ- ation rules. Besides, different products may have different on- shelf properties. For example, a popular product may be sold out quickly, and then be supplied and on shelf soon. It is thus intermittently on-shelf and off-shelf in the entire time [18].

Definition 7. A hierarchy of time granules, HTG, is composed of a set of basic time periods. In addition, a time granule pgl.g represents the g-th time granule in the l-th level of the hierar- chy, and it consists of the basic time periods contained by the time granule pgl.g.

In this paper, we introduce a new concept of temporal associ- ation rule mining with a hierarchy of time granules to find hier- archical temporal association rules in temporal databases, and we also present the effective approach (abbreviated as TPPF) to find such rules. In particular, an effective strategy is designed to predict the upper-bound of support values for itemsets. The strategy can be used to remove unpromising itemsets at an early stage in the process, and the proposed TPPF can effectively reduce the computational cost of scan- ning a temporal database. Experiments were also made, with results showing the proposed TPPF outperformed the other one TP-HTAR in reducing database scan and computational time.

The future research directions of this work are as follows. First, we will attempt to investigate the incremental problem of hierarchical temporal association rule mining. That is, based on this work, we will design a method to mine the new result without performing the whole mining procedure at database modification. Second, the optimal minimum support and con- fidence will be approximated by machine learning techniques. Third, actually, this work is the beginning of hierarchical tem- poral association rule mining. In the future, more efficient min- ing algorithms such as FP-growth will be adopted as the solutions to accelerate the mining process and more mining consideration such as utility mining will be studied to extend its applications.

