Fortunately, impurities in data, including noise, outliers, missing data, duplicate data or any other anomalies, can be handled using data cleansing methods. While one possible solution to solve the problem of small data sets is data augmentation. This latter includes techniques of increasing training data diversity without explicitly collecting new data (Feng et al., 2021), in an attempt to improve the generalisation ability of training models. For real-world data, generalisation is signifi- cant because it can help networks overcome small data sets (Olson et al., 2018), and it is used to regularise and reduce over-fitting when training ML models (Shorten and Khoshgoftaar, 2019). The most widely used data augmentation techniques involve either adding slightly mod- ified copies of existing data or creating synthetic ones (Shorten and Khoshgoftaar, 2019).

Several artificial intelligence (AI) applications apply data augmenta- tion in the case of small training data. In computer vision and pattern recognition for generating more labelled data, where techniques like cropping, flipping, and colour jittering are standard components of model training (Feng et al., 2021). In natural language processing (NLP), in this case, techniques of interpolation and rule-based are applied to augment patterns (Feng et al., 2021). In addition to time se- ries classification based on techniques of random transformation (Iwana and Uchida, 2021).

(Chergui et al., 2020) demonstrate possible applications of ML and DL for crop management, including crop yield forecasting. They distin- guish two trends for crop estimation; the first one is related to data sources that directly affect the crops(soil data, weather data, environ- mental parameter data). These are typically used to offer a pre-season estimate of crop yield (Crane-Droesch, 2018; Ehret et al., 2011; Fukuda et al., 2013; Gonzalez-Sanchez et al., 2014; Gyamerah et al., 2020; Kouadio et al., 2018). The second trend is related to the data

Other proposed studies used data augmentation via the aggregation of different small data sets for crop yield forecasting. Among others, we found the work of (Meroni et al., 2021) which predicted the monthly yield of three types of cereals at the national level, where it integrated data sets by crop from all provinces and added an identifier for each Province as an additional predictor variable. (Filippi et al., 2019) com- bined data on three types of cereals over multiple fields and years into one data set. Then they created three separate models based on factors like (pre-sowing, mid-season and late-season conditions); to study the effect of the availability of within-season information on the predictive ability of their models. They created a single model for the three crops and included the crop type as a predictor variable. In our study, we inte- grate small data sets from two Provinces to form a more considerable base for training. Rather than creating a single predictor for the two Provinces, we seek to construct a specific predictor for each one that better corresponds to its specificity.

These regions are known for the cultivation of cereals. The crop cho- sen for this study is durum wheat because it presents the most impor- tant crop and occupies the amplest agricultural area. The cropped wheat in both regions is rainfed or not irrigated.

We have obtained historical data on durum wheat yields from the Department of Agricultural Services of the Province of Constantine1 and the Province of Setif,2 data is not available online. The yield data ob- tained for the Province of Constantine covers the seasons from 1991 to 2019 and starting from 2005 to 2020 for the Province of Setif. The two data sets contain information on the recorded annual yields and the acreage; they present the crop yield as the harvested production of a crop per unit of the harvested area, measured in metric quintals per hectare (q/ha). However, they do not provide information on geo- graphic identification, soil nature and components or fertilisation pro- grams.

The climatic data from the first source is rich and downloadable; it offers daily-level records (at least three records per day). The second source provides data from 1945 at the daily level, but it was hard to reuse because it was not downloadable. Additionally, it includes only a few features (air temperature, precipitation, wind and pressure); it con- tains missing records for a few months. Thence, we selected attributes in common between the two data sources (the monthly mean temper- ature and the monthly mean precipitation) as predictor variables from November to June for each year. It exists a national climate centre that provides more detailed data and includes more expanded information on solar radiation, humidity, pressure, wind, etc. Because of the absence of agreements between the institutions, this data was helpless.

We divided data sets into training data (70%) and test data (30%). We chose this partition to obtain more cases to test the generation abil- ity of the ML algorithms, therefore, to get more accurate results because too little test data can lead to an optimistic estimation of the model's performance. Then, we used three-fold cross-validation to train the ML algorithms.

where the text in bold font indicates the best results for each metric in each experiment. Generally observed, each of the regression methods: ANN, DNN, ELM, RF and SVR, exhibited better performance for experi- ment3 over the two other experiments for both zones in most cases. Besides, they also showed better-to-comparable performance with experiment2 and experiment1, while experiment2 (data with the addi- tional feature) was favourable. Algorithms known to perform well with larger data sets (ANN, DNN, RF, ELM) performed very well with exper- iment3 for both zones. However, SVR showed weaknesses in generalising high-quality estimates for all three experiments, especially for experiment3 (zone-A). It is because SVR does not perform well with high-dimensional data sets.

However, ML methods such as ANN, RF and ELM outperformed DNN regression when fewer input variables were available (experiment1 and experiment2). Conversely, DNN achieved higher performance than other methods when a more significant number of input variables were available (augmented data of experiment3). It is because deep learning often goes beyond ordinary machine learning models for larger data sets (Maimaitijiang et al., 2020).

Moreover, we can observe that ANN, DNN and ELM performed very well concerning all evaluation metrics when predicting the durum wheat yield using data-set3A from experiment3 compared to RF and SVR. In addition, we perceive that for zone-B, almost all methods reached a high level of precision for RMSE, MAE, MBE and R2 (except the DNN showed a bit of degradation with R2). RF outperformed other methods in RMSE, R2 and MAE, while DNN surpassed them in MAPE and MBE.

On the other side, if we take the MBE metric that explains the aver- age amount by which the observation is greater than the prediction, and allows us to see how much the model overestimates or underestimates. We can perceive that the DNN model outperformed all the other models for both zones. Also, there is an improvement in the value of MBE from an underestimation in experiment1 to a slight overestimation in exper- iment2. Besides, it reached a neglected level in experiment3 for both

However, for zone-B in experiment2, all methods performed better than those in experiment1 in terms of all metrics. RF outperformed other methods considering RMSE and MAE, and DNN performances' surpassed those of the remaining algorithms in terms of R2, MAPE and MBE. This fact conducts us to understand that the impact of the relative humidity feature is more significant for forecasting wheat grown in zone-B (characterised by semi-arid climate) than zone-A (characterised by Mediterranean climate).

But since there is an average correlation between the relative humidity and rainfall (knowing that correlation = 0.37 for zone-A, correlation = 0.43 for zone-B), PDP may become a misleading. To overcome this limitation, we used the Accumulated Local Effects (ALE) plot, an unbiased model that describes how much the feature influences the prediction of an ML model.

the dependence of the prediction on a feature for each entry separately. These ICE plots confirm the previous observation where we can see that in zone-A, several samples have flat shapes to little curved, whilst in zone-B, all instances have curved shapes. This indicates that relative hu- midity is more relevant for predictions of zone-B than zone-A.

The data augmentation approach has remarkably helped improve the quality of predictions for many models. This fact is not due only to larger data sets, but the latter may contain additional information and varieties in weather conditions with different intrinsic yield potential, and this variety would be a necessary predictor variable (Filippi et al., 2019). The drawback of this study is that we used the entire Province (an aggregation of several scattered fields and farms) without consider- ing sub-regional spatial variability (Pham et al., 2022), resulting from climatic factors, the different topography and soil nature. In addition, various farmers manage these fields following different technical paths for seeding, harvesting and so on. Therefore, although we did not use most of this information in this study because of their unavail- ability, weather data taken at one station per Province are irrelevant for some fields and may affect the models' output. Therefore, if we had accurate climate variable information and ground-truth data at the field level within each Province, we could likely get more data points

On the other hand, it would permit us to use additional variables like vegetation indices which have proven their efficiency in enhancing pre- diction accuracy (Maimaitijiang et al., 2020; Abbas et al., 2020; Filippi et al., 2019; Han et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2019; Kamir et al., 2020; Oliveira et al., 2018; Schwalbert et al., 2020; Sakamoto, 2020).

Another potentially obtained benefit from the availability of field- level information is the exploration of other deep learning models like CNN for yield forecasting using the sensed images. Additionally, the exploitation of data augmentation techniques used for image classifica- tion purposes to augment the data size of samples if needed (Arsenovic et al., 2019; Aravind and Raja, 2020). Besides, image-based deep learn- ing approaches can employ spectral, spatial, and temporal information from satellite data and may reduce the need for feature engineering (Sagan et al., 2021).

The method was to increase the size and dimension of the data. Firstly, we increased the dimension of the initial data by adding a new climatic feature. Secondly, we augmented its size by merging data sets from the two provinces to create a more significant input. Next, we per- formed extensive experiments to study the effects of data size and select the best model, particularly to examine and test the effectiveness of the data augmentation-by-merging approach. We carried out a comprehen- sive comparison of five major AI regression models based on the three different data sets for the two provinces. Then, we proposed a cross- validation training/test process to learn algorithms to develop the best model for crop yield prediction. As a result, we achieved the best perfor- mance when utilising data augmentation-by-merging data sets for both Provinces. While the DNN model employed for the first Province outperformed the other four AI models, the RF model outperformed the related models for the second Province.

