To investigate the economic performance of applying the ground source heat pump system in swine farms in Beijing China, initial investment and operating cost of ground source heat pump (GSHP) heating and cooling system, coal fired heating system (CFH), wet curtain fan cooling system (WCFC), air conditioner heating and cooling system (AC) were analyzed and compared. The results showed that the initial investment of GSHP heating and cooling system was higher than that of the CFH system integrated with WCFC system, the relative operating cost of the heating systems of GSHP, CFH and AC was 0.94, 1.00 and 0.98 , respectively. The relative operating cost of the cooling system of the GSHP, WCFC and AC system was 4.50, 1.00 and 6.38, respectively.

In 2009, Beijing has had 18 million m2 of buildings utilizing ground source pump system. It is expected that by 2015, the area of ground source pump system utilization will increase to 50 million m2. The capacity and performance of shallow groundwater heat pumps in Beijing Plain area were evaluated by researchers[4- 5],and the city government of Beijing has made a layout of feasibility of ground source heat pump in Beijing Plain, , swine farms in Beijing hereby can decide whether it is feasible in technique and policy to apply ground source heat pump[6].

As to initial investment for the cooling and heating systems, GSHP is higher than AC system, CFH system with a WCFC system. The initial investment of CFH system together with WCFC system was the lowest. Therefore, though GSHP system can save energy and reduce emission compared to CFH system[8], fund subsidies are necessary for applying GSHP system to swine farms due to its high investment.

On condition that the technical parameters of each cooling system were described as in this paper, the relative operating cost of the cooling system of the GSHP system, wet curtain fan cooling system and air conditioner cooling was 4.50, 1.00 and 6.38 respectively. The GSHP system heating cost was higher than wet curtain fan cooling system.

Swine farmers will not apply GSHP system without fund subsidies from the government at present in Beijing. Considering cooling effect of and energy saving in heating period and air pollution from PM2.5, the GSHP system will to be accepted in the future.

