water-saving irrigation facilities. However, there are few studies about the evaluation of PA in the field. In China, the potential impacts of PA ap- plication in terms of yield, quality and farm incomes have not yet been fully demonstrated which is likely an important factor constraining its promotion (e.g. Kuehne et al., 2017).

The economic analysis considered all inputs, including the service charge for cultivation, the cost of seed, fertilizer, pesticide (irrigation water in the experimental area was free of charge) and farm manage- ment costs. Land preparation, planting, fertilizer and pesticide applica- tion, irrigation, and harvesting were all undertaken by agricultural machinery cooperatives and farmers' cooperatives. Thus, labour inputs were already included in these paid services. The farm belongs to

Where TCC = total cost of cultivation, C1 = agricultural material cost, C2 = agro-mechanization service cost, C3 = managerial pay; i = agricultural inputs e.g. seed, fertilizer, pesticide, Ii = amount of the ith agricultural input, Pi = price of the ith agricultural input.

NDVI parameters during March to May can provide good estimates of winter wheat condition and yield in the North China Plain (Zhao et al., 2012). Given the aim of PSLL to produce a uniform seeding and growth we consider that PSLL will reduces spatial variability and accel- erates the crops growth than under conventional farming approaches.

Soil nitrate and ammonium nitrogen residues after harvest increase the risk of nitrogen leaching losses (Fang et al., 2006). Previous research has found that PA technologies, by increasing nitrogen utilization effi- ciency, can reduce soil nitrogen residues (Chen, 2003; Diacono et al., 2013). But there are also studies suggesting that PA technologies cannot adding to the cost of production. Ashraf et al. (2017) study shows that there is no need to level the fields at least upto 3 years. Aryal et al. (2015) supposed that a one-time application of laser land leveling lasts at least 4 years. This study use the remote sense image found that the laser land leveling lasts at least 3 years, and than the benefit/ cost ratio of PSLL will increase about 5% percent.

The agricultural policies play a role in farmer's decision (Touza et al., 2008; Barnes et al., 2016), developing policies by the governments that encourage social services such as subsidies for PA technologies can help further promote the popularization and application of PA technologies in China.

Compared with the local conventional large-scale farming, both precision seeding and integration of precision seeding and laser leveling increased the yield of winter wheat, with the latter being significantly and more effective. They could also reduce spatial variability of yield at the same time. With respect to crop quality, the PA methods had no deleterious impact on the grain protein content of the in-season wheat crops.

