work can be modified to account for more general cell-to-cell relation- ships. Specifically, we consider the following two general scenarios. First, the number of cells may vary at different time points, and as a result, some cells may need to be reused when constructing cell-to-cell lineages. This can lead to multiple lineages passing through a single cell at specific time points. Second, cells may exhibit different proliferation rates at the same time points, i.e., the numbers of new cells produced by two cells at the same time point could be significantly different. This could result in the varying proportions of cell groups across time. To ad- dress these general assumptions, we present a comprehensive discussion of our generalized methods and experimental results in the supplemen- tary materials.

independently for each time point. These simulation datasets contain five same cell types in both time points. In the simulation setting, the number of cells ranges from 200 to 600, and the number of genes in one cell ranges from 100 to 500. The cell alignment and cell-to-cell corre- spondences were constructed using the CellST based only on the gene expression information of cells at each time point and no information

with the benchmark pathway expression patterns (black curves). The expression of cell fate trajectories illustrates consistent patterns with the benchmark expression of the two simulated pathways over time. In addition to the consistency, we observed that cells have unique behav- iors over time from the cell fate trajectories. Some cells grow slower and have lower expression values, while others grow faster and have higher expression values than the simulated average development pat- terns. The cell fate trajectories predict the unique cell development be- haviors by smoothing the constructed cell lineages to reduce cell-cell variance.

Those results proved that the cell fate trajectories and dynamic gene networks in the CellST method can be used to discover critical genes in a cell differentiation process. We also demonstrated the CellST cell fate trajectories have full coverage on different cell lineages even in some rare cell types since the trajectories track individual cell behav- iors. Lastly, those individual cell fate trajectories reflect unique gene expression patterns when cells develop into different mature cell types.

Trapnell C, Cacchiarelli D, Grimsby J, Pokharel P, Li S, Morse M, Lennon NJ, Li- vak KJ, Mikkelsen TS, Rinn JL. The dynamics and regulators of cell fate deci- sions are revealed by pseudotemporal ordering of single cells. Nature Biotechnol 2014;32(4):381.

Liu Y, Li J, Yao B, Wang Y, Wang R, Yang S, Li Z, Zhang Y, Huang S, Fu X. The stiffness of hydrogel-based bioink impacts mesenchymal stem cells differen- tiation toward sweat glands in 3d-bioprinted matrix. Mater Sci Eng: C 2021;118: 111387.

