Various stimuli can be utilized in emotion-related research such as movie clips, music, and verbal command, etc. Among them, the movie clip has greater efficiency and reliability [33] as it contains both audio and video. In this experiment, Chinese movie clips were selected since all the participants were native Chinese. The videos are of 4 min long and can be categorized as: positive, negative, and neutral. The following se- lection criteria were maintained- work. CNN is a type of machine learning system in which a model learns automatically to classify objects from images, numerical values, or videos. It is highly capable of learning from the input data by optimizing the weight parameters of each filter by minimizing the classification error. CNN consists of an input layer and an output layer, along with multiple hidden layers. It takes an image as an input, then processes it

In our proposed CNN structure, the input channel is normalized by a batch normalization layer. It is generally used between the convolutional layer and the ReLU layer to speed up the training process of CNN and reduce the sensitivity to network initialization. A batch normalization layer normalizes its inputs by calculating the mean and variance over a mini-batch and each input channel. Then it calculates the normalized activations as [39], input data thresholding. Running ReLU over the input volume changes the pixel values but does not change the spatial dimension of the input data in the output. ReLU is more preferred than other functions because it makes the neural network faster [39].

The topographic images are given as input to the CNN for feature extraction and emotion classification. To feed the CNN, there were three types of EEG data corresponding to three emotional states of the brain. Since each participant took part in 3 different emotional states (positive, negative, and neutral) and there are 15 trials for an individual state. So, the convolutional layer based on the trial and error method. Each result is checked using the Matlab simulator several times to select the best pattern. The convolutional layer, batch normalization layer, ReLU layer, pooling layer are used twice in this work. The final results are the clas- sification accuracies against the three classes: positive, negative, and neutral emotional states. Therefore, the fully connected layer produces 3 output classes.

signals. For feature extraction and classification CNN was used in this work and found a significant enhancement in the classification accuracy. Compared with the other recent methods that were applied on the SEED dataset, the proposed method achieved the highest classification accu- racies 89.056% 4.32 (using 25% data in training and the rest 75% in testing) and 94.63% 3.68 (using 50% data in training, and rest 50% in testing). From this convincing output, it is expected that the proposed expert system would work efficiently in other types of EEG signal clas- sification, which will be our next focus.

