One of the most promising approaches for complex technical systems analysis employs ensemble meth- ods of classification. Ensemble methods enable a reliable decision rules construction for feature space classification in the presence of many possible states of the system. In this paper the novel techniques based on decision trees are used to evaluate power system reliability. In this work a hybrid approach based on random forests models and boosting model is proposed. Such techniques can be applied to pre- dict the interaction of increasing renewable power, storage devices and intelligent switching of smart loads from intelligent domestic appliances, storage heaters and air-conditioning units and electric vehi- cles with grid to enhance decision making. This ensemble classification method was tested on the mod- ified 118-bus IEEE power system to examine whether the power system is secured under steady-state operating conditions.

The paper is organized in 6 sections. Section 1 introduces. Sec- tion 2 presents the problem statement of security assessment. Sec- tion 3 introduces the applications of ensemble DT-based learning for the security assessment in power systems. Section 4 describes database preparation with due considerations to power systems with high penetration of wind power generation and other dis- tributed generation (DG). Section 6 demonstrates the feasibility of the ensemble DT-based approach using an IEEE 118 test power system. Section 6 concludes.

A great many studies show that the effective solution to this problem can be found on the basis of machine learning methods which normally include artificial neural networks, decision trees, ensemble (committee) models, etc. These studies are summarised and discussed in Zhou et al. [23].

Later Valiant and Kearns [25] were the first question whether or not a weak learning algorithm can be strengthened to an arbitrary accurate learning algorithm. This process was called boosting. Schapire [26] developed the first provable polynomial-time boost- ing algorithm. It was intended to convert weak models into strong model by constructing an ensemble of classifiers. The main idea of the boosting algorithm is a step-by-step enhancement of the algo-

Another approach to the classification and regression problems using the ensembles was suggested by Breiman [28]. This approach is an extension of the bagging idea. According to this idea, a collec- tive decision can be obtained by using an elementary committee method which classifies an object according to a decision of most of the algorithms. Unlike the boosting method bagging is based on parallel learning of base classifiers. One of the progressive bagging-based approaches is the method called Random Forest [29]. Later there appeared the most effective modifications of both Random forests and boosting algorithms such as Extremely Ran- domized Trees [30], Oblique Random Forests [31] and Stochastic Gradient Boosting [32].

Several applications involving ensemble DTs have been addressed in real-time transient stability prediction and assess- ment, voltage security monitoring and estimation, loss of synchro- nism detection and timing of controlled separation in power systems [15,16,18,33]. A recent approach has combined DT with another data mining tool for prediction performance improvement in the field of dynamic security controls [34]. Vittal et al. [16] pre- sented an online voltage security assessment scheme using PMUs and periodically updated DTs. The proposed tree-based model are trained offline using detailed voltage security analysis con- ducted and updated every hour by including newly predicted sys- tem conditions for robustness improvement. Sadeghi et al. [13] proposed the AdaBoost algorithm as a new approach in security assessment by classifying pre-fault data of power system. The main benefits of using AdaBoost are a higher accuracy compared to other machine learning approaches and the ability to display effects of different features in the security assessment problem.

Liu et al. [35] proposed a random forest-based approach for online power system security assessment. The results are showed high accuracy in the presence of variance and uncertainties due to wind power generation and other dispersed generation units. The performance of this approach was demonstrated on the oper- ational model of western Danish power system with the scale of around 200 lines and 400 buses. Kamwa et al. [36] demonstrated the effectiveness of the random forest-based approach in a PMU predictive assessment of catastrophic power system events. To demonstrate the greatest generalization capability of the method- ology, a single Random Forest is shown to have a 99.9% reliability on a large data set containing a mix of 90% instances from the Hydro-Quebec grid and 10% instances from a nine-area test system.

The key to overcoming these challenges is to use automated modeling techniques. To find the best security assessment model, we need to be able to search across techniques and to tune param- eters within techniques. Potentially, this can mean a massive num- ber of model train-and-test cycles to run; we can use heuristics to limit the scope of techniques to be evaluated based on characteris- tics of the response measure and the predictors.

where aL is a set of load nodes. Lj is a local indicator that determines the buses which can be sources of collapse. The L-index varies in a range between 0 (no load) and 1 (voltage collapse) and is used to provide meaningful voltage instability information during the dynamic disturbances in the system.

