It is an important way to use of borehole electrical-logging techniques to determine true-formation resistivity and to estimate original hydrocarbon saturation in petroleum exploration. Joint inversion algorithm is efficient to improve log interpretation and reservoir evaluation [1]. Since the limited measurement data is nonlinear for the electrical-logging inversion, there is no unique solution for the logging inversion problem. The inversion results are really the approximate solution or estimated results for the true values. Hence, it is

In a logging inversion problem, the true reservoir parameters are usually unknown. Hence, except from the constraint of priori information, it is important to evaluate the inversion solution, i.e. to evaluate the inversion algorithm. Usually, a common way is to evaluate the reliability and efficiency of an inversion method for an artificial formation [2,3]. In addition, the electric logging inversion is an intrinsically nonlinear inversion problem. It can be transformed into a linear inverse problem using appropriate treatment methods, so that the evaluation criterion of linear inversion theory can be used [4,5]. The present works evaluated the stability and convergence for joint inversion algorithm of dual-induction log and dual laterolog device using data-resolution matrix, model-resolution matrix, and condition number according to the linear inversion theory.

The formation was composed of borehole, invasion zone and undisturbed formation. It can be described by three parameters: true-formation resistivity Rt, resistivity of invaded zone Rxo and invasion depth ri. A dual induction logging instrument, such as conventional dual-induction devices [6] or high-resolution dual induction array [2], can provide two logging curves: deep- and medium-induction log value. A dual laterolog tool, such as conventional dual laterolog tools [6] or high-resolution dual laterolog array [3], yields deep and shallow lateral logging value. If a well was logged using both the dual laterolog device and dual-induction tool, there were four log values were obtained simultaneously. Thus, the four logging data can be used to inverse the three unknown formation parameters: Rt, Rxo and ri simultaneously.

After the increment X was solved, the new values of model parameters can be yielded. Then these new data were input into the forward model to calculate the logging responses and errors. The iterative process will termination until the convergence condition was satisfied.

2, 3, 4). The superscript m and s denote the results of measurement and simulation respectively. R1 means deep-induction logging data RID. R2 denotes medium-induction logging data RIM . R3 and R4 were deep and shallow laterolog responses RLD and RLS, respectively.

