Integrated circuit (IC) fabrication technology has improved to 7 nm resulting that IC can accommodate more transistors to implement system-on-a-chip (SOC). SOC generally consists of a great quantity digital circuits with specific functions. Diverse signals not only convey inside but also communicate outside among circuits. For hundreds of thousands interlaced and complicated signals, it is an extreme big chal- lenge to route in shrink channel. In this work, we propose a complexity effect routing algorithm based on the Lee algorithm to achieve fast verification for SOC. The advantages are to gain fast evaluated for var- ious architectures of route, trace path from origin to destination and set diverse complexity to simulate SOC architectures. Experimental results demonstrate the achievements on five complexity sets of routing benchmarks.

Advance fabrication brings the inclusion of system-on-a-chip (SOC) that coexist processor and all the necessary components. As follow the latest technology of semiconductors nanometer pro- cess, the length of transistors is designed inside SOC that improves capacity, performance and reliability. At the same time, more and more circuit modules are integrated into SOC resulting in routing through all modules and becomes a lot much difficult.

Advance nano-process integrated circuit technology produces an extreme tiny transistor to achieve lighter and faster products. Minimized transistors expand capacity to accommodate more and more digital circuits but shrink the path among elements. Moreover, the area of chip is either the same or smaller than pre- vious products. In other words, new technology makes the design chip becoming more difficult resulting from tiny transistor, more circuits and narrow paths. Besides, within same area which places more circuits result in the usable communicating path are greatly decreased. As a modern chip with more and more circuits but less and less usable path, nano-process technology obviously brings a new challenge on exacerbating routing problem.

modules are determined their placements in SOC, the CERA performs the routing scheme from origin to destination. The result may be either successfully completed route or discon- nected. The former report is useful for designers to further consider of delay and driver issue. In the contrary, the latter points the stop stepping from origin to destination to help designers to adjust placement. In order to demonstrate the

