In recent years, intelligent diagnosis and intelligent medical treatment based on big data of medical examina- tions have become the main trend of medical development in the future. In this paper, we propose a method for analyzing the difference between males and females in medical examination items (medical attributes) and find that males and females of different ages have differences in medical attributes. Then, the cluster analysis method is used to further analyze the differences between male and female in medical examination items, such that some common important attributes (CIAs) that can be used for gender recognition are found within a specific age range. Following, we propose two gender recognition models (GRMs) by using the found CIAs to identify the gender. A large number of experimental results are provided to validate the effectiveness of the proposed GRMs. Experimental results show that the medical attributes with a large value of difference really contribute to gender recognition. Within a certain age range, such as 17 to 51 years old, the proposed GRM can reach 92.8% accuracy using only six medical attributes.

Neighbors, Iterative Imputer, and MICE to generate values for missing data in EMR centered on oncology [8]. Farnaz et al. developed a time series medical generative adjunctive network (GANs) for a wound prognosis model that can generate continuous and categorical features from EMR [9].

Two gender recognition models (GRMs), i.e., GRM A for the sample to be identified with known age, and GRM B for the sample to be identified with unknown age, are developed to identify the gender of samples. Experimental results show that in certain age ranges, such as 17 to 51 years old, the proposed GRM A and GRM B can reach 92.8% and 93.8% accuracy, respectively.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the dataset and analyze the differences between males and females in medical examination. In Section 3, we further analyze through cluster analysis and determine the medical examination items that play an important role in gender recognition in each age subrange. In Section 4, two gender recognition models are proposed according to whether the age of the examples is known or not. Then, we evaluate the proposed models and the role of data analysis in gender recognition in Section 5. Finally, we conclude in Section 6.

In this section, we evaluate the performance of the GRMs and discuss further the role of CIAs as well as the important of the division of age range. For each experiment, five learning algorithms, i.e., LR, linear discriminant analysis (LDA) [25], naive Bayes (NB) [26], RF, and gradient boosting decision tree (GBDT) [27], are used. In addition, for gain is 2.8%. This means that if we know the age of samples, the age range division will improve the accuracy of gender recognition more, which is much higher than the case of unknown sample age. Furthermore, the division of age range is more helpful for gender

with only six CIAs. In age subrange C1 and C2, compared to GRM five learning algorithms can achieve about 92% recognition accuracy A, GRM2 has 10% recognition accuracy loss. While, the recognition accuracy loss will be more in age subrange C3 and C4, close to 20%.

In this paper, we proposed a method for calculating the difference of medical attributes between males and females at a specified age via the distribution of medical attributes of males and females. We find that only a few medical attributes have an obvious differences between males and females. Then, we further analyzed the differences between males and females by cluster analysis, and found some CIAs in a certain age subrange. In addition, we proposed two GRMs based on the results of data analysis to identify the gender of samples according to whether the age is known or not. Experiment results have shown that in a certain age range, such as 17 to 51 years old, the proposed GRM can reach 92.8% accuracy using only six medical attributes. In addition to evaluating GRM recognition effect, we also verified the effectiveness of GRM B, cluster analysis, and CIAs through comparative experiments.

