The production journey of tea, which is harvested three times a year, starts with the tea collection process of the farmer. Farmers usually enter the tea field at sunrise and harvest the tea until the afternoon. The tea is transported to the so-called purchase location for the sale process of the farmer-factory. Tea is weighed, and the sales process is completed in the purchase locations. The purchase location and factory capacity constraints are important in the harvesting process. The intensities in the purchase locations may cause the tea to remain in the sun instead of in shaded areas. Tea can be affected by the sun. If the tea is sunburnt, it is not accepted by the factory. This causes the tea to be waste. Considering the purchase location capacity is essential to elimi- nate such grievances. The aim of the minimization of truck expeditions during harvest scheduling is significant to use the resources of the facto- ries efficiently. In addition, it is important for social development and in- centive to agriculture to consider the harvest day preferences in the creation of the harvest schedule. Considering these parameters in the harvest process increases national efficiency in tea farming.

The plan of the study is as follows: In the second section, the harvest scheduling problem is mentioned. In the third section, the studies in the literature are examined. In the fourth section, a sample application was performed. The result of the study is in the fifth section.

Each farmer belongs to a purchase location according to where he resides. Exposure of teas to sunlight burns teas, and some or all of them lead to the rejection of the factory. Because tea became useless for factories. The rejection of these teas, which are fertilized, cleaned from wild herbs, harvested when the time comes, and transported to the purchase locations causes wastage. For this reason, in this study, the capacity of purchase location is considered in the tea harvest scheduling.

This model minimizes the MNOTER complying with farmers' total number of harvesting days, purchasing place, and factory capacity con- straints. Minimizing the number of expeditions is essential in terms of the efficient use of factory vehicles. In this model the day preferences of farmers are not taken into consideration.

the number of weekly harvest days on the model's success. The farmers to be modified were randomly selected. The weekly harvest day num- bers of the selected farmers were again randomly changed by one day in the upward or downward direction. There has been no change in

the upward direction for those whose number of harvest days is six and downward for those who have one. The reason for changing only one day is to maintain the reasonableness of the number of harvest days established by considering the farmer's weekly quota. For example, it would not be reasonable for a farmer who harvests a large amount of tea six days a week to change the number of harvest days per week to one. In this way, 100 preference matrices were produced with Python. Solutions have been implemented through Python and COS. When the results were examined, it was seen that the weekly MNOTER was 87

changed without changing the number of harvest days. In this way, 100 preference matrices are produced with Python. Solutions have been implemented through Python and COS. When the results were ex- amined, it was seen that the weekly MNOTER was 87 in all solutions.

weekly MNOTER has lower success. This is because the model does not consider farmer preferences. When the MNOTER is examined, it is seen that the consideration of farmer preferences does not affect this value. Although the weekly MNOTER is the same, the second model of- fers a dominant solution compared to the first model because the sec- ond model is better at adapting to preferences. This proves that while considering farmers' day preferences, the weekly MNOTER of the facto- ries can also be minimized. Subjecting the models to sensitivity analysis and deciding their consistency shows they will succeed in different pref- erence matrices.

Considering the capacities of the purchase location is important for the sake of not losing the harvest, efficient use of the receiving places, and the sustainability of the farmer-factory relationship. In addition, as a result of analysing the occupancy rates of the reception place, it may be considered to make the purchase locations with low CUR value inactive on certain days. In this way, the shipping program can become more efficient.

In the study, a harvest optimization for sustainable agriculture was carried out. Two mathematical models have been developed for tea har- vest scheduling. One of these models only optimizes factory resources, while another aims to comply with factory resources and farmer prefer- ences as much as possible. A case study was conducted in a region with 3392 decares tea fields, 12 tea receiving places and a factory. The sched- ule created with the models is compared in terms of the number of ex- peditions made by the factory vehicles and the adaptation to the day preferences of the farmers. According to the mathematical model, which only considers the number of expeditions of factory vehicles, it tation to farmer preferences is 52.13%. In the model, which considers the day preferences of farmers and factory vehicles, it was seen that while the number of expeditions remained the same, the rate of adapta- tion to farmers' day preferences increased from 52.13% to 97.65%. This result shows that considering the farmers' day preferences does not negatively impact the factory and can increase sustainability and incen- tives in agriculture. Companies can increase their preference by consid- ering the farmers' harvest day preferences and get one step ahead in the market.

In future studies, vehicle routing and personnel scheduling prob- lems may also be included in the tea harvest scheduling problem. It can be decided which days the farmers will harvest, which route the factory's vehicles will follow, and which purchase locations will stop. Staff scheduling studies can be carried out for drivers and pur- chase location officers. The effect of making farmers' buying places flexible on the rate of adaptation to their day preferences can be ex- amined. Larger problems can be addressed, and scheduling can be carried out for all reception locations connected to the factory. As the complexity of models increases, solutions can be realized with heuristic methods.

