Aiming to target occlusion problem in complex scenes, human action recognition via a top-view vision is proposed. However, in this view, the human behavior rotated will be mistakenly identified as another behavior. To address this situation, taking into account the rotation invariance of the moments, human static posture are represented by Hu moments, and using the SVM as trainer and classifier. According to the change of coordinate of the binary image centroid, semantic web of dynamic behavior is established. The experimental results show that this method can accurately identify the human dynamic information and has a high recognition rate.

Human behavior understanding is very active in the field of computer vision, and with the rapid development of computers and other technology, it has made great progress [1]. In recent years, people have started from theoretical research to practical application scenarios. It is great significance in the real world. Now at many public occasions, the camera is located in the corners or top, so in this paper, based on a positive view would be impractical. At present, most of the behavior studies are based on the corner of the camera, while the top of the camera mostly concentrated on the statistics of the number of people [2,3], and action understanding literature is rare [4].

Therefore, a method based on the top-view is proposed. The method has the inherent advantage to solve the occlusion problem. However, in top-view, rotation of people makes the common feature representation is invalid. The translation invariance and rotation invariance of Hu moments are used to represent the gesture feature vector [6]. At the same time more high-level semantic information is drawn according to the change in the coordinates of the centroid.

The shape features need to be same after rotation in the top-view. So, the invariance of the geometric transformation is employed to represent the behavioral characteristics. Certain moments of the image area have the same characteristics such as translation, rotation, scale and other geometric transformations, so it is widely used in pattern recognition.

Use the training data to train SVM. SVM is a learning method based on structural risk minimization criteria and takes training error as the constraints of the optimization problem [9]. SVM classifier with kernel is shown in formula and we can get a classification.

Static posture recognition is far from meeting the needs of people. Accurately our aim is to identify the dynamic information. In recognition of the static posture, you can employ the coordinates of the centroid changes to identify the higher level of semantic information.

In the experiment, the camera fixed at the top of hall and the lens direction is vertically downward. The distance between ground and hall is about 6m.The experimental environment is VS2010 and Opencv2.2. And experimental set with 30 frames /s video data.

A top-view behavior recognition method is presented in the paper. It is able to identify three static postures and eight high-level dynamic behaviors. The experimental results show that the identification of this article is significantly higher than literature [4]. However, arm lift or not is very serious to behavior recognition, and how to overcome the impact of the arm is the focus of future research. This article is the basis of the behavior recognition of this view and we will focus on the other behavior, people interaction and tracking research.

