where Class is the class label with outcomes BLC or JNE, and Ai is the at- tribute. The model computes the posterior probability of a progeny, with respect to its lineage, as the product of the prior probability of the class label and the conditional probabilities of the attributes with re- spect to that class label. The application of this model in the prediction or the classification of subjects in a population is said to be discrimina- tive as opposed to logistic regression that is generative (Ng and Jordan, 2001).

The two strains were different by the color of their kernels. Kernels from BLC were translucent giving the appearance of white kernels. Kernels from JNE were yellow. In this study, the BLC strain underwent three cy- cles of selection for longer and wider leaves, a larger number of leaves and taller plants while the JNE strain was subjected to random selection after each cycle. Seed from selected plants of each strain were obtained by pollination with a bulk of pollen from several male inflorescences of the same strain. The controlled pollination was insured by the protec- tion of ear shoot with paper bag soon after it emerged.

each model. We assessed the performance of each model with the accu- racy and the AUC value. In running the two models, the BLC genotype was considered the positive class. We used the statistical software R (R Core Team, 2017) for all the analyses.

they were developed. The BLC population was developed with a selec- tion procedure directed to wider and longer leaves, a larger number of leaves and taller plants. Three cycles of selection may have contributed to the partial accomplishment of that goal. Except for the trait ln, more individuals of the BLC genotypes have developed the distinctive traits

group that was more homogenous and that was better predicted by the models. Kudaravalli et al. (2009), Bersaglieri et al. (2004), Enattah et al. (2005), and Tishkoff et al. (2007) reported corroborating evidence of the effect of selection on a trait. They proved that natural or artificial selection affected the expression of the gene(s) that translated into a modified phenotype. And Wang et al. (2018) found that the maize leaf width is controlled by dominant genes not linked with gene

