Desalination is one of the most important sources of water especially in Gulf countries like Saudi Arabia. For their sustainability and localized generation, it is important to switch to or start integrating renew- able technologies to the conventional grid for powering desalination plants. Furthermore, the control of these types of grids is now moving towards a cyber-physical system (CPS) approach rather than tradi- tional process control. In this paper, we show how the control and monitoring of renewable-based desali- nation plants can be done using Internet of things (IoT) as IoT comes under the framework of CPS. The system studied is a hybrid wind-solar energy driven desalination plant that is implemented from an IoT perspective using the network simulation tool Packet Tracer by CISCO. The plant is powered using renewable sources which operate the pumping station. In addition, the motors are automatically con- trolled according to the water level and demand whereas the boiler is also controlled automatically by a thermostat. However, there is also a web-accessible monitoring station housed on a server to which employees are given different levels of access according to their position. Lastly, NAT and ACL are used to implement network security and aid in access control.

Due to the focus on renewable energy nowadays and the prob- lems with sustainability of fossil fuels, the focus is on powering desalination plants using renewable sources. Furthermore, desali- nation plants are usually located at the coast. The weather in those places is quite windy and there is a lot of potential for the use of wind energy. In the Gulf countries like Saudi Arabia, sunlight is usually available all year round, so there is a terrific opportunity to power industrial operations by hybrid wind-solar energy. How- ever, these nations severely lag in renewable technologies; although Saudi Arabia has recently begun work on such a plant.

In literature, a lot of work is there on using renewable sources to generate energy for desalination plants. They have been ana- lyzed from the perspective of the physical/chemical process as well as the engineering and financial aspects. However, as we will show in the next section, they have yet to be analyzed/simulated from the perspective of IoT. This is very important because renewable energies are part of the smart grids which come under the domain of cyber-physical systems (CPS).

This paper implements a small-scale desalination plant using the IoT framework in CISCO packet tracer. It is organized as fol- lows: Section 2 briefly reviews the work done in literature for renewable energy driven desalination plants. Section 3 describes the implementation logic of our hybrid wind-solar desalination plant and discusses the different components from an IoT perspec- tive. Section 4 presents some of the results and finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.

$3.16, which is in stark contrast to the previous predicted costs of up to $9.00 [12]. Aparicio et al. carry out the economic analysis for small desalination plants from brackish acquirers located in the city of Cartagena in Spain [13]. Similar analysis for plants powering local agricultural needs is done by Jones et al. for hybrid wind-PV generators without storage. Several case studies were conducted in Jordan valley which showed the importance of favorable loca- tions and proper crop selection [14].

Hamed et al. recently analyzed the performance of a Fresnel solar collecting system. They showed that under certain conditions, solar power can achieve a reduction in cost by about $40 per barrel of drinking water produced [15]. Tsai et al. implement a novel innovative model which combines desalination and renewable energy for optimal power and water supply; which is different to most of the existing work that focuses only on one entity at a time [16]. A case study is done for the case of Taichung city to fulfill its electricity and water needs for the year 2030.

The most recent research for Saudi Arabia was done by Mokhei- mer et al. who propose a hybrid wind-solar that consists of 2 wind turbines, 40 PV modules and 6 storage batteries [17]. This system is expected to power a 1KW load all year round for 24 and 12 h a day. The expected cost is $0.672/kW h. We follow a similar model in our implementation but for a smaller scale because currently, our sys- tem cannot support such a large-scale plant. We hope to imple- ment this in a near future. Currently, the focus is on the IoT aspect of the plants rather than the mechanical/electrical aspects.

