Multiple-Point Simulation (MPS) is a geostatistical simulation technique commonly used to model complex geological patterns and subsurface heterogeneity. There have been a great variety of implementation methods developed within MPS, of which Patch-Based Simulation is a more recently developed class. While we have witnessed great progress in Patch-Based algorithms lately, they are still faced with two challenges: conditioning to point data and the occurrence of verbatim copy. Both of them are partly due to finite size of Training image, from which a limited size of pattern database is constructed. To address these questions, we propose a novel approach that we call Generative-Patched-Simulation (GPSim), which is based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN). With this method, we are able to generate sufficient (in theory an infinite) number of new patches based on the current pattern database. As demonstrated by the results on a simple 2D binary image, this approach shows its potential to address the two issues and thus improve Patch-based Simulation methods.

The first difficulty is conditioning to point data. Patch-based meth- ods generally have more difficulty with conditioning to point data than Pixel-based algorithms. During the simulation, patches from TI are compared with the neighborhood of the current simulation point (termed Data Event) using the concept of distance (or similarity). The most similar candidate patches are selected and one of them is pasted onto the simulation grid. Data Event often includes hard data which are assumed known and certain, as a result the candidate patches must honor the conditioning hard data exactly. There is a likelihood that we could not find from TI a sufficient number of replicates exactly matching the hard data. What is even worse, no such patch from TI could be found if the hard data within the data event are dense.

The second difficulty is the occurrence of verbatim copy, which refers to portions of TI perfectly reproduced onto the simulation grid. This leads to the reduction of variability between realizations. Since one of the main goals of MPS (or say geostatistics) is the modeling of spatial uncertainty, it is desired if we can improve the variability between realizations to ameliorate the verbatim copy problem.

will follow an approach called GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014b) for the generation of such new patches. GAN consists of two competing neu- ral networks trained simultaneously by an adversarial process. These two nets, called the Generator and the Discriminator, are essentially differential functions. We first introduce the Generator, which can be formulated as follows,

Generating new patches used in patch-based simulation is always desirable due to finite size of TI. Recently, Rezaee et al. (2015) en- riches the pattern database by generating many independent realiza- tions from which more patches can be extracted. These realizations are obtained by passing the original training image to a patch-based multiple-point simulator. Our paper and Rezaee et al. (2015) address the same problem of improving patch-based algorithms by enriching pattern database. The main difference is as follows: there are various implementation methods developed within patch-based approaches. The emphasis in the paper is not on describing all implementation methods. It is on how to improve the performance of those existing methods using GAN. For a detail review of patch-based algorithms see, e.g. Hu and Chugunova (2008), Mariethoz and Caers (2014), Mariethoz and Lefebvre (2014), and references therein.

In this section, we will quantitatively compare realizations created from the enriched patch database with the ones produced from the original patches. This comparison is conducted on the basis of two criteria (Tan et al., 2014): (i) the variability between generated real- izations, also called a diversity score representing a model of spatial uncertainty and (ii) the variability within the realizations, also termed an inconsistency score depicting how well the statistics of the training image are reproduced. Realizations generated by a better patch-based algorithm could be deemed to have a larger space of uncertainty and a better pattern reproduction. To quantitatively study these two types of variabilities, we use the distance function, as defined in Tan et al. (2014) to provide a measure of similarity between any two images

In the second row, the original approach represents a slightly shorter distance of 0.9823 compared to 1 for the proposed one, in- dicating that both of their performance in reproducing statistics of the training image is quite similar. This result is also consistent with the expectation. A possible reason could be that both of new and original patterns come from the same probability distribution (see Section 4.2). Therefore, the performance of both two methods in reproducing statistics of the training image is quite similar.

