Durian is known as the king of fruit and considered to be an impor- tant agricultural product. Thailand is the largest producer and exporter of durian in the world (Ministry of Commerce, 2020). In particular, the Mon Thong variety is famous because it has a sweet, delicious taste. Ac- cording to Thailand's export statistics for fresh durian in 2021, Thailand is the world's number one exporter of durian, with an export volume of around 900,000 tons, valued at about 3 billion dollars. In 2021, the value of Thailand's fresh durian exportation increased by approximately 66.39% compared to 2020 (Export statistics of fresh durian, 2022).

Near-infrared spectroscopy was used to predict the sweetness of du- rian pulp both online (scanning with the sample moving) and offline (scanning with the sample remaining static) (Leepaitoon, 2018). The online model consisted of an R2 of 0.70 and RMSEP of 4.0%. Meanwhile, the offline model had an R2 of 0.81 and RMSEP of 3.27%. The near- infrared (NIR) hyperspectral image technique was used to scan the du- rian pulp, predict DM, and classify the ripeness of the durian pulp (Sharma et al., 2022). For DM prediction, the model developed with a

According to the literature review, the near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRs) techniques demonstrated a high potential to determine the ma- turity stage and ripeness of durian fruit and pulp. The previous research resulted in destructive and minimally destructive fruit. Therefore, this present research attempted to perform evaluation under conditions which were as non-destructive as possible. Therefore, the aim of this study was to apply NIR spectroscopy techniques to classify the maturity of whole durian fruit. The scanning was performed under full non- destructive conditions and two main objectives: 1) to develop a classifi- cation model for measuring the maturity stage of whole durian fruit using SWNIR and LWNIR spectroscopy, and 2) to search for an optimal scanning method for use as a full non-destructive measurement of maturity class.

Durian fruit (Mon Thong variety) was obtained from the Duangkhae durian orchard, Nam Nao District, Phetchabun Province (Latitude 16.7866, longitude 101.6478). A total of 160 fruit samples were col- lected from five different age periods, based on the days after blooming (DAB), including 80 to 90 (40 fruits), 90 to 100 (40 fruits), 100 to 110 (40 fruits), 110 to 120 (20 fruits), and 120 to 130 (20 fruits). The durian fruit collected was classified into three maturity stages based on DAB: unripe (80 to 100 DAB = 80 fruits), prematurity (101 to 120 DAB = 60 fruits), and mature (121 to 130 DAB = 20 fruits). The samples were taken to the Department of Agricultural Engineering Laboratory, Faculty of Engineering, KhonKaen University. The 30 durian fruits from prematurity stage (60 fruits) were separated randomly and were left to ripen for seven days. They were assigned as the ripe stage (Pimten., 2021; Posomboon, 2020). Durian is a climacteric fruit. The rip- ening is regulated by ethylene which fruit can ripe by itself after har- vesting (Tongdee et al., 1990).

The training model was created using cross-validation (CV). K-Fold CV is where a given dataset is split into a K number of sections/folds with each fold used as a testing set at some point. Taking the scenario of 5-Fold CV (K = 5). In the first iteration, the first fold is used to test the model and the remainder to train the model. In the second iteration, the second fold is used as the testing set, while the remainder serves as the training set. This process is repeated until each of the five folds have been used as the testing set (Krishni, 2018). Thus, in this research, k-fold CV of k = 5 used where the training set and test dataset are 75% and 25%, respectively. Therefore, the total sample was 160, calibration set was 117 fruits and validation set were 43 fruits.

for rind (from first step) had been obtained, the pre-processed rind spectra were merged with raw stem spectra or stem spectra pre- treated with several techniques (D1, D2, MA + SNV, and MA + baseline offset). A rind spectral sample was merged with a stem sample to form a single sample. These combined spectra were used to generate the clas- sification model again.

This work classifies into four classes i.e. unripe, prematurity, matu- rity, and ripe. For example, if considering for the class of ripe stage; TP, TN, FP, and FN can be described as: TP is the number of samples that are correctly classified for ripe; TN is the number of samples unripe, pre- maturity, and maturity; FN is the number of samples to unripe that are misclassified as ripe, prematurity, and maturity and; FP is the number of samples of unripe, prematurity, and maturity that are misclassified as ripe. Furthermore, the area under the receiver operating characteristic the pulp smears, causing the humidity to be higher than usual. This corresponds to Timkhum and Terdwongworakul (2013), where the percentage DM values are lower because of the high moisture caused by the heavy rainfall. This demonstrates that humidity affects the percentage DM.

The application of NIR spectroscopy could reduce operating time, and different positions of rind combined with stem spectra producing a similar performance. Any rind position combined with stem spectra can be used for prediction. The findings reveal that different rind spectra can give similar results. Accurate prediction was achieved by the LDA classification model developed from MA + baseline rind spectra (differ- ent positions, i.e., head, middle, and tail) and MA + SNV stem spectra for SWNIR spectrometer.

