Urbanization, which is mainly caused by the migration of people to seek employment opportunities and better services, creates high popu- lation densities because of land restrictions in designated areas [1]. The UN report on World Urbanization Prospects - 2018 [2] shows only 43% of world population lived in urban area in 1990. However, it has increased to 55% in 2018 and predicted to be 60% by 2030. This will definitely cause aggravated pressures on urban land development.

Demand for land development exerts pressure on surface runoff drainage systems and also on the available water storage in floodplains. Hellmers et al. [3], study shows the increment in flood inundations areas with the urban growth and existing drainage system. Carver [4] describes the reduction of lag time to collect runoff to drainage as a reason for flood. USGS fact sheet [5] also describes the negative effect of $/km2. According to Huizinga [12], damage due to urban floods varies significantly from Asia to America. Word Bank [13] estimates the global flood loss will be 52 Bn $/year in 2050 which was only 6 Bn $/year in 2005. This points to the importance of achieving sustainable develop- ment in urban areas.

However, Han et al. [38], highlight that urban lands have more pressure when considering the effect of urban economy on the interna- tional supply chain and commodity trade. Hence, the business-people have more interest on urban lands. Meantime, according to Struyk and Angelici [39], the Russian urban dwellers pay a high interest on rural cottages/villas known as dacha phenomenon, and less interest on urban lands. Then, it can observed that the stakeholder interest on urban land does not have a common behavior. Nevertheless, it is common that the uncompromising nature of floodwater that continues to flow under gravity with no respect for administrative boundaries.

As there are gaps in the initial review, a systematic literature review has been conducted following the guideline by Kitchenham and Charters [54]. Accordingly, a set of literature that describe the tool/procedur- e/guideline/framework which use for flood/water management are selected. Then literature is evaluated under two research questions (1) How the literature has identified the stakeholder concerns and (2) How those concerns are incorporated to the HydroGIS tool. Among the sur- veyed literatures, following are crucial for the overall study.

Then present work developed and analyzed the main approval granting use case to identify and classify the stakeholders. A compre- hensive literature survey was carried out to find the different concerns in GIS automating. Then the findings were discussed with the identified stakeholders and those were modified and enhanced. To implement those concerns when developing the tool, it attempted to apply the state of art methods. If there is no proper method, then present work devel- oped novel methods. When the tool was developed, it was evaluated with the potential stakeholders. Later, based on their views, the tool was further modified. This was repetitively done to reach to a substantial satisfaction of stakeholders.

System developers pointing to the challenge of achieving a user- friendly GIS map based hydro model without having structured guide- lines stressed the need to contribute towards better GIS-GUI development guidelines. The other key concern raised was the time constraint for modeler-developer interaction due to urgency for product development by adhering to independent development of the front end and the back end of tools. Developers highlighted the need for intensified stakeholder interactions to achieve.

The present work identified two main works whilst automation. One is the accurate automation of hydrology model with GIS and other is incorporating the user concerns sufficiently. Then a predictive develop- ment method was used as the core for the tool development however, whilst an adaptive development methodology with repetitive prototype development was utilized as a hybrid methodology for the present user interface development. In this effort, development works of both the user interface and the hydro & GIS model computational modules were simultaneously started by incorporating a combined modelling effort thus reflecting a development model which oriented a process centric development to achieve a user centric tool. The process is described in the previous work by the authors [69].

The tool was developed and tested with data of Thimbirigasyaya Ward of Colombo municipal council, Sri Lanka. The initial stakeholder satisfaction evaluation was carried out using a sample of 31 users. After that, the resulted suggestions were appropriately incorporated and sub- jected to the 1st formative evaluation with 34 users. Similarly, the 2nd and 3rd evaluations and modifications were done with 31 and 34 stakeholder sets. After a comparison of the gradual increase of stake- holder satisfaction in the key areas of concern, the HydroGIS was accepted to submit for practical application.

A structured questionnaire was developed for easy tools testing. The stakeholders after performing the tasks of land approval process using the HydroGIS expressed their satisfaction levels as a percentage. The process took special efforts to facilitate the stakeholders with both without tool and with tool situations for the assessment of the advantages of the tool during the evaluation. Testing was carried out with two sets of potential system operators. One set participated in the first three evaluations and the final evaluation with the other set was considered as tool verification. Finer details of the evaluation process are described in earlier work [82].

At the first evaluation, the tool lacked a security option, and hence the stakeholder satisfaction was 0%. The stakeholder sample also lacked suggestions. In the next development stage, many options were attemp- ted to secure the data from unauthorized manipulation. The option of physical access control through a lock and key arrangement in a stand- alone computer was incorporated. Stakeholders showed non-satisfaction with a 0% satisfaction. The development strategy of the tool was changed

The main contribution of the present work is a demonstration of how to identify, evaluate, incorporate and verify the stakeholders and their concerns which is lack of documentations for HydroGIS tool at present. Whilst the other works paying attention to stakeholders concern on output, the present work reveals that input, process and output re- quirements also to be automated for easy decision making. Those are practically implemented in the developed tool through providing in- terfaces to technical and non-technical stakeholders to evaluate, adjust, redo/undo and visualize hydro and GIS inputs, processes and outputs.

