DTs are becoming increasingly prominent in the manufacturing industry. DTs are capable of optimizing processes and products prior to their execution thanks to their ability of high-fidelity forecasting. In manufacturing industries, DTs can be virtual representations of differ- ent systems, e.g., machinery, production lines, products, or any other operation or service related to the manufacturing process. Therefore, DTs can be introduced at any time in the manufacturing process, hence their usefulness is not limited to pre-production planning and design, where prediction and optimization of the product or production lines apply, but they can also be used for maintenance, market analysis, etc. [3].

In order to provide a digital integrated platform, both software and hardware components need to be considered. However, one of the core technologies of the DIGITbrain project is the device-agnostic software- based verification mechanism by the implementation of a lightweight cryptographic library. This paper strictly focuses on Models, as a sepa- rate and reusable asset in DIGITbrain.

time-consuming process. Each DT is typically constructed individually, without reusing previous results and existing building blocks. The work described in this paper is the first step to overcome this obstacle by categorizing and describing models with a rich set of metadata to enable their reusability when building DTs.

The sub-systems and components are created by model developers and exported as co-simulation units [41]. In order to perform co- simulation of a complete system, these co-simulation units need a standard way of interacting with each other. Since manufacturing systems are typically produced by a combination of heterogeneous components, these components are usually supplied by several legal entities; hence protection of the intellectual property for the underlying model is needed.

From a LCA point of view, an output of a specific process (i.e., a system) can be formalized as an input to another process. Since a process is considered the fundamental unit for the LCA evaluation, a complex system might be represented by a production machine (as

In addition to LCI data, LCA methodology is also based on Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) information on the impacts related to the inventory, i.e., the computed environmental indicators. LCIA data, for the analysis of a specific system, can be calculated from the LCI data via characterization factors, i.e., factors meant to translate the inventory into environmental impacts. On the basis of the approach explained before, the LCA assessment of a SoS can be obtained as a composition of LCA assessments of each system.

Another type of SoS models supported by DIGITbrain is integrated 3D and Discrete Event Simulation (DES) models. DES models are be- havioral model which describe the evolution of a system during a given time, in which the simulated time is advanced at discrete intervals only when a change in the system occurs, updating the state of the system. In DIGITbrain, DES is supported through the DDDSimulator simulation engine, a DES tool with integrated 3D virtual environment. Simulation models are composed by reusable elements called prototypes, each one representing a component of the simulated system (machine, trans- porters, logic module); prototype instances communicate among each other with ports that are used to exchange data between different modules. The models realized can be used to simulate the system for a period of time and obtain statistics that give information on the performance of the system in the simulated conditions. A graphical Integrated Development Environment (IDE) called DDD Model Editor supports the visual editing of both prototypes and models.

The key to efficiently create DTs lies in the reuse of existing arti- facts. The reuse of software artifacts is a well-established concept in software engineering [59]. The DIGITbrain ecosystem enables reuse by decomposing DTs into their constituting parts, i.e., data, models, and al- gorithms. Metadata describing these assets and their physical locations in external repositories are stored in the Platform, enabling users to create DTs by composing the parts into a Data-Model-Algorithm (DMA) tuple.

The major challenge tackled by DIGITbrain is to present the charac- terization in such a way that the model user can conveniently find the right model for efficient reuse. The core service responsible for enabling reuse is the DIGITbrain Asset Metadata Registry that stores a rich set of metadata about all DIGITbrain assets, including models. The actual models are only referenced from this Registry and stored in external model repositories (the project set up a sample model repository for demonstration purposes). The access service relies on the metadata descriptions to provide filtering, search functionality and to assure that the selected model is fed into the chosen algorithm at execution time.

Within the reference architectures, the domain experts (data scien- tists) can build on and use well-known ML frameworks. The DIGITbrain Platform provides a fast way to reuse models and train them indi- vidually with customized datasets. This fast and easy reproducibility of implementations provides a very fast way to implement AI in pro- duction. This model processing takes place in a predefined working environment supported by ML frameworks such as TensorFlow [69], PyTorch [70], etc. After training, the generated models can be stored in ML framework-specific formats and executed on less powerful hard- ware. To support model portability, the open source community has proposed the Open Neural Network Exchange (ONNX) standard [71]. With this approach, we propose a standard to exchange and transfer trained ML models to the different devices for applications. As another option, we also rely on the SavedModel format [72] favored by Google.

Within this context, the discrete simulation engine (DDDSimula- tor) [76] was used for SoS analysis. The DDDSimulator is a simulation tool for integrated 3D and DES, developed and distributed by Technol- ogy Transfer System (TTS). This simulator enables its users to design new layouts combining reusable modules, each representing an ele- ment of the plant such as machines, transporters, feeding systems and robots. The simulation models can be used to assess the performance of alternative layouts, after which the Model of the effective plant can be uploaded to the DIGITbrain Platform and used to simulate the performances of different production plans.

Popper J, Hermann J, Cui K, Bergweiler S, Weyer S, Ruskowski M, Wang M, Guang L, Hu Y, Kueh V, Wang D, Madigan M, Oppermann I, Ryu S-M, Kim L, Wei S, Li R, Du X, Shang Y, Thonet G. Artificial intelligence across industries. Tech. rep., IEC Whitepaper; 2018, p. 93.

Valentina Zambrano M.Sc. in Physics (La Sapienza University of Rome, Italy). Ph.D. in Medical Physics (Medical University of Vienna, Austria). Worked at CERN, INFN (Italian Institute for Nuclear Physics), MedAustron (Austria). Taught at the University of Zaragoza (Spain). Currently teaches at the International University of La Rioja (Spain) and is Post-Doc at the Aragon Institute of Technology (Spain) on Reduced-Order-Modeling.

Michael Sandberg is an Assistant Professor at Aarhus University (Denmark), De- partment of Mechanical and Production Engineering. His research is focused on the manufacture of polymers and polymer composites, with emphasis on process simulations, flow- and thermo-mechanical modeling. Before academia, Michael worked as an engineer in the wind turbine blade industry.

Davide Zanin M.Sc. Eng. Davide Zanin works as a Researcher at the Institute of Systems and Technologies for Sustainable Production of the Department of Innovative Technologies within the Sustainable Production Systems Laboratory (SPS). He has been involved, as Software Engineer, in several European projects regarding Sustainability and Circular Economy. He is teaching assistant in Introduction of Programming course.

Elke Loeschner is a Senior Consultant with C-LAB, a joint research and development laboratory operated by Atos and the University of Paderborn, and is engaged primarily in innovative R&D projects. During more than 25 years, Elke Loeschner has gained competence and experience in all phases of the software lifecycle. Her recent topics of interest are Industry 4.0 and decarbonization.

Wolfgang Thronicke Dr., works as Principal Consultant and R&D Manager at the Atos Innovation Lab in Paderborn and is member of the Atos Scientific and Expert Communities. Since 2000 he is working on innovative technologies and trends both in research and customer projects with the current focus on digital twin technologies, AI, platforms, and especially GAIA-X related aspects.

Giuseppe Landolfi works at the Institute of Systems and Technologies for Sustainable Production of the Department of Innovative Technologies within the Sustainable Production Systems Laboratory (SPS). He has been involved in several National and European projects as Software Engineer with a supervisory role of a group of developers. He is lecturer in several courses such as Introduction of Programming, Introduction of Object Programming and Industry 4.0.

Alessandro /ontana M. Sc. Eng. Alessandro Fontana is Lecturer & Researcher at SUPSI. Graduated in Material Engineering, he had a six-year industrial experience in Life Cycle Assessment of products and manufacturing processes within Legrand Group. Member of Sustainable Production Systems Lab of SUPSI, his main research domain is sustainability assessment in manufacturing. He teaches Industrial Sustainability at Master and Bachelor level.

Jibinraj Antony completed his M.Sc. in Mechatronics from University of Siegen, Germany, with focus on Deep Learning. Presently he is working as researcher at DFKI focusing on the digital transformation of SMEs. He is also part of the Mittelstand Digital Zentrum (MDZ), offering consultation for SMEs in their digitalization and AI implementation efforts.

Valerie Poser is a researcher at DFKI, focusing on software engineering in cloud environments. She received her B.Sc. and M.Sc. in Computer Science from Saarland University in the field of classical AI planning. Her current research activities address machine learning in cloud environments, with the goal to facilitate the application of state-of-the-art ML tools for industrial applications.

Simon Bergweiler received a diploma in the field of applied computer science at Trier University of Applied Sciences. Since then, he has been working on national and international projects at the German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI). The focus of his current research activities as a senior engineer is on the Cognitive Factory and Human-Centered Subsidiary Industrial Production. In the context of this paper, Machine Learning models as well as the use of methods of AI were considered in terms of Manufacturing as a Service (MaaS).

Salvador Izquierdo is M.Sc. Chemical Engineering (2003) and Ph.D. Fluid Mechanics (2008). Currently he is Coordinator of the Multiphysics & Multiscale Simulation Group at ITAINNOVA. He builds and manages industrial R&D projects providing innovative solutions for materials-, manufacturing- and energy-related problems based on scientific machine learning and high performance simulation. Additional interests: Artificial Intelligence; Digital Twins; Innovation Management; and Intrapreneurship.

Ismael Viejo received the M.S. degree in mechanical engineering and M.A.S. in computational mechanics from the University of Zaragoza, Spain, in 2006 and in 2010. In October 2008, he joined as permanent staff of ITAINNOVA. His research focus on advanced modeling of materials including multi-scale material, process simulation, multi-physic simulations, data analysis, optimization numerical tools and ad hoc applications.

Asier Juan B.Sc. in Mechanical Engineering and M.Sc. in Mechanics of Materials. He joined ITAINNOVA in 2017 as R&D Engineer in the Multiphysics and Multiscale simulation division. He has experience in Computational Fluid Dynamics simulations (CFD) in a variety of industrial products and processes and the generation of Reduced Order Models (ROM) for the user assessment, on live evaluations and optimization tasks.

/rancisco Serrano is Mechanical Engineer (2016) and obtained his Ph.D. in Biomedical Engineering from the University of Zaragoza in 2021. In 2017 he joined ITAINNOVA in the Materials and Components department. He has carried out modeling and simulation tasks on composite material, fiber-reinforced plastics and plastic injections, as well as programming simulation flows, design of experiments and optimizations.

