Mapping and identifying the high-risk zone of landslide is a scien- tifically accepted practice that aim to provide the scientific basement for planning and enhancement of the area (Koley et al., 2019; Juliev et al., 2019). Modeling with the simulation of landslide susceptibility has effectively allowed in the last few years to reduce the damages (Juliev factors (LCFs); (3)Afterward, these LCFs were tested by the multi- collinearity analysis and relief-F. In the third step, the thematic layers of LCFs were prepared; (4) The benchmark models i.e. MLP, KLR, RF, and MARS simulations were used for the modeling of landslide susceptibility;

The choice of LCFs among the various factors used by the different researchers is a challenging process since there are no standardized criteria. Tien Bui et al. (2019) and Saha and Saha (2020a) used mathe- matical methods to choose the important LCFs. In all areas, the same environmental, geological and hydrological variables are not applicable and cannot be used for mapping all hazards (Arabameri et al., 2020). To recognize certain geo-environmental factors, Saha et al. (2020) used the Relief F-test. Different analysis techniques can be used for evaluating parameters such as correlations, relief-f, IGF, probabilistic techniques, and machine learning algorithms. The multi-collinearity (MC) test and relief-F are being used to identify the LCFs.

The MC technique is a procedure for assessing the variables. Due to higher associations between LCFs, the estimation of land susceptibility area may be inaccurate (Dang et al., 2020; Saha and Saha, 2020c). MC decides the independence of the LCFs. Pearson coefficients of correlation, percentages of variances, variance inflation factors (VIF) with condi- tional index, and tolerance levels can be utilized to measure the MC (Cama et al., 2016; Sameen et al., 2020). The VIF and tolerance processes were applied to estimate MC in this region. The VIF and TOL (tolerance)

The different type of landslide (LS) happens due to an imbalance in the local factor's resistance and mechanisms (Pisano et al., 2017). In this research, some specified geo-environmental LCFs were selected for recognizing LS hazard zone and mapping. The most important selected factors for this study are presented below.

Users, commonly used for grouping, are familiar with multi-layer perception (MLP) as ANNs (Haykin, 2009). The training sets are not dependent on the hypothesis of the statistic distribution of the input variables, the relative significance of those input variables is not defined, and the factors are chosen based on their weights throughout the test procedure (Gardner and Dorling, 1998). Input, hidden, and output layers constitute and construct the MLP. The geo-environmental LCFs are the input layers and LS or non-LS are the output layers. The hidden layers are classified and helped to transfer data into output. MLP development is divided into two stages (Tien Bui et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2018; Pham et al., 2016): 1) The performance values are transmitted from the hidden layers and the result values are then incorporated with the preceding values for the differentiation and 2) the correlation weight is associated

Bagging, introduced by Breiman (1996), was assigned to forecast LS sensitivity, one of the appropriate and efficient-ensemble techniques. To direct individual classifiers, the Bagging process utilizes bootstrap sam- ples. New subsets of MLP, KLR, RF, and MARStraining data were collected by randomly sampling the training sets with replacements. As the training base-classifier, certain sub-training sets were included. To incorporate the result of the base classifier, plurality voting was used (Breiman 1996). As the base classifier of the Bagging ensemble meta classifier, MLP, KLR, RF, and MARS MLT was used to compare the results with the individual MLP and RF models.

Validation is important if model reliability is to be calculated (Groesser and Schwaninger, 2012; Saha et al., 2020). Two statistical approaches (MAE and RMSE) and three threshold-dependent statistics (area under of ROC curve, proportion incorrectly classified, accuracy, and precision) were used to determine the reliability of the models in this analysis.

The RF is an essential machine learning process that produces accu- rate predictions without the curse of dimensionality (Shahbazi et al., 2017). RF model works on the concept of classification trees. RF reliably compares, tests, and deals with inconsistency and imprecision in diverse data sets (Lin et al., 2015). RF models create a range of decision trees with a mean decrease in the Gini index (Cutler et al., 2007). At each branching node, RF models take into consideration a random subset of the input data and allow the tree to grow without limiting the tree's maximum size (Rodriguez-Galiano et al., 2012). RF begins with the bagging process in which sub-samples of bootstrap are randomly chosen

that a quantitative evaluation of the correlations between LCFs and LS enable planner and stakeholders to predict the impacts of LCFs. The conditioning variables which work well in one simulation can therefore be negligible in other simulations. For this research work, the significant contribution of LCFs in numerous previous studies was assessed using an RF model (Rahmati et al., 2019). The findings of the RF model revealed that slope had the largest weight and soil depth had the least weight

