Nowadays there is a tremendous effort to enhance educational procedure with the incorporation of new technologies aiming at the better understanding of educational material from students. In this direction many theories have been developed, some of which have been implemented into digital systems. A chal- lenge here is to develop a system that integrates more than one of such theories in a harmonic way for the benefit of student community. In this work we attempt to give an answer to this challenge proposing a novel system that integrates the main characteristics of three well-known educational theories: learning objects, collaborative learning and mobile learning in the context of cultural heritage teaching and learn- ing. Evaluation results suggest that such an attempt is technically feasible, the integrated characteristics of the educational theories remain visible to educators of cultural heritage courses, while cultural her- itage educators positively accept the potential incorporation of the platform in the educational procedure.

The integration of the above characteristics to a unified educa- tional digital environment for cultural heritage courses would not have a solid background without the guidance of approved educa- tional theories. Collaborative learning theory promotes student collaboration and active participation, mobile learning theory explains how to effectively use mobile technology for teaching and learning inside and outside the classroom and learning objects theory guides the creation of re-usable, aggregation-ready, inde- pendent and meta-data enrichable educational content. More specifically, collaborative learning theory [5] guides the formation of small teams in which students work together to reach a com- mon educational goal. Every student participates actively and she/he is responsible to fulfil her/his assigned task in order to help the team. Mobile learning [12,24] provides unique characteristics like portability, user mobility, pervasiveness, ubiquity and imme- diate interaction with the external environment making learning experience more engaging and interesting for young students. Learning objects theory [10] uses small, independent, reusable, aggregation-ready educational units as the main element of educa- tional procedure. Such units can be designed and implemented easily with the help of digital means and can become available to students during learning process regardless of the digital environ- ment or tools they use. Those educational theories can be easily implemented in IT applications, since they have guided the imple- mentation of numerous educational software applications [1,6,7,23,31,32].

The integration and adaptation of characteristics from collabo- rative learning theory or mobile learning theory or learning objects theory to the implementation of educational software applications have been proven feasible in numerous cases [1,6,11,16,19,23]. Wang [1] introduces the design of a collaborative learning environ- ment that focuses on making collaboration friendlier among stu- dents. Chen and Choi [6] present the design of an online collaborative location-aware platform for history learning. Dorca et al. [23] present an efficient approach for personalization of the teaching process using learning objects. A thorough discussion about various technical aspects of mobile learning including usability, user experience and accessibility is provided in [11].

lessons. MedcGame [3] is a collaborative cultural heritage interac- tive software that attempts to engage students in an active learn- ing process. The MusEd Platform [17] offers an online learning repository of reusable cultural heritage content, organized in learn- ing objects. Castle Route [22] urges students to reflect, investigate, disseminate and share cultural heritage and historical content cre- ating a collaborative environment.

site in real-time using mobile devices. The platform allows stu- dents and teachers to contribute personal content based on their experiences or take part in educational discussions. In LAMP/Pulu platform, students learn and construct personal experiences through group work, collaboration and interaction in small groups. The LAMP/Pulu platform makes a primitive step towards the orga- nization of educational information in units. Those units are re- usable within the context of the project, but they are neither plat- form independent as they can be only used within the LAMP plat- form, nor aggregation-ready or metadata enrichable as a typical learning object should be.

Guided by learning objects theory, the system has been designed to organize educational content in units. Each unit retains the main characteristics of a learning object as they have been declared by learning objects theory [10]. More specifically, each unit contains a small amount of information and it can be used by one or more individuals simultaneously. Each unit is semanti- cally independent from other ones and it can be used on its own or be aggregated in a collection with other units, which share a

Learning objects are aggregated in collections based on general and educational elements as they are described in their metadata. More specifically, educational units can be aggregated in collec- tions per cultural discipline, keyword, interactivity type and level, context, age range, difficulty, learning time and semantic density. If a teacher wants to create a specific collection, she/he can download the corresponding xml file with filtered content based on her/his needs.

Students are able to interact with the system searching and viewing educational content as many times as they desire concur- rently with other students. Also students can review a unit. Stu- dent contributions lead in constructing new personal knowledge and sharing it with other students, which is a key feature in educa- tional theories like constructivism [9].

Collaborative projects: Teachers can create a specific educa- tional project, set a final goal and intermediate tasks, provide hints and solutions for each task and assign the project to a specific student group. Students collaborate with their team- mates to complete project tasks. After completing each task, the system unlocks the next task until the final goal is reached. The system organizes potential projects in four distinct cate- gories following an extended Contextual Model of Learning concept interacts. Teachers can allow the system to present their own projects and tasks to other teachers for usage. Project and task creation is supported through user-friendly screens. Teachers can use the pre-made project samples provided by the platform, which have been created by other teachers.

Mobile lesson service: Teachers can transfer the lesson outside classroom with the use of Guide. If a teacher wants to revitalize a lesson, then she/he can guide students outside and present through Guide various cultural points of interest. The teacher can start conversations with the students and urge them to make reviews or start searching more information about any cultural point.

The proposed platform adapts an extended role based access control model for authorization purposes concerning content access. The implemented access control model supports three user types/roles with different scopes and permission levels. Users are separated in registered users that have created an account and they are able to use the full potential of the platform and non- registered users that do not have an active account on the system and they can use only a part of the offered educational services.

Teachers: Registered users that can search public content, view both public and private content, create and assign tasks and projects. Teachers can formulate private groups and include students in them. Also teachers check content contributed by students and make their own contributions.

View: There are multiple viewing levels for all users: (i) Cultural map viewing: A user views cultural content as pins on a geo- graphical map. (ii) List viewing: A user views cultural content in a list of descriptive thumbnails. (iii) Private content viewing: Users that are members of a private group can view private content.

Overall, the platform seems to accomplish its design goals which included the integration of characteristics from specific edu- cational theories. Students found platform content, services and modules rather compliant with the main characteristics of learning objects, mobile learning and collaborative learning theories. Last but not least, students would be eager to use the proposed plat- form as a main part of the educational procedure and strongly comprehended its educational strength.

