Knowledge sharing is still a main problem to deal with in organizations. Although, studies in semantic web and human machine interface provide tech- niques to enable a better access to information, these techniques are not sufficient in terms of allowing a contextual access according to user needs. In fact, in the semantic web framework (Berners-Lee et al., 2001), the information access is guided by the ontology of the user domain. However this type of ontology is built as a consensual concept definition of the domain. Therefore, it can be considered as a reference of the concepts used in a given domain while any user generally has her/his own representation of the domain, which is more or less close to domain ontology. Moreover, the structure of the domain ontology is usually provided by a knowledge engineer who introduces her/his own representation to build this ontology.

The rest of this paper describes, in its second and third sections, the designed structures of project memory and a suggested approach that enables the capture and representation of knowledge used and produced during design project. Section 4 argues the need of contextual information retrieval in design. Section 5 describes how a project memory has been represented using conceptual graphs and RDF formalisms. Information retrieval as carried out with Corese (Section 6) is based on the relation between the constructed conceptual graph and its RDF representation.

The principal objective of the content structuring is to enable an intelligent access to knowledge represented in the project memory. Our idea is to make possible a flexible access to the project memory according to several viewpoints. This form of access is described in the information retrieval section of this paper. The second stage of our approach consists of a structuring based on a cognitive analysis of the

One of our key suggested ideas is to integrate the traceability procedure in the process of projects realization itself. This implicates a slight change in project structures and organization and permits the capture of knowledge during the pro- ject realization and not afterwards. This aspect is very important as the knowledge that emerges during any project realization is volatile and can hardly be reconsti- tuted after the project is over.

manager). This kind of meeting can be held after a number of project phases and at the end of the project realization. This makes possible to reformulate the argu- ments, the suggestions and the criteria and to re-examine their classification. The structure of the memory encourages the project members to explicitly express their knowledge, enriching by that the contents of the memory.

The structure represents the logic of discussion. Participants (project members) discuss each part of the problem by expressing their opinions supported by argu- ments. The participants can also provide suggestions concerning the design prob- lem. The collection of arguments and suggestions allows the team to take a decision concerning a part of a problem. Thus, the part of the problem is either totally solved or will be discussed again in the same manner and will go through the same cycle. This enables to see the evolution of this element during the prob- lem solving process until its final version.

In the structure, the arguments are classified according to their types or natures. Each argument or suggestion is related to the member who emitted it. The fact that the competencies and the role of each member are indicated permits to see the relation that may exist between the contributions (arguments and suggestions) of the participants and their competencies and skills. This is essential for a prob- lem solving context comprehension.

Problem/decision. The global problem discussed during design meetings is split into sub-problems or elements of problem. This permits to represent these ele- ments of discussion through the different phases, connect them and elucidate the evolution of each of them during the project completion.

Suggestions. The arguments advanced by the speakers during meetings often lead them to present their own suggestions concerning a given part of the discussed problem; we envisaged in the model a space for suggestions of project members (participants). The suggestions are linked to the arguments and the par- ticipants who emitted them.

Project members/participants. The representation of the participants in the structure is important; it permits to bind the arguments and suggestions to their emitters. Each participant is characterized, primarily, by his competencies/skills and his role in the project (see context). This permits to clearly understand the lo- gic and the reasoning of the members and the motives of their opinions.

For that precise reason, we propose to represent project memory as a semantic network and to use semantic inference engine to conduct the information retrieval process. The resulting memory is not a simple list of documents or parts of doc- uments but a network presenting on the one hand, the relations between project elements and on the other hand, pointing the relevant documents. Designers can therefore have a contextual information retrieval that can be very useful in their design activity.

Indexing documents can either be simple using metadata and keywords (currently recommended in HTML documents) or complex using semantic networks and ontology (defended by semantic web) (Martin, 1995). Semantic Networks have shown a great ability in terms of information structuring and information retrie- val. (Steyvers and Tenenbaum, 2005) demonstrated that developing search and re- trieval algorithms that exploit the large-scale structures of semantic networks is likely to be a project of great promise, for both cognitive science research and information retrieval applications.

We choose conceptual graphs to represent our semantic network. Conceptual graphs are a formalism that offers a highest structure of the semantic relations be- tween concepts (Chein and Mugnier, 1992). In this formalism, there are a number of inference functions (Sowa, 1984) that helps in information retrieval. We partic- ularly note projection, joint, generalization and specialization functions. This for- malism has been used and validated in numerous applications and its effectiveness is now commonly approved.

Moreover, the structure of conceptual graphs (especially support and graphs) is close to RDF (Resource Framework Description) and RDFs (Resource Frame- work Description Schema). Thus, it can easily be translated to RDF and XML respecting semantic web recommendations (RDFS, 2004). This connection be- tween conceptual graphs, RDF and XML can provide a number of specific func- tions that give more power for information retrieval. The Corese search engine developed at INRIA (Corby et al., 2000) is based on this principle.

The Corese search engine (Corby and Faron-Zucker, 2002) is dedicated to the que- rying of corporate semantic webs in which documents are described through RDF annotations. Corese interprets RDF metadata in the conceptual graphs model in order to exploit the inference capabilities of this formalism. The RDFS (RDFS, 2004) and conceptual graphs models share many common features and a mapping can easily be established between RDFS and a large subset of the conceptual graphs model. The information retrieval in Corese is based on this mapping. In fact, the Corese query language is RDF with addition of some extra conventions introducing variables and operators. An RDF query statement is interpreted as a conceptual graph query and is processed by a conceptual projection of the query on the annotation graphs. Therefore, Corese enables to process information

Examples presented in this paper are extracted from a design project of profes- sional safety evaluation rules (Bekhti and Matta, 2003). DyPKM and Corese have to be validated on other design projects. We also plan to define a graphical inter- face to display results as graphs or trees, clearly illustrating the relations between the elements of design project.

Finally, the environment we defined can also be used to gather elements of sim- ilar design projects in order to build a global classification of tasks, problems, arguments, etc. produced in a company. These classifications can show the evolu- tion of design strategies in the company.

