Face image variations such as expression and pose radically increase the intra-class variations which affect the performance of feature extraction methods. It is desirable to extract more robust local discrim- inative features to effectively represent such face variations. This paper proposes a novel facial feature extraction method which utilizes interpolation-based directional wavelet transform (DIWT) and local binary patterns (LBP). An efficient direction assessment method based on quadtree partitioning is imple- mented to facilitate adaptive direction selection in the local regions from the face images to obtain DIWT sub-bands. LBP histogram features are extracted from selected top-level DIWT sub-bands to obtain local descriptive feature set. Experimental results are simulated on ORL database, GT database, and FEI data- base. A comparison with various contemporary methods which include holistic, local descriptors and LBP-based non-adaptive multiresolution analysis methods illustrate the efficacy of the proposed method.

To effectively deal with the expression and pose variation in face images this paper consider the underlying theory of DIW and proposes interpolation-based directional wavelet transform (DIWT). In the implementation of DIWT, we used quadtree parti- tioning instead of megaquad partitioning which is used in DIW [18]. LBP is applied to the selected top-level DIWT sub-bands which eventually extract the descriptive histogram features. Finally, LDA is applied to obtain discriminant features in reduced space. Nearest Neighbor (NN) [2] classifier is used in an identifica- tion process. The outline of the paper is depicted as follows. A review of the related methodology is explained in Section 2 includ- ing the DIWT and LBP. Further, in Section 3, proposed facial feature extraction method is explained. In Section 4 experimental results are performed on three eminent face databases and results of the proposed method are compared with various contemporary meth- ods. Conclusions based on the method are presented in Section 5.

The essence of directional wavelet transform (DIWT) is to per- form the lifting wavelet transform steps at a viable variety of direc- tions while preserving the characteristics of multiresolution, localization, and isotropy intact. The DIWT still performs the con- ventional lifting wavelet transform but consist of modification in the prediction and update step. The 2-D DIWT can be realized with only one pair of lifting step, which means only one prediction step followed by one update step.

Due to face variations, each face image contains a varying amount of information located at different local pixel regions. To consider these local regions the quadtree partitioning scheme is applied which facilitate effective direction assignment. Here each face image is quadtree partitioned into non-overlapping blocks and a direction from the direction set is selected for each block based upon the minimum value of the prediction error energy. All the pixels in a quadtree block will have the same direction.

All experiments are conducted using Matlab 2014a on a stan- dard i3-330 2.13 GHz machine with 2.0 GB RAM. To evaluate the efficacy of the proposed expression and pose-invariant feature extraction method, we consider three face databases such as ORL database [22], Georgia Tech (GT) database [23] and FEI face data- base [24,25]. Face feature extraction methods such as LDA [2], LPP [3], LBP [5], LDP [6], WLD [7], LGBP [13], and LSPBPS [14] to form the feature set and LPP is used for dimensionality reduction [15]. To evaluate the performance we use cumulative match char- acteristic (CMC) curves [26,27]. CMC curve is used as a measure of 1: m identification system performance. It judges the ranking capa- bilities of our proposed method. Due to random selection approach, we run the experiment ten times on each database and only report the average rank-one recognition rates in all fol- lowing experiments.

= 2. Compared with LBP-based non-adaptive MRA methods such as LGBP, LSPBPS, and CTLBP our method exhibit higher rank-one recognition rates even for fewer numbers of training images. The proposed method makes an adaptive selection of best lifting direc- tion from the direction set and uses interpolated samples at the spatial resolution of five directions and preserves the local details of expression and pose-variant features. Such details, when extracted in terms of LBP histogram features, improves the overall performance.

method not only excels with the holistic method such as LDA and LPP but also demonstrate superiority against various local descrip- tors such as LBP, LDP, and WLD methods for face images with les- ser to extreme expressions and pose variations. Our experimental results verify that the proposed method also outperforms some non-adaptive LBP-based MRA methods such as LGBP, LSPBPS, and CTLBP. We also demonstrated the effectiveness of our method over other adaptive directional lifting methods.

