tributes that are characteristics of the reef through a supervised machine-learning algorithm. The neural learning resulted in a minimum nRMS error of 0.28 and 0.30 and a misclassification percentage of 1.13% and 1.06% for the train and test data sets. The Reef Cube meta-attribute has efficiently captured the anatomy of carbonate reef buried at ~450 m below the seafloor from high-resolution 3D seismic data in the NW shelf of Australia. The novel approach not only picks up the subsurface architecture of the carbonate reef accurately but also accelerates the process of interpretation with a much-reduced intervention of human analysts. This can be efficiently suited for delimiting any subsurface geologic feature from a large volume of surface seismic data.

The processing/modeling of seismic data has made substantial progress over the past decade, significantly improving subsurface im- ages (Burgess et al., 2013; Kumar and Sain, 2018; Kumar et al., 2019; Kumar and Sain, 2020; Sain and Kumar, 2022). Human analysts or developed a reef-rimmed carbonate platform during the Miocene period, we have looked into the high-quality 3D seismic data for the delimita- tion of the 3D subsurface architecture of carbonate reefs. First, we computed the seismic attributes that can characterize the carbonate reefs and then amalgamated them into a single hybrid attribute, termed the RC meta-attribute, using a machine learning algorithm. The pres- ence of meta-attribute within the data volume, implying the existence of carbonate deposition, can now elucidate the anatomy of carbonate reef automatically from huge data volume with a much-reduced human intervention.

in the Indian and Southern Oceans, the dominant sediment type on the NW shelf shifted from siliciclastic to carbonate during the Cenozoic era Struckmeyer et al., (1998); ConocoPhillips (2012); Dixit and Mandal (2020). The Early-Middle Miocene period witnessed the development of a typical reef-rimmed carbonate platform in the Browse Basin, which formed part of an unbroken reef belt extending along the NW shelf margin of Australia (Rosleff-Soerensen et al., 2012). Most of the present-day reefs in the basin and nearby areas grew on this extensive foundation of paleo-reefs and carbonate build-ups (Ryan et al., 2009).

The DSC is taken as an input for data enhancement through struc- tural filtering (Kumar and Sain, 2018). Structural filtering is performed using a structure-oriented filter (SOF). The key objective of using the SOF is to differentiate between the dip-azimuth of seismic reflectors and overlying noises (Kumar and Sain, 2018; Sain and Kumar, 2022). This

The labeled locations are marked arbitrarily along a few xlines and inlines. The Reef-yes and Reef-no locations are designated following the seismic signatures and geologic properties described in the previous paragraph. The Reef-yes locations are assigned binary number 1, and Reef-no locations are allocated binary number 0 according to the clas- sification rule of binary numbers. Ambiguous areas where there is no hint of the presence of the target or the areas that are devoid of the target are avoided. About 870 Reef-yes and 880 Reef-no locations are labeled for training and testing. The binary data (0, 1) and seismic attributes at the marked locations are fed into the neural model for training and testing. This entire process is summarized in the following steps.

were not considered in training. Once this validation is complete, the network runs over the entire seismic cube, automating and speeding up the interpretation process. We must state that the probability output with more than 0.75 thresholds highlights the RC meta-attribute, which delimits the anatomy of the carbonate build-up in the entire three-dimensional space.

Seismic data, when contaminated by coherent or random noise, the S/N ratio decreases and lowers the accuracy of static and dynamic corrections during the processing stage. This finally degrades the quality of the processed seismic cross-sections (Liu et al., 2006; Onajite, 2014). As a result, interpreters struggle to interpret the buried carbonate reefs and their internal anatomy precisely. Advanced data conditioning ap- proaches help to overcome such problems. The initial phase of this use of noisy or poor-quality data as input for the computation of the meta-attribute. Using such data may result in feeding inaccurate example locations to the network. As a result, the learning capability of the neural network decreases, and thus the generalization efficiency of the NN fails, making the network to output artifacts. This thus impedes the interpretation. In such instances, the computed meta-attribute may scuffle to deliver a successful interpretation of reef complexes from the data volume.

The data used in this research is publicly available and can be found online. The seismic data and reports are available from Geoscience Australia (http://www.ga.gov.au/). Conoco Philips shared this data in the public domain through the Google Drive link (https://drive.google. com/drive/folders/0B7brcf-eGK8CRUhfRW9rSG91bW8?resourc thanked for providing academic licence of Hampson Russell 13.0 and Jason 12.0 for this research. The authors are thankful to the anonymous reviewers, and the Editor-in-Chief Gabriele Morra for the comments and valuable suggestions on earlier version of this manuscript. GEBCO Compilation Group (2019) is thanked for making gridded bathymetry files freely available for academic research. KS acknowledges DST-SERB for according him with JC Bose National Fellowship. This is a Wadia contribution no. WIHG/0274.

The nRMS error curve demonstrates the overall error on the train and test data sets, with a scale ranging from 0 to 1, where 0 corresponds to no error, and 1 corresponds to the highest error. It has been demonstrated that the lower the nRMS, the better the neural outcome is (Kumar and Sain, 2018, 2020; Kumar et al., 2019; Sain and Kumar, 2022). The other benefit is that error performance can be observed from a single graph display.

