Agriculture is the main source of food, income, and employment for developing countries and their rural populations, especially in Africa Preethi et al. (2020); Tapsoba et al. (2020); Collier and Dercon (2014); Rejeb et al. (2022). Given current population growth, pressure on agri- cultural systems will continue to increase Kamilaris et al. (2017);

Accurate diagnosis of current crop nutritional status and nutrient re- quirements plays a critical role in overall farm management and im- pacts not only the environment, but also the economic sustainability of the farm Goulding et al. (2008); Monaghan et al. (2007); Fairhurst et al. (2007); Dhal et al. (2022). Yield loss, under-utilization of natural resources, decline in soil organic carbon content (OC), lower carbon use, and other problems can be caused by either nutrient excess or de- ficiency. Accurate diagnosis would benefit farmers on many levels, in- cluding yields, fertilizer recommendations, and revenue.

In this paper, we review ML based fertilizer estimation and nutrient status algorithms developed in the last decade. Commonalities in this area are identified, weaknesses are discussed, and possible solutions and future perspectives are proposed. A thorough review of detection and classification approaches was conducted, which served as the basis for a detailed assessment of key challenges that remain to be addressed. This review is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the most common machine-learning algorithms, feature selection approaches, and performance metrics used in the reviewed work. In Section 3, the most common features for nutrient management and fer- tilizer recommendation studies and the methodology for study selec- tion are presented, along with the ML-based algorithms used by each approach. Finally, Section 4 discusses the advantages and disadvantages of using ML in nutrient management.

Machine learning is a branch of artificial intelligence in which the computer, referred to as a machine, learns to perform various tasks au- tomatically Venkataraju et al. (2023). ML combines mathematical modeling and complex algorithms to perform tasks by learning from existing data. ML has been successfully applied in many fields that re- quire classification, prediction, and recommendations Abioye et al. (2022). For example, it provides farmers with soil quality monitoring tools and personalized recommendations based on experimental and field data. ML uses features extracted from known experimental input data to develop models capable of predicting the desired outcome from new data. Machine learning can be divided into three main

With advances in machine learning algorithms, even the most com- plicated regression and classification problems can now be solved Tesfaye et al. (2021). In addition, many of the algorithms are available on a number of open source platforms designed specifically for ML. Re- gression is a part of supervised learning that provides a prediction of an output variable as a function of input variables that are usually known and available in these subcategories. There are many algorithms used in almost all fields, e.g., linear regression (LR), least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (lasso), logistic regression, and stepwise regres- sion. Many complex algorithms have seen the light of day to solve much more complex problems, such as multivariate adaptive regression splines.

uses models to predict a discrete label instead of a continuous output. Support Vector Machine (SVM) is an algorithm that classifies data instances by constructing a linear separation hyperplane John et al. (2020); Karimi et al. (2006). To improve classification, SVMs use a kernel function to transform the original feature space into a higher- dimensional feature space. Classification, regression, and grouping have all been performed with SVMs. SVMs are useful in a variety of applications because they overcome the difficulties of overfitting that occur in high-dimensional spaces and are based on global optimization. Support Vector Regression, Least Squares Support Vector Machine and Successive Projection Algorithm Support Vector Machine are the most commonly used SVM algorithms.

Decision tree (DT) based algorithms use trees to gradually group the dataset into smaller homogeneous subsets (subpopulations) while cre- ating an associated tree graph. Each branch of the tree graph displays the result of a particular pairwise comparison for a particular attribute, while each internal node represents the comparison itself. After follow- ing the path from root to leaf, the leaf nodes show the final judgment or prediction (expressed as a classification rule). The classification and re- gression trees, the automatic chi-square interaction detector, and the it- erative dichotomizer are the most common learning techniques in this category.

The first step in any ML experiment is to extract impactful features from the raw data Chandrashekar and Sahin (2014); Dash and Liu (1997). The goal of feature extraction is to find the most informative group of features (unique patterns) to improve the effectiveness of the classifier. Feature extraction, also called feature engineering, ex- tracts features from the original data to achieve accurate classification. Feature extraction is an important step in ML as classification perfor- mance can decrease if features are not carefully selected Kebonye et al. (2022).

nificant impact on agricultural productivity. Even low levels of rainfall can have a detrimental effect on crops, and production can fluctuate sig- nificantly due to extreme variations in rainfall amounts and periods. On the other hand, weather conditions are more complicated than just a rainy or dry climate. There are a number of climate features to consider. Total daily and annual precipitation, high-yield and well-distributed precipitation, and the Shannon diversity index (SDI) for precipitation are some of the most common. Other characteristics include daily max- imum and minimum temperatures and total solar radiation, pest infes- tation under various atmospheric conditions and weather patterns.

harvest key, fresh and dry biomass, fertilizer rate, and nutrient uptake Ahmed et al. (2021). The information contained in the red and near- infrared (NIR) canopy radiances is used mainly in common vegetation indices: Ratio Vegetation Index (RVI)[4] and Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI)[5].

In recent years, many applications of nutrient management models have surfaced, especially regarding nitrogen recommendations, as it is considered very important for yield estimation Puntel et al. (2016); Dai et al. (2013); Castaldi et al. (2016); Shi et al. (2021). In the present time, the implementation of ML techniques for N management can be divided into different approaches such as EONR and NNI determination, remote sensing and spectroscopy.

Determining the economically optimal amount of nitrogen can be influenced by various factors such as rainfall and management practices. Advances in ML paved the way for better Economic Optimum Nitrogen Rate (EONR) predictions that take these various parameters into ac- count. Qin et al. (2018) looked at the prediction of EONR from field trial data at two different time points: i) seeding, ii) split application time points. Model-derived features such as AWCwt and RAWCwt and weather data were used to build the prediction algorithm. RR provided better results compared to LR, LASSO and Gradient Boosted Regression Trees (GBRT). However, the results of this study cannot be generalized due to the limited data sets. Ransom et al. (2019) evaluated the ability of a set of machine learning and statistical algorithms to improve

nitrogen recommendations for corn using measured soil properties along with weather variables from 49 sites in the Midwestern United States. The authors examined different modeling scenarios for improv- ing three different nitrogen recommendation tools and tested whether adjustments for multicollinearity and accounting for the interaction be- tween soil and weather parameters would result in improvements. Per- formance was evaluated using the out-of-sample RMSE and included soil and weather data prior to each nitrogen recommendation tool. RF provided better nitrogen recommendations, but compared to the per- formance of the models in terms of number of variables, the decision tree provided the best fit with the smallest number of variables. The results showed that reducing multicollinearity slightly improved the performance of the different ML algorithms.

The objective of a study by Correndo et al. (2021) was defining the importance of soil, weather conditions, and cropping management in estimating and magnifying uncertainty in key components affecting the nitrogen response of corn yield. When yield without fertilizer, Yield at Economic Optimum N Rate (YEONR), and nitrogen fertilizer ef- ficiency (NFE) are considered in EONR. Bayesian statistics were used for the N response curves fitting along with Extreme Gradient Boosting that evaluates the importance of the traits in the predictability process. EONR was the most difficult attribute to estimate, with an average un- certainty of 50 kg N ha-1. Weather accounted for about two-thirds of the variation in estimated values for YEONR, EONR, and NFE. Uncer- tainty in all aspects of the N response mechanism was also influenced by weather conditions (72% to 81%). With a constant but moderate con- tribution, soil factors explained both the predicted N response and the associated uncertainty (10% to 23%). Model uncertainty as a form of risk, potential seasonal weather predictions, and the development of probabilistic frameworks to optimize this data-driven decision process for corn nitrogen application should be considered in improving nitro- gen decision support systems.

combines crop sensing data with soil data, is a promising avenue for corn nitrogen management. To improve machine learning-based N rec- ommendation for seasonal seeding, additional data from the year of the site, varying conditions on the farm, and sensors with more spectral ranges are needed. Similarly, data from the RapidSCAN active canopy sensor was also combined with Genetic*Environmental*Management (G*E*M) information to increase the accuracy of NNI estimation in the Midwestern U.S. under a variety of weather, management and soil variables Li et al. (2022);

as input data for the FNN to predict N content. With R2 = 0.903, RMSEP = 0.307%, and a residual prediction error RPDp = 3.238 for N concentration, the model SAE-FNN performed quite well. The results show that with a combination of hyperspectral imaging and deep learn- ing, it is possible to quickly and non-destructively detect N concentra- tion in canola leaves to provide better fertilizer recommendations.

Similarly, in the study by Kou et al. (2022), RGB images of the cotton canopy were acquired using a UAV digital camera. The nitrogen content of the cotton canopy was predicted using two cotton cultivars and six nitrogen gradients. Forty-six features were extracted from the image after image preprocessing, and CNN were used to extract deep features. Pearson and partial least squares were used feature selection. For accu- rate prediction of nitrogen content of cotton crowns, manual features were used as input to build linear regression models, support vector machines, and one-dimensional CNN regression models. Deep learning based features were used as inputs to build a two-dimensional CNN re- gression model. The results were R2 = 0.80 and RMSE = 1.67 g kg-1 for Xinluzao 45 and R2 = 0.42 and RMSE = 3.13 g kg-1 for Xinluzao 53, in- dicating that cotton nitrogen content can be predicted on a large scale

In the Nitrogen category, we can see a high presence of image inputs, reflecting the emerging trend and the wide use of multi-source images (HS, RGB, NIR, etc.). This has been enabled by the development and af- fordability of this technology along with high computational power. By integrating machine learning with IoT data, farm management sys- tems are evolving into true artificial intelligence systems that provide better recommendations and insights for future decisions and actions, with the goal of increasing productivity. To this end, it is envisioned that the use of machine learning models will become even more popu- lar over time, enabling the development of integrated and applicable technologies. Despite the great strides that have been made recently in the field of nutrient management, actual practical/accurate applica- tion is currently a challenge. Many limitations have come to light that are related to the methods used and are both intrinsically and extr- insically related to the target problem. The current state of nutrient management using digital imagery and machine learning was also discussed to provide an in-depth analysis of the various challenges faced by many researchers working on this topic. Collecting datasets with such precise factors and for a specific crop is usually not an easy community. However, this also leads to many misleading publications by researchers who either do not know exactly what ML expertise is re- quired or do not have the proper soil and plant nutrient knowledge. This phenomenon has led to a great pipe dream Schut and Giller (2020); Lischeid et al. (2022); Paudel et al. (2021) in which scientists confirm the accuracy of their models while considering the wrong parameters. Given the rapid progress ML has made in recent decades, it is very likely that the world will see an increase in the applications of ML models. The integration and applications are becoming more and more remarkable. ML algorithms show great potential when properly used for support or decision-making. The fusion of spectral and spatial features and unique hybrid processing systems that complement each other's limitations would definitely improve the understanding of soil dynamics. This success will likely be paired with better yields leading

John, K., Abraham Isong, I., Michael Kebonye, N., Okon Ayito, E., Chapman Agyeman, P., Marcus Afu, S., 2020. Using machine learning algorithms to estimate soil organic car- bon variability with environmental variables and soil nutrient indicators in an alluvial soil. Land 9, 487.

