each stage of farming is presented. Section 2 explains the use of ML in the pre-harvesting stage. In Section 3, usage of ML in the stage of harvesting is explained and in Section 4 usage of ML in the post-harvesting stage is explained. Sections 5 and 6 focuses on discussion and challenges in use of the Artificial Intelligence (AI), ML, and DL.

Pre-harvesting parameters play a key role in overall growth of crop/fruits. In pre-harvesting machine learning is used to capture the parameters of soil, seeds quality, fertilizer application, prun- ing, genetic and environmental conditions and irrigation. Focus- ing on each component it is important to minimize the overall losses in production. Here few important components in the pre- harvesting are considered and how neural networks and machine learning are used to capture the parameters of each component.

For P, K and OC three classes: Low, Medium, and High. For B six classes: Very Low, Low, Medium, Moderately High, High, and very High. For pH Four classes: Strongly Acidic (SA), Highly Acidic (HA), Moderately Acidic (MA), and Slightly Acidic (SLA).

Liakos, et al. [8] and Sharma, et al. [9] presented a soil manage- ment survey with the application of ML techniques for prediction or identification of soil properties (estimation of soil temperature, soil dry- ing, and moisture content). The categorization and estimation of the soil attributes help farmers in minimizing extra cost on fertilizers, cut the demand of soil analysis experts, increase profitability, and improve health of soil, whereas Suchithra and Pai [10] presented pH values and soil fertility indices classification and predication model. Yang, et al.

Alagumariappan, et al. [27], developed a real-time decision support system integrated with a camera sensor module for plant disease iden- tification. In this work authors evaluated the performance of three ma- chine learning algorithms namely, Extreme Learning Machine (ELM) and Support Vector Machine (SVM) with linear and polynomial kernels and observed that the performance of ELM is better when compared to other algorithms. Savary, et al. [28] studied how diseases cause the crop losses and their implications for global food production losses and food security. The objective of this work is to show that crop loss research is vital and should be consider as full branch of plant science.

Hua, et al. [40] presented a detail survey on automated fruit harvest- ing systems for sweet pepper, tomato, apple and kiwifruit as an example to demonstrate the recent advances in intelligent automatic harvesting robots in horticulture. The use automatic robots in field helps to increase the production, saves the harvesting time which ultimately increase the profits of the farmers. Kushtrim, et al. [41] developed a CNN model based on single shot detector (YOLO) algorithm for on-tree fruit detec- tion. A dataset consisting of real and synthetic images of apple and pear trees was created. For labeling the images, open-source labeling tool called as BBox-Label-Tool was used. More than 5000 images of pear and apple fruits were used while training the model. Amazon cloud platform was used to train the model. The model achieved more than 90% accu- racy for on-tree fruit detection. Two deep neural network models were investigated in the proposed work, a small CNN model and a VGG-16 msec. Bauer, et al. [45] developed a platform that chains up-to-date ML techniques, modern computer vision, and integrated software engineer- ing practices to measure yield-related phenotypes from ultra-large aerial imagery named as AirSurf. Author claims that this platform help to in- crease the yield and crop marketability before the harvest. Zhang, et al.

Our study indicated that there is need to follow the machine learning pipeline with standard experimental methods. Researches should create their own dataset and make this available to others through different platforms, so that others can use it for testing and validation of their own models. This comprehensive survey of various machine learning algorithms used in different stages of agriculture will be more helpful to other researches who are working in this field.

Doh B, Zhang D, Shen Y, Hussain F, Doh RF, Ayepah K. Automatic Citrus Fruit Dis- ease Detection By Phenotyping Using Machine Learning. In: Proceedings of the 25th international conference on automation & computing. Lancaster UK: Lancaster Uni- versity; 2019. 5-7 September.

Bauer A, Bostrom AG, Ball J, Applegate C, Cheng T, Laycock S, Rojas SM, Kirwan J, Zhou Ji. Combining computer vision and deep learning to enable ultra-scale aerial phenotyping and precision agriculture: a case study of lettuce production. Hortic Res 2019;6:70 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41438-019-0151-5.

