Academic and pharmaceutical industry research are both key for progresses in the field of molecular machine learning. Despite common open research questions and long-term goals, the nature and scope of investigations typically differ between academia and industry. Herein, we highlight the opportunities that machine learning models offer to accelerate and improve compound selection. All parts of the model life cycle are discussed, including data preparation, model building, validation, and deployment. Main challenges in molecular machine learning as well as differences between academia and industry are highlighted. Furthermore, application aspects in the design-make-test-analyze cycle are discussed. We close with strategies that could improve collaboration between academic and industrial institutions and will advance the field even further.

In this perspective, we discuss diverse aspects important to ML mod- els in the area of small-molecule drug discovery, including model build- ing and applications. We highlight the different challenges and oppor- tunities that researchers in industry and academia face, and potential synergies. Since the field of ML/AI is very broad, we focus on models that are trained on experimental data as opposed to calculated data, although many aspects are common and transferable. The industry per- spective mainly covers large pharmaceutical companies and not neces- sarily common practices in smaller biotech companies or start-ups.

rise to more homogeneous and consistent data sets. However, bring- ing diverse data sources together might also constitute a major effort due to legacy systems, change of protocols over time or different con- ventions in annotations (e.g. units or molecule identifiers). Given these challenges with experimental data, curation and homogenization are crucial steps for successful ML applications [11]. Discussions with exper- imentalists may help detecting outliers, properly combining data from diverse sources, or defining other modelling aspects. Moreover, having replicates to analyze experimental variability and error across the mea- surement range also provides information about the maximum accu- racy that a ML model can achieve and facilitates interpretation of model outputs [31,32].

A non-negligible aspect for influencing decision-making in drug dis- covery is the integration of these models into other design platforms ac- cessible to medicinal chemist teams. Continuous model advertisement and education also becomes essential to keep potential users informed and to increase adoption. The modelers or computational chemists con- nected to a project, who are often involved in the decision-making, also constitute important training resource.

uate students and postdocs). This might lead to premature obsolescence unless detailed documentation and knowledge transfer is achieved be- fore the model builder leaves the research group. Given the push of FAIR (findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable) science (both data [90] and software [91]) and the growing spirit of open-source de- velopments, these potential issues can be mitigated. However, by de- fault there is limited training in this area, and financial support to hire software engineers in academic groups is largely absent.

which compound to make next, whereas on large scale they can also be used for predicting complete virtual libraries to focus making and testing towards the most promising compounds in wet-lab experiments. Models are also used in the analysis phase for experimental selection. If enough evidence for trusting the model - e.g. low error or high confidence val- ues - is present, experimental testing could be avoided and focus shifted to testing other molecules predicted with low confidence [102]. Ulti- mately, new experimental data and obtained knowledge is fed back to the model in the re-building or re-training stages (see Section 2.2).

Importantly, an increasing usage of the models for experiment selec- tion influences data generation and thus model re-training. For example, using a reliable solubility prediction model will lead to less insoluble compounds being made in the future; by this the label distribution in the new training set will change and class imbalance will be reinforced. This process is also known as feedback loops and can cause real chal- lenges for future versions of the model [108]). Further development of methods for interpretation could help to improve models in the next training cycle [109].

Federated learning is an alternative approach developed for industry-industry collaborations [120]. A recent example is the MEL- LODDY consortium [121], aiming at using data from different phar- maceutical companies collectively to train ML models while protecting proprietary data of the contributors. So far, models were only usable by the consortium partners. It is yet to be seen whether this approach can be adapted to facilitate publishing in academia-industry collabora- tions. A different federated learning approach was developed by LHASA [122], where models are trained on proprietary data (each company separately) followed by predictions on non-sensitive public data. The consolidated labels from the different ML models for the public data set serve in turn as input for the training of a final model. As the final model is in principle publishable, this may be a more applicable approach for academia-industry collaborations.

While the use of commercial software in other areas of computational drug discovery means that training in university cannot directly prepare the students for future work, this has changed in the area of ML/AI due to the increasing usage of the same open-source tools to build, test, and deploy ML models in academia and industry. Using the same tools leads to vast opportunities for cross-fertilization and simplifies collaborations. MIT and several industry partners set up a collaboration to advance research in machine learning for pharmaceutical discovery and synthesis (MLPDS), where the industry partners were funding researchers at MIT while also being strongly involved in driving the research into a relevant direction for real-world applications.

Since academia is more focused on basic research and methodolog- ical enhancements, the model cycle often ends with a proof-of-concept study. In contrast, model deployment, accessibility, and stability are crucial in industry since the models are used in active drug discov- ery projects. More collaboration efforts between academia and indus- try to share data and code might lessen the gap between exploratory and applied research work. Some examples of private-public collabora- tions were mentioned showcasing constellations in which science can be advanced in real-world project set-ups while keeping sensitive data private.

With the increasing ease at which new ML developments can be translated into industrial applications, we expect that the mentioned boundaries/differences, progressively blur. Active research areas in- clude uncertainty estimation and ML explainability. ML for molecule discovery has come a long way, but its impact will become even more apparent when correct model decisions can be identified (low uncer- tainty) and rationalized (explained).

Sydow D, Rodr-guez-Guerra J, Kimber TB, Schaller D, Taylor CJ, Chen Y, Leja M, Misra S, Wichmann M, Ariamajd A, Volkamer A. TeachOpenCADD 2022: open source and FAIR Python pipelines to assist in structural bioinformatics and chem- informatics research. Nucleic Acids Res 2022. doi:10.1093/nar/gkac267.

Coley CW, Thomas DA, Lummiss JAM, Jaworski JN, Breen CP, Schultz V, Hart T, Fishman JS, Rogers L, Gao H, Hicklin RW, Plehiers PP, Byington J, Piotti JS, Green WH, Hart AJ, Jamison TF, Jensen KF. A robotic platform for flow synthesis of organic compounds informed by AI planning. Science 2019;365:eaax1566.

