side. These parameters impact the final properties of castings produced in pressure die-casting process. In this kind of technology, castings can be produced using cold or hot chamber die-casting machine. The cold chamber die-casting machine employs holding furnace that has important role between melting alloys and

forcing it under high pressure into a mold cavity. The role of holding furnace is to hold molten metal preparatory to casting. The melting and holding process of non-ferrous metals is carried out in the stationary crucible furnaces. Holding furnaces can also be divided into four categories based on power source. They can be supplied by heating gas, oil or electricity [1], [2], and [3]. The extension category includes induction holding furnaces that provide energy-efficient and well-controllable melting and holding process.

Our proposed method assesses behavior pattern of the liquid alloy in the melting holding furnace. It also monitors an occurrence of variations in chemical composition of the alloy that result from taking of the load in specific layers. These layers typify decreasing level of the liquid alloy. We analyze chemical elements that exert influence over quality of final casting properties. These elements are as follows: Si, Silicon; Mn, Manganese; Al, Aluminum; and Fe, Ferrite.

Using proposed method we can simply indentify and determine variations that occur, for instance, declining values of monitoring elements can reduce the strength and leakage. In another case, elements, mainly ferrite, can concentrate on the bottom of the furnace. We can also determine the ideal balanced weight percent of given elements in every layer. The application of the method lies in the setting of the optimal furnace utilization.

Perform the visual control of the samples. If it is found that sample was contaminated by surface layer of the liquid alloy, the sample must be excluded. If there are three or more excluded samples in a row or more than 4 in total, it is necessary to repeat the sampling from the start.

From the charts, we can assume decreasing trend of the weight percent for silicon, ferrite, and manganese. The weight loss percentage (WL%) was also calculated for each element. The WL is highest for manganese, about 20.21%, and the minimum WL for aluminum, -1.2%, the negative value denotes an increase in weight percent of aluminum. The weight loss percentage of silicon is 6.46%, and for ferrite is 9.28%.

