Although artificial intelligence has really improved, facing a mechanical entity does not provide the same ingeniousness or reactivity as a human controlled player. Online games also allow players to challenge each other, making it possible to compete with people from all over the world and even establish a sense of team spirit with people they have never met. The growth of networks makes the game with other humans easier, by suppressing distances. Interest communities are developing and make the games live over time, by feeding forums, writing guides or organizing events and special challenges.

Our interest is in video games that follow the principles of a real collective sport, bringing into opposition two teams, according to a well bounded and regulated game-play. In particular, we study a Multiplayer Online Battle Arena (MOBA) whose objective is about conquering the field of the opponent, as in rugby or American football. This kind of game offers a high reproducibility of situations since the field does not vary over the games. Lots of similarities are then observable between matches played in the E-games environment and the actual sport environment and as such, may make generalizations of what is happening on the actual field of play, easier and studying MOBAs in the sport context, fruitful.

Defense of the Ancients (DOTA) (described in Section 2.2) is a MOBA that consists of two teams of five players who compete on a virtual battlefield. The same battlefield is used for every game. The goal is to push the opposing players in their camp and destroy the iconic building.

Embodying a hero with powers, the human player follows the progression of his autonomous armies to help them destroy the towers, and then the buildings at the base. If a player suffers too much damage, his hero is knocked out and dies (for a given amount of time). A MOBA could be seen as a simulation of rugby with five player teams on a very large field with three balls in three different lanes.

A MOBA is a team-play oriented game. Each player chooses a hero from a list of a hundred. Each hero has its own characteristics (strength and weakness). The composition of the team is constrained by the choices of hero made by each player.

During the game, it is vital for each team to coordinate its actions and react to the actions of the opposing team in the most efficient way. These actions are coordinated spatially and temporally, and significantly alter the front line by breaking through the enemy territory, uncovering an opponent. "One versus one" is possible in the game, but isolated actions of a single player are rarely decisive. The MOBA offers a game based on competitive balance in which the reversals are possible and often decisive throughout the game.

An analysis was conducted on 1,120 DOTA games. We studied the relevancy of topological clues about the position of the players, for predicting the outcome of the match. No knowledge about the game was used, except the one allowing for computing the movement speed of the players, which was necessary for inferring their positions.

In order to compare the rough estimate of these clues, the square root of the area is used. It gives a clue which is homogeneous to a distance. Every clue is normalized so that it represents a percentage of the gap between the two bases.

In order to validate the relevancy of the topological clues for predicting the outcome of the match, we realized some experiments with supervised classification. This decision method enables the computation of a model for the prediction of a class variable, such as the win/loss ratio for a team. Besides its decision-making potential, supervised classification can validate the relevancy of the topological clues. If a reliable model can be computed, it means that these clues are contributory and relevant.

These results have opened a way which is complementary to existing professional expertise. The method consists in analyzing a game starting from the behaviors of the players, considered as tracks. Knowledge is extracted from these tracks and allows to suggest strategic recommendations.

