In the field of agriculture, frosts occur when ice crystals are formed within the plants and damage the cells [1]. As a result, frost could cause significant losses on the economy and ecosystem [2]. Currently, there are many active and real-time protection methods against frost, including heaters, sprinklers, artificial fog, and air disturbance tech- nologies [3]. However, the frost prediction methods automating the activation of these protection methods can still be improved [3].

This section explains the methodology and settings of the experi- ments. The study area is firstly explained, followed by the data pre- processing procedures. Then, model construction and testing leveraging the preprocessed data are described. Finally, the experiment processes are summarized.

This study is focused on the months June, July, and August of winter [16,17]. Minute-wise climate data of these winter months in years 2016 and 2017 are extracted from the 30 weather stations in the study area. After extracting these data, they are further processed to be prepared for model construction and testing. These procedures are discussed in the next subsection.

The rest of this paper is arranged as follows. Section 2 describes the methodology and experiment settings with the study area, data pro- cessing procedures, and experiments. Experiments include comparing temperature prediction models (ANN, RNN, LSTM, GRU), analyzing dif- ferent RNN model settings, and the performance of predicting minimum temperature with other frost-related parameters. Then, the experimen- tal results are discussed in Section 3 and lead towards limitations with open challenges. In the end, Section 4 concludes the whole article.

In the second step of data preprocessing, the minimum temperature is constructed as the prediction target. The minimum temperature is simply constructed by getting the minimum temperature value in the next 60 min. As the recording of data is done once per minute, the minimum temperature of the current data entry is the minimum value of the next 60 temperature values.

In this subsection, information of model construction and testing is provided. The computation environment is firstly described, followed by the usage of datasets. Next, the model structures and hyperparam- eters are clarified. Finally, the two stages of model construction are revealed.

The model structure for all models is defined as a three-layer model. The first layer has five neurons. The second has seven and the output layer has one neuron. The first two layers change according to the target model. For example, if it is an ANN model, the cells in these two layers are ANN cells with Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation functions. For RNN and its variants, the cells use the tanh activation

The frost prediction models constructed in this article only predict the start of a frost event with real-time sensor readings. This predic- tion could be the trigger of a frost protection mechanism. However, there are limited mentions of predicting the end of a frost event to switch off any protection mechanisms. As most frost protection systems rely only on a single sensor node [3], activation of a nearby protection mechanism might affect the sensor readings and contam- inate the prediction outcomes of frost prediction models. Therefore, future prediction models could be developed to eliminate the effect of frost protection mechanisms. As a possible benefit, frost protection mechanisms could be switched off earlier to reduce the operational cost.

