In this paper, we propose an algorithm of moving-object detection via the sparse representation and learned dictionary. First, compress image in order to reduce data redundancy and bandwidth. Then initialize data dictionary with CS measurement values and sparse basis, train and update it through the K-SVD which can get the sparsest representations. At the same time, we consider the correlation between the dictionaries which can effectively reduce the dictionary redundancy. Carry out the selective reconstruction depending on the sparse coefficients to determine whether the target invades, which can decrease the amount of data to calculate and is better to achieve real-time. We segment the moving- object through the robust principal component pursuit(PCP) for that the image is consisted with low-rank of the background regions and the sparsity of the foreground regions. Analysis, simulation, and experimental results show that our scheme has a good detection result, which can significantly decrease data redundancy and the demand for bandwidth at the same time.

In this paper, we propose an algorithm of moving-object detection via the sparse representation and learned dictionary. Make the sparse coefficient sparser according to the CS measurements and sparse basis which are used to train dictionary initially. Update the dictionary continually through K-SVD to strengthen the sparse representation of the dictionary capabilities. Reconstruct the image depended on whether object occurs, which can reduce the amount of data to calculate and is better to achieve real-time. Finally, image consisted of low-rank of the background component and the sparsity of the foreground component can be recovered through the robust principal component pursuit(PCP) individually.

We form 100 frames into the matrix to construct the background model, and each frame is written as a column vector(streaming video at 25 frames per second, size of image is 512*512). So training sample size is 262144*100 and CS sampling rate is 20 %. Then initially compressed measurement matrix is 52428*100. The initial data dictionary is represented by the measurement, training iterations is 30, sampling column number

The study proposes an algorithm based on the sparse representation and learned dictionary to detect and segment the moving-object, which can effectively decrease the data transmission through the CS and K-SVD algorithm. Update the dictionary continually through K-SVD to strengthen the sparse representation of the dictionary capabilities. The selectivity of the reconstructed image reduces the amount of calculation achieving practical application of real-time. Reconstruct the moving-object and background individually through PCP method which the image is consisted of low-rank component and the sparse component.

