Program, there were 60,650 newly diagnosed cases of leukemia, and 24, 000 death occurred in the US in 2022. According to a review of the cancer database by the WHO, leukemia [8] incidence varies significantly by region and subtype. More than 20,000 cases of pediatric blood cancer are detected annually in India, with approximately 15,000 cases of leukemia only [9]. Around 61,780 instances of leukemia were diagnosed in the United States in 2019, with another 9900 cases being found in the United Kingdom. From 345,000 in 1990 to 518,000 in 2018, the number of newly diagnosed cases of leukemia increased, lowering the Annual- ized Survival Insusceptibility Rate (ASIR) by 0.43% per year [10,11].

The subtypes of leukemia are Acute Leukemia (AL) and Chronic Leukemia (CL). The progression of CL is usually gradual. On the other hand, without specialized care, the average life expectancy for those with AL is only 3 months [6]. There are two subtypes of AL recognized by the French-American-British (FAB) classification system: Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) and Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) and have homogeneous chromatin, few nucleoli, and a modest amount of basophilic cytoplasm. Nevertheless, L2 of enormous size exhibits uneven nuclear structure and clefting. L3 are very large or medium-large, with prominent cytoplasmic vacuoles. The lifespan rate can be increased with appropriate therapy, but only if the cancer is detected early and correctly [21,28].

The manuscript is classified into five sections. The section two rep- resents a comprehensive study of previous works. Section three provides proposed method and working principles. The section four illustrates the results with the relevant discussion. Finally, the section five represents the conclusion of this manuscript.

Researchers offer a novel Bayesian-based optimized CNN method for identifying ALL in microscopic smeared images in study [8]. A hybrid dataset was formed to be used in this study by combining two subsets of ALL-IDB datasets (ALL-IDB1 and ALL-IDB2). The hybrid dataset consists of 368 blood smear photos. In the test set, the optimized CNN model for ALL identification was found using the Bayesian optimization technique, and it achieved maximum accuracy of 100%.

The latest developments in ALL detection and categorization using deep and machine learning are presented in study [16] through a sys- tematic review. This article thoroughly examines the advantages and disadvantages of many different AI-based ALL detection methods. Lastly, a range of tough topics and potential future scopes are presented, which may inspire readers to develop their own research questions in ALL areas.

training on the bone marrow pictures, a robust segmentation method- ology along with deep learning techniques and a CNN are utilized in study [21]. Amreek Clinical Laboratory in Pakistan provided the dataset for this study. The experimental results indicate that the suggested approach has a high accuracy of 97.78%.

Article [22] proposed a new approach to categorizing and identi- fying ALL using SVM and CNN. In the proposed research, lymphocyte identification is followed by retrieving CNN features using the Alex-Net Model. Finally, SVM is used to classify the discovered cell as either normal or cancerous. In order to conduct this research, 4000 blood smears lymphocyte samples were collected from the Hayatabad Medical Complex in Peshawar, Pakistan. The accuracy of the proposed method is 98%.

The Acute lymphoblastic leukemia is diagnosed with the use of a ViT- CNN ensemble model in article [33]. Vision transformer and Convolu- tional Neural Network (CNN) models were combined together to generate the ensemble model. The study used a noisy, unbalanced ISBI 2019 dataset (consisting of 10,661 cell images). For the evaluation set, the proposed ViT-CNN model achieved an accuracy of 99.03% in its classification.

In order to classify photos of ALL and healthy cells, study [35] pre- sented an attention-based CNN. The suggested method consists of a CNN-based model that employs a module named ECA (Efficient Channel Attention) in conjunction with the VGG16 to extract higher-quality feature information from the image dataset. The study utilized the C-NMC dataset which consists of 10,661 single cell pictures. The experimental outcomes demonstrate the effectiveness of the suggested CNN model in extracting deep features, with an accuracy of 91.1%.

order to fit the instance segmentation problem on microscopy white blood cell images. To fix the issue of poor lighting in stained white blood cell microscope images, the proposed method applied a contrast enhancement method to the dataset. An actual dataset from Dr. Soetomo Hospital in Surabaya was used by the proposed method. The system achieved 83.72% accuracy.

Research [37] includes the following 3 proposed systems: the first consists of a feed forward neural network (FFNN), an ANN (artificial neural network), and an SVM. These three components are all based on hybrid features that were retrieved with the LBP (Local Binary Pattern), Gray Level Co-occurrence Matrix (GLCM), and FCH (Fuzzy Color His- togram) methods, respectively. CNN models AlexNet, GoogleNet, and ResNet-18, trained with the transfer learning approach, are the basis of the second suggested system. These architectures were used to suc- cessfully extract and classify deep feature maps. The third proposed method combines CNN and SVM algorithms to extract and categorize feature maps. The dataset of ALL IDB1 and ALL IDB2 were used in the study. A total of 108 pictures are in the ALL IDB1 dataset and the ALL-IDB2 dataset consists 260 images. The accuracy of the ANN and FFNN were 100%, where the SVM had an accuracy of 98.11. Addition-

The goal of study [39] is to develop methods for rapid and accurate detection of ALL cells in order to stop cancer from spreading in children. CNN was utilized in this method to identify every cell that was present on the blood smears sample slide. The main focus of this research is to provide clinicians in hospital Hematology Laboratories with a better tool for detecting ALL utilizing CNN. The accuracy of CNN in detecting ALL cancer was determined to be 98.53%.

Study [40] proposes a method that uses CNNs (Convolutional Neural Networks) to identify WBC and then investigate ALL illnesses auto- matically. Using the ALL IDB dataset, the efficiency of three different pre-trained CNN models (VGG, Alexnet, and GoogleNet) was compared. The results show that GoogleNet and VGG were superior to AlexNet in terms of pre-trained models, with both obtaining 100% accuracy throughout training. According to the results of the tests, VGG has the highest performance, with an accuracy of 99.13%.

The purpose of study [41] is to develop a deep learning model for detecting acute leukemia from images of lymphocytes and monocytes, utilizing a customized framework. In order to classify pictures of acute leukemia, a CNN model was presented that combined the Tversky loss function and the Adam optimizer with the four dense layers, six convolution layers, and a Softmax activation function. The database was obtained from the Shahid Ghazi Tabatabai Cancer Center in Tabriz. The suggested approach correctly identified 99% of cases of acute leukemia, such as ALL and AML (Acute Myeloid Leukemia).

Using the EfficientNet-B3 CNN framework, study [42] categorized ALL as a model that automatically modifies its own learning rate. The suggested model was tested using the C-NMC Leukemia dataset which contains 27,558 pictures of RBCs. Recently developed classifiers were used to assess the proposed model. In general, the proposed model had an accuracy of 98.31%, and the Disc similarity coefficient (DSC) of 98.05%. The proposed methodology was also used to separate healthy and parasitized microscopic pictures with an average accuracy of 97.68%, proving its usefulness beyond detecting ALL.

The article [43] proposes an autonomous approach that gives users access to a widely-used classifier for improved facial expression recog- nition. The system is broken down into two primary machine-learning phases: feature selection and feature categorization. The Active Shape Model (ASM), which is made up of landmarks, is used to perform feature selection, and the classification of features has been evaluated using seven different well-known classifiers, namely KNN, NB, DT, Quadratic classifier, RF, MLP, and SVM. The experimental findings showed that the Quadratic classifier gives excellent performance and has the best accu- racy of any classifier tested (92.42%).

Studies [44] have provided an overview of tools for detecting cancer and techniques for treating it. The study aimed to develop accurate colon cancer survival prediction models by analyzing data from the SEER program. The authors also evaluated different classification sys- tems to estimate mortality rates within five years of diagnosis. Results showed that the deep autoencoder model yielded the best prediction performance (97%) and AUC-ROC (95%), respectively.

infected blood cell to detect malignant. Multiclass classification was merely used in these studies with less significances. Thus, the proposed model used a large dataset that mainly focuses on the multiclass clas- sification of the infected cells of blood tissues along with its noteworthy stages. Further, seven traditional ML algorithms with five DL methods are utilized to classify the Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (All). More- over, PCA, LDA and SVC feature selector algorithms were used in the present study with PSO and CSO optimization algorithms.

In this sub-section, a mechanism of feature extraction is described. Firstly, the pipeline of feature extraction will be presented with algo- rithmic annotations. Then, the mechanism of feature selection will be illustrated. After, this subsection will present the working principles of

The Algorithm 01 shows efficient view of feature extraction from a particular image. In this procedure, the system first initialized the dataset based on the number of images. Where X represent the input image and Y is the output after applying the image filtering and resizing. Then, the pseudocode represents a loop structure to enumerate the feature vectors.

[48] in the proposed pipeline to extract the features from a particular image. ResNet50 identically consists of 50 layers with having approxi- mately 2M parameters. The ResNet50 architecture has several parts to constitute the model. The first part contains 64 kernels with a max-pooling layer, convolution layer and fully connected layer. The augmentation layer permits dilapidation problems and eliminates the disappearing problem. Besides, the skip connection act like a super-pathway. The research predominantly includes the ResNet50 for feature extraction and excludes the classifier part. The proposed model

This subsection provides the working principles of the feature se- lection models in our proposed system. In the research, the model mainly develop with three significant feature selection models namely, Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), and Support Vector Classifier (SVC) feature selector. PCA and LDA [49,50] are favorable algorithms to diminish the feature vectors [50]. PCA is an unsupervised learning algorithm and mainly focuses on enhancing the variation in a particular dataset. On the contrary, LDA and SVC feature sector are the supervised learning method that focuses on a feature vector subspace that improves the separability between the groups. In the research, PCA, LDA, and utilize with some sort of following mathematical expression.

Linear SVC. The main objective of the SVC is to fit the data and return the "best feature" hyperplane that has the ability to categorize the data from a certain dataset [50]. In the proposed model, the SVC feature selector works as In Algorithm 02.

But, LDA works with the five interconnected steps. Initially, LDA calculates the respective d-dimensions of the mean vectors. Then LDA creates scatter matrices and computes eigenvectors. Then, LDA sorts the eigen vectors in decreasing order. Then, a matrix multiplication results in the corresponding features reduction or feature selection.

model always tends toward the global optimal. In nature, any of the birds in a particular swarm has minimal observable proximity to the observer. But, more than one bird out of these birds allows all the swarm birds to be conscious of the more excellent surface of a fitness function [51].

The machine learning technique known as Random Forest is used for both classification and regression. An ensemble classifier is another name for this algorithm, which incorporates several decision tree models. A classifier like this one takes the results of many decision trees applied to various subsets of a dataset. It averages them in order to

The powerful XGBoost machine-learning algorithm can aid in data analysis and decision-making. To be precise, XGBoost is a program that uses decision trees that are boosted by a gradient. Several researchers and data scientists around the world have utilized it to fine-tune their machine learning models.

This subsection presents the experiment data analysis with nature inspired algorithm like Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) and Cat Swarm Optimization (CSO). Initially, we have applied the PSO on the extracted features with the pre-trained CNN architectures. After we have applied the CSO.

benign, early pre-B, pre-B, and pro-B. The research first extracts the features from CNN models, and then feeds the extracted features to feature selectors such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), and SVC Feature Selectors, along with two nature-inspired algorithms such as Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) and Cat Swarm Optimization (CSO). The seven ML classifiers have thereafter been used in research. A collection of experimental data has been compiled and analyzed in order to evaluate the effectiveness of the suggested architecture. The research first worked with pre-trained CNN models with conventional ML classifiers and found the highest accuracy of 98.43% accuracy without explicitly using the feature selection algo- rithms and nature inspired algorithms. The research has executed the proposed model with ResNet50 architecture with feature selection al- gorithms and PSO & CSO. Then, we have tracked out the highest ac- curacy up to 99.84%. This is very remarkable improvement in multi- class classification in malignant with the feature fusion and nature inspired algorithms.

The model has certain shortcomings even though the outcomes are optimum. Firstly, the proposed is not applied in real-time malignant classification. Secondly, we have only applied the PSO and CSO on the extracted features. If these algorithms are applied in the deep layers of customized CNN, then the model can be embedded in the small IoT based devices like smart watch or smartphone. In future, this research will overcome these issues to create the proposed system more reliable in real-life applications. Firstly, this study will develop and android application. Then, the proposed model will be applied to android application in order to compile with phone camera for real-time classi- fication. Secondly, this study will be implemented in small IoT device to aid hematologist in the leukemia classification. However, the proposed model may also be helpful for real-world Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (All) classification.

