In this paper authors offer the new method for solving coherent tasks in distributed computing system, based on resources of personal computers. Parameters of such resources are dynamically varying and that makes it hard for their application in distributed computations. To achieve ability of effective usage of personal computers, proposed method uses multiagent approach: proactive agent controls every personal computer in distributed computing system, and process of task solving is dispatched decentralized by interactions of agents. To solve every incoming coherent task agents of the system unite into community and that makes it easier to dispatch and perform computations. The main benefit of proposed method is decreasing the price for creating and maintenance of distributed computing system.

The main problem of using such personal computers (PCs) in distributed CS is varying of their parameters (such as performance and so on) any moment due to their owners actions. Another problem is probability of coexistence of many different PCs in one distributed CS. All that makes the process of effective distributing and solving of tasks very complicated.

Solving coherent tasks in such distributed CSs based on private PCs collaboration is considerably more difficult task. Today effective loading of a distributed CS while solving coherent tasks is a challenge [5]. However, solving such tasks in case of varying of parameters of PCs dynamically changes is even harder, that is why creation of new method of organizing of distributed computation of coherent tasks is very important task.

This new method is based on multiagent approach [6] and collective decision-making principles [7]. In the proposed method of distributed CS organization, we try to avoid dedicated servers and to make a decentralized organization of the distributed CS [8]. Every PC of distributed CS has proactive agent software installed. Interaction between program agents of the system realizes process of dispatching of task solving.

The main benefit of proposed algorithm is ability to adjust computing process to actual parameters of personal computers of distributed computing system. Two proposed algorithms allow solving coherent tasks in distributed CS based on personal computers with varying parameters. The next step is exploring effectiveness of proposed method and algorithms.

The main target of experimental research is the practical proof of efficiency of proposed algorithms, but also we wanted to evaluate of the relative loss of processor time on PCs due to dispatching of the decentralized computing. That is why we had to carry out several series of experiments with different parameters of PCs and computer networks. While researching on the proposed algorithms, we used some types of real tasks we work with in Southern Federal University [13]. We decided to use percent of actual load at PCs, which can show loss of processor time due to organizational purposes and percent of tasks, solved in time, which show efficiency of system for end-user [14]. There are many important parameters in distributed CS that is why we decided to use planning of experiments: we divided parameters to three groups: Primary (system parameters) (P), Secondary (parameters of specific tasks and PCs) (S), and Tertiary (user-conditional

The results show that the percent of actual load at PCs was good: from 72% to 92%. That means that time loss due to organization ranged from 8% to 28% of the total time. Modern researches in the same directions [5] show that average effectiveness of solving coherent tasks in distributed CS is about 40%, which means that proposed methods are effective.

