A fuzzy-Hammerstein model predictive control method is proposed for a continuous stirred-tank reactor (CSTR). In this paper T-S fuzzy model is used to approximate the static nonlinear characteristics of Hammerstein model, and a linear autoregressive model is used to solve the results of optimal control. The designed nonlinear predictive controller using Hammerstein model make good use of the ability of universal approach nonlinear of T-S model, and divide the question of nonlinear predictive control into the nonlinear model recongnization and the question of linear predictive control. The application results of CSTR process show the proposed control method has good control performance compared to PID controller.

based predictive control algorithms, such as Hammerstein model[4], Wiener model[5], Volterra model[6]. Hammerstein model as a kind of experimental model, has to describe the characteristics of various types of nonlinear object, literature [7] using a polynomial model to approximate the nonlinear characterristcs of Hammerstein model, the linear part of the external factors input autoregressive model (Autoregressive the model with exogenous input ARX) Description and Binary Distillation the tower simulation results show that the effectiveness of the method, but using polynomial to describe nonlinear makes the precision and complexity of the algorithm is proportional to the increase, has certain limitations. In the literature [8] using nonlinear base as static nonlinear part of the Hammerstein model, while its dynamic linear part Laguerre series, this method may effectively control the output of the interference, and pH neutralization process to prove the algorithm is effictive. Zhu[9] and others Hammerstein model has been improved, and the algorithm is verified by simulation better control effect. In [10] for the CSTR reactor two new identification are introduced based on Hammerstein model identification are given, and good control method given. In literature [11] nonlinear predictive control algorithms based on Hammerstein model to demonstrate the stability and robustness of the algorithm, and pH and reaction process example simulation.

