Chemicals employed in cosmetics, drugs, pesticides, household prod- ucts, among others, need to be classified appropriately according to their potential ocular toxicity to ensure safety [1]. Eye irritation or corrosion are characterized by cell membrane lysis, coagulation, saponification, and chemical reactivity [2]. All of these characteristics are mediated by contacts between a chemical and the eye surface (cornea and conjunc- tiva) [3].

NAMs have been developed and made available for in vitro identifi- cation of ocular corrosives/severe irritants using alternative biological material including rabbit corneal cells (OECD Test Guideline 491) [15], isolated bovine corneas (OECD Test Guideline 437) [16], and a mono- layer of Madin-Darby Canine Kidney (MDCK) cells (OECD Test Guideline 460) [17,18]. Other three-dimensional human tissue models such as the Reconstructed Human Cornea-like Epithelium (RhCE) test (OECD Test Guideline 492) and the Vitrigel-Eye Irritancy test (OECD Test Guide- line 494) are approved for use in a bottom-up approach identifying sub- stances not classified for ocular irritation. These tests provide varying coverage of the biology relevant to eye irritation and corrosion when compared to human ocular anatomy and physiology [19].

Computational models provide a fast and low-cost solution to ob- tain reliable predictions for the endpoint of concern when generated on high-quality curated data and properly validated [10]. A major compu- tational approach, named Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationship (QSAR) modeling, employs various statistical and artificial intelligence (AI) approaches, such as machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) to generate models that can accurately predict the outcome of testing new compounds in a specific assay, based on their molecular features. In recent years, the growth in publicly available data enabled the devel- opment of highly robust and predictive models [20,21]. However, mod- eling toxicity is a complex task as the underlying mechanisms are not always clear [3,21]. For this reason, QSAR models are highly dependent on the quality and volume of the data [12] in the training set, proper chemical and biological curation of primary data is critical [22,23], and failure to follow these practices question the trustworthiness of models [6].

Our team has extensively worked on the development of QSAR mod- els for toxicity endpoints and developed web applications to dissemi- nate the use of these models, such as Pred-hERG [43] and Pred-Skin [44]. Considering the lack of reliable models for eye irritation and cor- rosion, herein, we have collected, curated, and integrated the largest publicly available eye irritation and corrosion datasets, used it to build predictive and rigorously validated ML and instance-learner models, in- tegrated these models into a software package called STopTox (Sys- temic and Topical chemical Toxicity), and made it publicly available (https://stoptox.mml.unc.edu/). We offer these models as reliable com- 1 It is important to notice that there are some commercially available models such as ADC/Percepta (https://www.acdlabs.com/products/percepta/ index.php) and Case Ultra (http://www.multicase.com/case-ultra) and freely available software tools such as Toxtree (http://toxtree.sourceforge. net/) and QSAR toolbox that do not fully disclose their parameters, as well as datasets and statistics (https://www.oecd.org/chemicalsafety/risk-assessment/ oecd-qsar-toolbox.htm#Guidance_Documents_and_Training_Materials_for_Using

The final (unbalanced) dataset was composed of 3,547 compounds, of which 2,401 were classified as non-irritant/non-corrosive, 937 were classified as irritant (categories 2A and 2B) of which 209 were classified as corrosive (category 1). The GHS classification for irritant/corrosive compounds was only available for 1,248 compounds of the dataset, where 209 compounds were classified as category 1 members, 166 were classified as category 2A, and 84 as category 2B, whereas 789 were clas- sified as NC. These compounds classified under GHS system were used to generate multiclass models.

(ii) choose 469 non-irritants with the largest Tanimoto similarity to the nearest irritant and 468 via random selection. Such procedures allowed us to create the most challenging training set with structurally similar irritants and non-irritants to achieve the most rigorous model capable of separating these two classes from each other and including a fraction of more diverse non-irritants to provide broader chemical space coverage. The final dataset consisted of 1,874 compounds (937 irritants and 937 non-irritants). The same approach was performed to balance the data for the generation of QSAR models to predict eye corrosion, i.e., the NC class of compounds was under-sampled using both structural similarity and random sampling, leading to a balanced data of 418 compounds (209 corrosive and 209 non-corrosive).

The compiled data was carefully curated and inspected according to protocols proposed by Fourches et al. [42,57]. Briefly, counter ions were stripped, mixtures and inorganics were removed, and specific chemo- types such as nitro groups and aromatic rings were standardized. Dupli- cates were identified, carefully analyzed, and only one entry was kept if biological responses were similar. The curation steps were implemented

In KNIME, a collection of 117 different RDKit molecular descriptors were calculated for the dataset followed by the removal of invariant descriptors and descriptors with a correlation higher than 0.9. MACCS structural keys [61] are implemented in the RDKit module available in the KNIME platform, as well as Morgan fingerprints [62]. RDKit pro- vides 166 publicly available structural keys to represent molecules, and, for the Morgan fingerprint, it is possible to define the number of bits to encode the fingerprints as well as the radius, as the Morgan fingerprint is a circular fingerprint similar to ECFP and FCFP fingerprints family. For this study, Morgan fingerprints were generated using radius of 2 and 2048-bits length.

Version 5.5 of Dragon software (Talete SRL, Milan, Italy) was used to generate all the 0D, 1D, and 2D descriptors provided by the software, totaling 2489 descriptors [63]. After the descriptors were calculated, invariant descriptors and descriptors with a correlation higher than 0.9 were also removed prior to the model generation step.

Both RF [64] and MuDRA [65] algorithms were applied. RF is a well- known ensemble decision tree learning algorithm, while MuDRA is an instance-based learning process. MuDRA does not build an underlying model to make its predictions but performs an instantaneous classifi- cation of known irritant/corrosive and non-irritant/non-corrosive com- pounds based on their similarity range and nearest neighborhood. An in-depth explanation of how the MuDRA method can be applied can be found elsewhere [65]. Both methods are implemented in the KNIME an- alytics platform; RF is a built-in node provided by different developers, while MuDRA is implemented through the integration between KNIME platform and Python scripting language via built-in nodes for this pur- pose.

spective validation processes. As described above, the 5-fold external cross-validation procedure was chosen to validate the models in this study. Hence, the statistical analysis is based on the collected results of predictions made in each fold of the cross-validation approach. For the multiclassification models, the same metrics were calculated, but con- sidering the confusion matrix and comparing each class against all. The statistical metrics and the respective formulas are described below.

The FDA inactive ingredients database (IID) set of compounds is freely available at https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-approvals-and- databases/inactive-ingredients-database-download. We also retrieved the data and curated it following the protocol described above. We ap- plied the best models reported in this study to predict the ocular toxicity binary models for eye corrosion. For each endpoint, we built RF models using four molecular descriptors described in the methods section as well as one MuDRA model. The AD of each model was calculated, with an exception for the MuDRA method as it is an instance-based modeling approach.

serious issues in human eyes [69]. The compounds are glutaraldehyde [70], Paraquat [71,72], and glyphosate [73]. All three were correctly predicted as being irritants. This reinforces the predictive power of the MuDRA approach and its applicability to important toxicological end- points such as eye irritation/corrosion.

As a further application of our models, we have retrieved and care- fully curated 4780 compounds from the CosIng database and predicted their effects on eye corrosion / irritation using the MuDRA models; com- plete details of the results are available in the supplementary material. In summary, our prediction identified 2003 compounds with the potential to cause eye irritation. We also predicted the effects on eye irritation and corrosion of the Inactive Ingredients Database (IID) containing 4673 in- active ingredients using MuDRA based model. The subset of compounds used in the ophthalmic route of administration had 181 entries consist- ing of 76 unique ingredients. Among them, 24 were predicted as poten- tial eye irritants and 12 as corrosive, where most of these are reported

Bhhatarai B, Wilson DM, Parks AK, Carney EW, Spencer PJ. Evaluation of TOPKAT, toxtree, and derek nexus in silico models for ocular irritation and development of a knowledge-based framework to improve the prediction of severe irritation. Chem Res Toxicol 2016. doi:10.1021/acs.chemrestox.5b00531.

