In this work, a new obstacle detection and classification technique in dynamical background is proposed. Obstacle detection is based on inverse perspective mapping and homography. Obstacle classification is based on fuzzy neural network. The estimation of the vanishing point relies on feature extraction strategy. The method exploits the geometrical relations between the elements in the scene so that obstacle can be detected. The estimated homography of the road plane between successive images is used for image alignment. A new fuzzy decision fusion method with fuzzy attribution for obstacle detection and classification application is described.The fuzzy decision function modifies parameters with auto- adapted algorithm to get better classification probability. It is shown that the method can achieve better classification result.

accident. Also known as forward collision warning systems they use radar and sometimes laser sensors to detect an imminent crash. Depending on the system they may warn the driver, precharge the brakes, inflate seats for extra support, move the passenger seat, position head rests to avoid whip lash, tension seat belts and automatically apply partial or full braking to minimize impact. In 2009 the U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) began studying whether to make frontal collision warning systems and lane departure warning systems mandatory[1]. In 2011 a question has been submitted to the European Commission regarding stimulation of these "collision mitigation by braking" systems [2]. The mandatory fitting of advanced emergency braking systems in commercial vehicles will be implemented on 1 November 2013 for new vehicle types and on 1 November 2015 for all new vehicles in the European Union [3].

Some vehicles are already fitted with systems which employ sensors to monitor the proximity of the vehicle in front and detect situations where the relative speed and distance between the two vehicles suggest that a collision is imminent. In such a situation, emergency braking can be automatically applied and the effects of the collision are either mitigated or avoided altogether. The capability of such systems could be expanded in the future to cover other types of accident (for example, pedestrian accidents or even head-on collisions). Preliminary studies suggest that such systems could ultimately save around 5000 fatalities and 50,000 serious injuries per year across the EU. It is likely that due to the technical challenges involved, these systems will only be ready for installation on the whole range of new vehicles in a few years time. However, it is already possible to provide estimates of the likely costs and benefits of such systems.

Lots of sensors mounted on the vehicle could provide a practical solution to this problem. However, the prices of the traditional systems and their limited performance have prevented such systems from entering the market. In this context, solutions based on video processing have played an important role for the last decade. Obstacle detection becomes the main focus in most Forward Collision Warning (FCW) systems.

This paper presents a full system for obstacle detection and classification in non-stationary settings based on computer vision. The method proposed for obstacle detection exploits the geometrical relations between the elements in the scene so that obstacles can be detected by analyzing motion parallax. Namely, the homography of the road plane between successive images is computed. The estimated homography is used for image alignment, which in turn allows to detect the obstacles in the image.

