fed to the neural network. With this, a dataset of 500 images was generated with each camera and divided into healthy and faulty parts. Then it was divided into training with an 80% and validation with 20%. Data augmentation that consists on small modifications was used to artificially increase the dataset, that was zoom in and out, rotation, mirror in different values to increase the dataset to 1000 samples. To test the consistency of the results, the dataset was shuffled, and randomized training and validation sets were assembled and tested. All these sets produced similar results.

As seen in the bibliography, artificial intelligence is useful in de- tecting faulty parts in olive leaves. This can be seen in [24] where 97% accuracy was achieved using a combination of the ViT model (Visual Transformer) and the VGG-16 (Visual Geometry Group), or in [25] where 91.8% accuracy was achieved with ResNet101. Finally, in the

To detect olive leaves it was used the faster-rcnn-inception-v2 neu- ral network [27], and for intrinsic segmentation it was applied the mask-rcnn-R-50-FPN-3x from Detectron 2 [28]. Both networks were retrained with a dataset that contains healthy and sick leaves alike. With this, was expected that both neural networks could generate a representative sample of leaves which could be used to determinate the health level of the tree. Finely, Inception V3 convolutional neural network was used to classify the detected leaves on the different categories as this network has shown good result on leaves disease classifications [29,30].

others to evaluate the tree. This network will be retrained with a dataset of 3000 leaves divided into healthy, faulty parts and unclassifiable. The training set will be 80% and the validation set 20%. The dataset was increased to obtain 1500 samples per category, reaching 4500 samples with data augmentation. As in the previous cases, the dataset was mixed and recreated to detect inconsistencies in the network training.

In the beginning of this work, it was analyzed the capability of CNN to detect faulty parts on leaves. Then, two neural networks were retrained to extract a sample of leaves on trees. Later, both networks were used to evaluate the disease level of a part of an olive tree crop. In this case the classifier was retrained to detect three classes: healthy, sick and non-classifiable leaves. Both, the Mask rcnn and the Fast-r cnn can perfectly detect a sample of leaves, but through the experiment it was observed that both of them can detect other objects than leaves, like the olive fruits and flowers. The classifier had to recognize those false detections and ignore them. Leaves out of focus were considered non classifiable as well. The classifier was retrained with a new dataset generated by the detector and the intrinsic segmenter.

In the second part of the work, the implementation of neural networks to detect and evaluate the disease level of an olive tree was analyzed. It could be observed that both detection and semantic segmentation networks can obtain a representative sample of leaves that can be classified determining the disease level of a part of the tree. Then, the system to evaluate the health status of an olive tree was exported to an embedded system that could be used in on-field applications by an operator.

olive trees and determine the proper action to be taken. Also, an improvement in the detection or intrinsic segmentation to detect the presence of some disease that is present in other parts of the tree will be studied. Additionally, the device will be mounted on an autonomous quadricycle [32] to avoid the use of an operator and to improve the disease mapping in extensive fields. Finally, the capability to control a whole autonomous fumigation system [33] with the information provided with this detection system will be developed and analyzed.

