In many dynamic open systems, social interaction plays an important role for the development of social capital. These interactions may not be secure from self-interested agents. For that, each agent must be capable of identifying reliable interaction allies. In light of this, the focus is on developing a different type of interaction among the agents inside a spontaneous networked organization (SNO). It helps to overcome such a problem through applying a broad range of policy of negotiation to accelerate the execution process of the fittest task provided by the organizer. Moreover, by applying collaborative filtering (CF), we examine different types of data to show how agents interact implicitly or explicitly and how these interactions affect the social capital. This method obtains a high performance of interaction and can help to control the spontaneous flow of behaviors and knowledge to be more accurate when agents communicate rationally since trust is recorded in such a distributed organization.

A spontaneous networked organization (SNO) is a collection of agents characterized by their shared values and interactions with each other to achieve a certain goal [2]. In the real world, people always attempt to obtain the satisfied strategy to accomplish the goals. This satisfied solution can meet their own needs even though it may not be computationally perfect. Formation is considered as a main guide to understanding the

Interactions among agents play an important role for the growing of social capital inside the SNO [1]. They give a rise to a set of social norms, shared value, relations and common goals that describe an organization. The behaviors, attitudes, and experiences of each agent are collectively influenced by other agents. Since the social capital is growing rapidly, the new strategies and planes will be launched dynamically to avoid arriving to the dissolution [1]. Therefore, the social interaction process plays an efficient factor in the creation of trust between agents or agents and other entities inside the organization.

Shared values can strengthen the competitiveness for SNO's agents [6]. These shared values become cognitive contexts with agents, and they in a right manner can coordinate their actions and follow to combined communication. These cognitive contexts represent the social norms that can set roles and plans of behavior that synchronize agent's communication with others.

Social norms are the level of social customs and traditions, and common trends, that demonstrated by organization's agents. They are legislated rules and procedures that pay individuals to adapt both when carrying out simple or complex interacts because they know and accept public laws, which increase the unit of organization cohesion and interdependence. These norms are shared values, which deeply cherished by individuals, affect their interactions, and characterized by congruence and similarity among the agents [2]. This is what helps to increase the degree of unity and cohesion of the organization.

The spontaneous networked organization (SNO) has properties that are similar to many traditional organizations. Usually, it goes through processes from formation to dissolution. Some other operations may also exist inside it. Any organization goes through certain processes that formulate its existence. Virtual networks, for instance, have a life cycle stages of creation, operation, evaluation, dissolution, and metamorphoses [9]. These basic stages are very noticeable in the life cycle of many existing organization, such as the SNO.

This paper mainly focuses on developing a different type of interaction among the agents inside the SNO. We present first the agent negotiation protocols through the interaction process, and then move to show the service level agreements (SLAs), and how to use them inside SNO in the following sections. The interaction using distributed database will be shown next. The implicit and explicit interactions by applying the concept of collaborative filtering (CF) will be addressed in the last section.

The negotiation among the agents will be based on the Contract Net Protocols that distribute the task as task announcement between the agents when the organizer offers it. These protocols allow the agents to negotiate with their peers to make the fitness agents candidates in one group of agents. When the agents receive the tasks and for some reasons they cannot solve the present them, they will become sub-tasks. Agents will form a contract between themselves, and announce the sub-tasks to the contract net acting as agents which evaluate the task with respect to their capabilities. Thus, other agents will attempt to bid more for winning this contract. The agents who have more bids will win the contract and then show their fit capabilities and abilities to the organizer to be assigned. The organizer in this case can evaluate the submitted bids, and choose the most appropriate agent to perform the task [8]. Furthermore, the organizer is responsible to capture the agent-specific data for particular tasks. When the contract agreement is established between the agents, SLA violation monitoring is applied in this group of agents to determine whether negotiation protocols are achieved or violated [13].

SLAs have parameters and metrics that elaborate the service standards between at least the parties in the network and push them to interact in a proper manner. Interaction using the SLA modeling will include some events that identify the actions occurring on it such as service discovery, negotiation, scheduling, monitoring. SLAs can be a cause of attracting the agents by establishing the credibility of the tasks offered [13].

SLAs will be sectioned with each group of agents who interacts in different locations of SNO. The interaction among the agents who have a full similarity of attribute will be implicitly using SLA. SLA shows the relationship and level of correction between the agents depending on the contract of similarity they sign it before. Thus, this will sign implicit agreement that ties the agents who have a similarity of attribute. This similarity will help the agent to behave dynamically over the time and may be employed to build implicit concoctions. Therefore, SLA controls the implicit connections and relationships between the agents in the same case of similarity attribute.

By using the Collaborative Filtering (CF) technique, we can know the agents who will interact implicitly and explicitly. Agents from different locations seek to show their capabilities and preferences to get the tasks offered. In this model, we will illustrate that the agents who belong to one cluster after negotiating will send the agreed payoffs or final results of their negotiation. To compute the similarity between the two groups of agents (X, Y) for their attribute in the SNO, we will present the idea of (CF) of (Memory-Based), which filter data using techniques involving collaboration among multiple agents and the past agent behavior can be examined like (the previous transactions or product ratings), in order to create a new connection between these groups of agents. This method provides an automatic prediction for the interests of the agent by gathering the preference from many agents, thus matching agents with similar interests [11].

Usually inside the organization, many agents share the values and have the same interests with other agents, so they have commonalties in their attributes. They are closely related characteristics to some agents in different clusters of SNO. This relationship will be characterized by a wide range of attribute, thus they will interact explicitly. The agents who interact explicitly will be controlled by the organizer rather than SLA which is responsible for the implicit relations only. In the game matrix above, the agents (1, 4) can interact explicitly because they are closely related characteristics. The ratio between two groups of agents 1 and 4 is [2:4], so they share some attribute and can interact explicitly in SNO.

The SNO organization will be founded from implicit and explicit connections between the agents that may be characterized by any number of attributes in different locations. As social capital is based on social similarity which indicates to the implicit interactions and the individuals sometime create explicit connections when they have some similarities with others in different clusters, so the agent can interact inside and outside the group. This way of interaction can cause to spread the ideas to other agents, thereby increasing the social consensus to achieve the common interest and by using SLAs seek to set an agreement between the various actors and stakeholders to work together.

In conclusion, this paper has focused on the development of a different type of interactions among the agents inside a spontaneous networked organization (SNO). It helps to overcome the problem of interaction through applying a broad range of service level agreements (SLAs). Applying collaborative filtering (CF) allowed further examinations on different types of data to show how agents interact implicitly or explicitly and how these interactions affect the social capital. This method obtained a high performance of interaction and can help to control the spontaneous flow of behaviors and knowledge to be more secure when agents communicate rationally since trust is recorded in such a distributed organization. Future work will examine more about the security of these interactions and their effect on a wide range of organizations.

