Accuracy is one of the key features that favor robotic manipulators for many industrial applications. Superior levels of accuracy are achieved by controlling or measuring all possible sources of errors on the pose of the moving platform of a robotic manipulator. Joint clearance is one of  ost important sources of errors. It introduce extraneous degrees of freedom between two connected links. When present, they generally contribute importantly to the degradation of the performance of a mechanism Various approaches have been proposed to compute and quantify the errors due to joint clearances [ 9 10 12 1 ], however none of them focuses on the reliability of solutions, which is mandatory to provide an accurate prediction of the pose error. This paper focu	guaranteeing the reliability of solutions by using constraint programming and interval analysis To this end we combine a branch and bound algorithm with interval analysis, which allow drawing firm bounds on the pose errors given possible ranges for the clearances. We illustrate experimental results where the proposed approach generally outperforms the well known solvers GAMS/BARON [1] and ECLiPS [5], while providing reliable solutions

The results show that our implementation is in general faster than its competitors. For smaller problems involving two and three joints, our algorithm exhibits excellent performance, being dramatically faster that BARON. This is because there is no need for a high level of precision for this problem. Indeed, there is no need to reach the usual 10-8 precision, which makes the search process less costly than they usually are.

Let us note that running times is not the most important aspect to remark. It is more important to observe that the solutions reached by the BARON solver are not always reliable. Indeed we have verified by using RealPaver that results computed by BARON are unfeasible on some of the above tested problem instances. The following example illustrates how BARON can fail to give the correct value and return an inconsistent point instead. Let   be two real variables,      , and two constraints       and and interval analysis. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach where it is able to in general outperform well-known solvers such as BARON and ECLiPSe, providing reliable solutions. In this context, there are several directions for future work such as to implement more efficient filtering techniques for accelerating the convergence of solutions. In this way, it would be easier to handle the exponential growth of the space of solutions. Finally, it would be interesting to pay an extended attention to the unreliability of solutions obtained by BARON. Such a problem could be also present in additional solvers.

Berger N, Soto R., Goldsztejn A, Caro S, Cardou P. Finding the Maximal Pose Error in Robotic Mechanical Systems Using Constraint Programming, Proceedings of 23rd International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Other Applications of Applied Intelligent Systems (IEA/AIE), 2010, volume 7345 of LNCS, pp. 82-91, Springer.

