So, based on the above literature reviews, it is clearly evident that the ANN modeling approach integrated with the PSO algorithm could be used for modeling and optimization of the seed-cell filling perfor- mance of an inclined plate seed metering device. Therefore, the present study aims to apply a new integrated ANN-PSO-based intelligent opti- mization approach for determining the optimal operating parameters of an inclined plate seed metering device corresponding to 100% cell fill. With this aim, an artificial neural network model for predicting the cell fill was developed with the experimental data. The developed ANN model was then coupled with a particle swarm optimizer to re- trieve the optimal operating parameters for achieving 100% cell fill. The confirmation tests were also carried out to verify the reliability of the proposed optimization approach.

respectively, based on 20 cm seed spacing and the given overall gear ratio between the drive wheel and the seed metering plate. The seeds passing through the seed delivery tube were detected by the IR sensor interfaced with the Arduino microcontroller, and the counted seed numbers were recorded in the laptop with the help of a serial monitor app during the experiment. Initially, the test was conducted by varying the forward speed of operation while keeping other parameters con- stant. Similarly, other observations were taken by varying all indepen- dent parameters one by one while keeping the rest parameters constant. The test setup was run for ten revolutions of the seed metering plate corresponding to each set of independent parameters. The system counted the metered seeds in 10 revolutions, and cell fill was deter- mined. Three replications were taken for each set of conditions, and the corresponding average cell fill was computed. These data were fur- ther utilized to develop the ANN model for predicting the cell fill.

0.001, and the maximum validation checks before terminating the training process, which represents the number of successive iterations for which the validation performance fails to decrease, was taken as 6. The model was adaptively trained by the trial and error method, and the network connection weights were adjusted to minimize the mean squared error (MSE) between the target and model-predicted cell fill values.

Where: RIik is the relative importance of input variable xi on the out- put yk. Ni and Nh are the number of input and hidden neurons, respec- tively. Wij and Wjk represent the connection weights of input- hidden layer and hidden-output layer, respectively.

Particle swarm optimization (PSO) is a bio-inspired population- based metaheuristic algorithm. Its working mechanism imitates the so- cial behavior of the bird flocking. In this algorithm, each member of a given swarm, also called a particle, represents a potential solution to the given optimization problem. Each particle is allowed to move in the problem space with associated random position and velocity. At each iteration, the best position of each particle achieved so far among all iterations (i.e., personal best) and the best position of any particle achieved so far among all the particles (i.e., global best) are selected

Where Xd = [X1, X2, X3]T denotes the design variable vector, F(Xd) is the objective function of this optimization problem, and Fc is the cell fill pre- dicted using the developed ANN model. The goal of this optimization problem was to determine a set of design variables that minimized the objective function F(Xd) under the given constraints. The minimization of the objective function F(Xd) actually maximized the cell fill (Fc) to 100%.

Similarly, an excellent agreement can be observed between experi- mental and model-predicted cell fill values for the testing dataset as in- dicated by a high R2 (0.9825) value and low MSE (0.734) value, which also confirms the excellent generalization ability of the developed ANN model for predicting the cell fill. Furthermore, the R2 (0.9825) value for the testing dataset indicates that the developed ANN model best approximation of optimal values of operating parameters at 100% cell fill with a maximum deviation of 2% between the model-predicted and experimentally observed cell fill values. These experimental valida- tion results indicate that the proposed optimization technique is feasi- ble to determine the optimal operating parameters of an inclined plate seed metering device. However, these results need to be verified under actual field conditions.

This study, thus, proposed a new intelligent optimization technique based on the integrated ANN-PSO approach for optimizing the seed-cell filling performance of an inclined plate seed metering device. The ex- perimental results of this study suggested that the proposed optimiza- tion technique could also be effectively applied to determine the optimal operating parameters of other agricultural machines. Moreover, this study also provides a reference basis for future research on process parameters optimization and precision seeding technology.

