The paper involves modeling of quarter car models of passive and various semi-active suspension systems. Semi-active suspension is better than the passive and active suspensions based on optimum performance within the constraints of weight and operational cost. Fuzzy logic controllers are incorporated in the design scheme of semi-active models. Fuzzy logic based systems can handle non-linearities through heuristic rules. Particle swarm optimization technique is applied in order to determine the optimized scaling factors keeping the normalized ranges of inputs and output of fuzzy logic controller. The performance of resulting optimized system is compared with different systems based on various control algorithms (including passive system). The models are compared for attributes of road handling and ride comfort. The results clearly manifest supremacy of fuzzy logic based particle swarm optimized semi-active suspension system in relation to all other systems. The research presents an innovative approach of utilizing relative displacement and relative velocity as the input parameters resulting in no overshoot of the suspension displacement.

During the last decades, fuzzy logic has implemented very fast since the first paper in fuzzy set theory, which is now considered to be the seminal paper of the subject, was written by Zadeh [3], who is considered the founding father of the field. Mamdani [4] developed Zadeh`s work and demonstrated the application of Fuzzy Logic Control (FLC) for a small model steam engine. It is difficult to control the parameters of the fuzzy logic control system through manual procedure. Therefore, important scaling factors are tuned by means of an appropriate optimization technique. Particle swarm optimization (PSO) method performs better in terms of convergence and computation time. This technique has been widely used in engineering problems [5].

This paper presents quarter car passive and semi-active suspension systems modeled in Simulink. The inputs and output of optimized fuzzy logic controller are normalized and gain factors are incorporated in the system. The gain factors are evaluated by performing off-line tuning method using PSO technique. Based on the optimized parameters, the maximum output of the damper is selected. Various models are designed on the basis of various control algorithms. All the models are compared for road handling and ride comfort. Section 2 describes modeling of the systems along with the implementation of PSO technique. Section 3 discusses the simulation results while Section 4 presents the conclusion.

For a semi-active suspension model, the damping coefficient needs to be varied. In order to incorporate the modulation of damping coefficient, a fuzzy logic controller is incorporated in the design scheme. Fuzzification interface, fuzzy rule base, decision making logic and defuzzification interface are the main blocks of a fuzzy logic system..

Fuzzification involves transformation of crisp values into linguistic variables that are further manipulated by fuzzy rule base and decision making process. Defuzzification transforms the linguistic variables back to crisp values that are fed into the plant again. In current research, the proposed fuzzy logic controller takes two inputs; relative displacement and relative velocity, while output of the controller is desired damping coefficient. Each of the inputs comprises three membership functions; N (triangular), Z (singleton) and P (triangular), while the output variable consists of three membership functions; S (triangular), M (Gaussian) and L (triangular).

Based on the three membership functions of each input variable, a total of nine rules are formulated. All the input and output variables have been normalized having ranges of [-1,1] and [0,1] respectively. Mamdani inference system is selected employing centroid defuzzification method.

Each particle optimizes a set of three scaling factors; A, B and C. Libest indicates the best known position for each particle while Gbest denotes the corresponding best known position for the complete swarm. The position of each particle (pi) is updated by velocity (vi) in the k+1 iteration, as given by (1) and (2).

The optimized fuzzy system outperforms all other systems in the domain of suspension displacement. There is no overshoot and the system gets stabilized rapidly in relation to other systems in comparison. Therefore, the optimized fuzzy system gives the best ride comfort among all the control algorithms. Passive system does not stabilize at all in case of suspension displacement. Fuzzy hybrid combines the strategies of skyhook and groundhook control algorithms. In terms of tire displacement, the best stabilizing time periods are depicted by the optimized fuzzy logic system while groundhook offers the minimum percent overshoot. However, optimized fuzzy system is still comparable with the groundhook system in vehicle handling.

The paper has demonstrated successful application of hybrid artificial intelligence techniques in designing a semi-active suspension system. Both passive and semi-active suspension systems have been modeled in Simulink. The input and output membership functions of optimized fuzzy system have been normalized because of the incorporation of scaling factors. The performance of optimized fuzzy logic controlled system is much better in comparison with the passive system and other control schemes in terms of road handling and ride comfort.

