Small berries including strawberry and blueberry are extensively consumed fruits with great economic values due to their characteristic flavor and appearance as well as potential health benefits. This review elaborated the optical non-destructive techniques viz. Vis-NIR spectroscopy, computer vision system, hyperspectral imaging, multispectral imaging, laser-induced method and thermal imaging, and their ap- plications for quality and safety control of small berry fruits. The discussion regarding the photoacoustic technique, X-ray technique, Terahertz spectroscopy, odor imaging, micro-destructive testing and smart mobile terminal-based analyzer was also presented. Furthermore, we proposed our personal under- standing of the technical challenges and further trends for these optical non-destructive techniques:

Small berry fruits including strawberry, blueberry, bayberry, mul- berry, raspberry and gooseberry are widely consumed due to their char- acteristic flavor and appearance, and were proved to potentially inhibit the growth of cancer cells (Manganaris et al., 2014; Seeram et al., 2006; Zanini et al., 2015). Applying non-destructive testing techniques to the quality and safety control of small berry fruits can provide the consistent and safe as well as nutritious products for consumers (Chen et al., 2013b), thereby greatly increasing their economic values (Opara and Pathare, 2014). Optical non-destructive approaches are based on the brief principle of analyzing the signals which have been interacted with the testing materials (Mollazade et al., 2012). Over the last two de- cades, the optical non-destructive measurements for controlling quality and safety of food and agricultural products have attracted much scien- tific attention and industrial concerns (Zhang et al., 2018).

The main disadvantage of the spectroscopic techniques is a lack of the spatial information (Manley, 2014). Although some investigators attempted to add spatial data by the use of spatially-resolved spectros- copy (Nguyen Do Trong et al., 2014a; Nguyen Do Trong et al., 2014b), it would not meet the increasing experimental demand for the non- homogenous biological materials. Unlike spectroscopic techniques, the computer vision can operate in the spatial dimension, hence allowing the detection of material external quality, especially for heterogeneous samples.

nique was significantly influenced by the inconsistent ambient illumi- nation and complex background. In order to solve these problems, Li et al. (2014) proposed a novel method based on the stepwise algorithm to identify the blueberry mature stages under natural outdoor lightings in the branch. The alternative solution for varying lighting was to use the flash light for the exposure compensation (Hu et al., 2015a; Wang et al., 2012).

With respect to the other small berries, Lu et al. (2011) successfully sorted the bayberries as the healthy and bruised categorizations using computer vision system. Patel et al. (2013) evaluated the appearance quality such as color, shape and size of gooseberry for the purpose of promoting the export industry.

Future research opportunities have been and are still being focused on multi-dimensional vision techniques (Adamczak et al., 2015). For ex- ample, Uyar and Erdogdu (2009) used 3-dimensional scanners to esti- mate the surface area and volume of irregular shaped fruits such as strawberry.

Agudelo-Laverde et al. (2013) exploited the computer vision technique to monitor the variations of color attributes. With the aid of ultraviolet light, Yoshioka et al. (2013) captured the fluorescence images of straw- berries to estimate fluorescent phenolic compound levels. This indi- cated that the addition of light source operating outside the visible spectral range might extend the application scope of computer vision system.

In terms of other laser-excited techniques, Wulf et al. (2008) tested the potential usage of the laser-induced fluorescence spectroscopy for quantifying the blueberry p-coumaroyl-glucose and cinnamoyl- glucose contents. Li et al. (2011) estimated the blueberry firmness using a laser air-puff instrument with the correlation coefficient of

Recently, in food and agricultural research, the photoacoustic ap- proach has been used for determining nitrogen in rapeseed (Lu et al., 2015) and quantifying pesticide residue in apple cuticle (Liu et al., 2015). In terms of small berries, Popa et al. (2014) validated the hypoth- esis that the nonorganic raspberry and strawberry fruits released more ethylene gas than organic ones via the photoacoustic spectroscopy. Since most of biological materials are turbid or opaque in nature, the photoacoustic spectroscopy or the imaging technique deserves a lot of attention in the further study.

X-ray technique is commonly applied to security inspection in air- ports and customs, and recently it has been extensively used in food and agricultural domain (Jiang et al., 2008; Mathanker et al., 2013a), in- cluding detecting fruit pest infestation (Chuang et al., 2011), determin- ing food density (Kelkar et al., 2015), inspecting the foreign bodies (Li et al., 2015), charactering fruit internal structure (Magwaza and

For small berry fruits, Nielsen et al. (2014) differentiated frozen and defrosted blueberry and blackberry fruits from the X-ray images. In the further research, large data volumes in X-ray CT posed a challenge in image acquisition and processing. Developments in the multimodal ma- chine vision system containing computer vision, hyperspectral imaging and X-ray technique (Wang and Li, 2015) bring not only more useful in- formation, but also the increasing redundant information.

According to our unpublished data, the THz reflectance spectroscopy was validated to be not applicable for blueberry quality evaluation be- cause of the curved surface (data not shown). Further researches are re- quired to overcome some technical hurdles such as the attenuation by water and scattering by inhomogeneous media (Ok et al., 2014).

project under Grant 2016M600315, the Innovation Fund Project for Graduate Student of Shanghai (JWCXSL1401), and the STCSM (No. 18DZ2270700). We are grateful to Prof. Yi-Ming Zhu, Dr. Hong-Wei Zhao, Mr. Wei Xiao and Mr. Jing Chen from School of Optical-Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Shanghai for Science and Technology for their valuable helps in THz experiments. We are also grateful to Dr. Chao-Hui Feng from College of Food Science, Sichuan Ag- ricultural University.

