Numerous facets of daily life are transforming due to the Internet of Things (IoT). The ubiquitous nature of IoT technologies sets them apart from earlier advancements and encourages the development of intelli- gent and autonomous solutions [1]. A significant strategic technology trend is the development of the IoT [2]. The conceptual model in the novel approach to learning is predicated on having multiple sensors that connect the physical and virtual machines. Sensors are embedded into any object, which supports this change in basic assumptions. Next, embedded sensors use Machine-to-Machine (M2M) communication to connect billions of devices to the Internet [3]. Face Detection (FD) using Deep Learning is a popular Computer Vision (CV) task that involves identifying and locating human faces in images or video streams. DL techniques, specifically Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), have proven highly effective for FD tasks.

existing OTS. EC technology integrates a network, a computer system, storage spaces, and application capabilities on free-standing platforms. It starts on edge to provide fast network service responses and fulfill industry standards for real-time business, application intelligence, se- curity, and privacy. Between the physical subject and industrial connection, or even above the physical subject, is where the edge computer is situated. Data processing and analysis with EC is faster than with CC [9].

Training and Processing Pipeline: The paper presents a training and processing pipeline where the EBSAAS model is initially trained on a face dataset within the ED. Once trained, the system can capture images of individuals or groups, perform FS, recognize faces, and analyze attentiveness by sending images to the ES for processing. This pipeline enables real-time analysis of student attentiveness.

Integration of Edge Server: The paper highlights the inclusion of an ES in the EBSAAS architecture. The ES is responsible for processing the attentiveness analysis and training the recognition classifier. By offloading these tasks to the ES, the EBSAAS can leverage its computational capabilities and potentially enhance processing speed.

In FD, the goal is to identify and locate the presence of faces within an image or video frame. The primary focus is detecting the overall face region rather than specific facial features. However, during the FD process, certain facial features can be used as cues to locate and validate the presence of a face. Some common facial features that can be applied are eye, nose, mouth and face contour. The facial features are retrieved using DLIB.

further complete than the preceding network. Many candidate windows are obtained once the test sample passes on the P-Net layer. The network filters out a high number of candidate windows. The prediction out- comes are further improved on the selected candidate boxes using Non- Maximum Suppression (NMS) and BB regression.

and cropping the images of faces, this work divided the video dataset into images for the experiment. The DLIB library labels the basic facial features after cropping the face image to determine the state value of the eye and mouth. This paper detects close fatigue by deciding the aspect ratio of the eyes and mouth. Ten videos from the RLDD test set were

However, the ES brings a slight increase in recognition time. To forecast the nature of listening, it is vital to identify student reactions quickly, and it is essential to compare the performance speeds of the proposed and current models. In comparison to existing models, the proposed model predicts the result in a short amount of time. The accuracy of classification is compared, and EBOL outperforms the state-of-the-art techniques.

attentiveness more quickly and effectively, enhancing learning out- comes and the efficiency of Online Learning (OL). The proposed model states whether the student is fatigued or focused, and the detection is achieved with a speed of 47.23, which is minimal than other models. The proposed model stands for a significant improvement in the evo- lution of contemporary education by giving teachers a potent tool to enhance their educational approaches and guarantee that students reach their full potential.

groups, and cultural contexts. While current Face Detection (FD) algo- rithms have achieved high accuracy, there is always research direction for improvement. Research can focus on developing more accurate models that can handle challenging scenarios, such as occlusions, extreme poses, variations in lighting conditions, and diverse demographics.

