Automatic data processing represents the future for the development of any system, especially in scien- tific research. In this paper, we describe one of the automatic classification methods applied to scientific research as a supervised learning task. Throughout the process, we identify the main features that are used as keys to play a significant role in terms of predicting the new rank under the supervised learning setup. First, we propose an overview of the work that has been realized in ranking scientific research papers. Second, we evaluate and compare some of state-of-the-art for the classification by supervised learning, semi-supervised learning and non-supervised learning. During the preliminary tests, we have obtained good results for performance on realistic corpus then we have compared performance metrics, such as NDCG, MAP, GMAP, F-Measure, Precision and Recall in order to define the influential features in our work.

SMO Classifier [4], and Kstar Classifier [5]. The three classifiers rep- resent the neuron network with nodes and edges as papers and citations between the different authors in a similar set of informa- tion. The major reason for this choice is that a research paper net- work is a concrete example of the relation where the researcher collaborates with other research communities in the scientific domains in order to achieve their goals.

The related work gives us a vision on the approaches and meth- ods for the classification of scientific research papers, and which is grouped into two major axes: the first axis is ranking according to the query and the second is ranking according to the technical analysis link. The limitation of these two main axes classifies the existing papers to us but it does not propose a contribution con- cerning the future classification. The novelty brought in this work is manifested through the prediction of the future classification being based on the existing papers that will offer the researcher the paper with the highest rank in this field.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: in the next section we review the related work in ranking scientific research papers. Section 3 shows the state of the art for the learning methods. Sec- tion 4 describes Methods. Section 5 shows Results and discussion. Finally, in section 6, we conclude and describe future research directions.

However, all researchers have concluded that both types of ranking algorithms (the relevant/the important) have some limita- tions, especially the relevance algorithm that is not used any more in ranking algorithms. However, studies on predicting a new rank are still lacking. In the next section, we will review the state of the art for the learning methods.

To perform generic tasks of supervised learning while exploit- ing some labeled data simultaneously with multiple raw data. The first idea is using a non-supervised context of the outputs pre- dicted by the system itself in order to construct the desired outputs by applying a supervised technique. This approach is known as the directed decision. The second idea depends on the simultaneous use of two classifiers. They alternately act as a teacher and a pupil in an algorithm, iterative learning: the output calculated by one will be taken as the appropriate output by the other and recipro- cally until convergence.

The Web of Science dataset also contains information that is not useful in our algorithm. We need to pre-process the dataset to extract only the information that we will use in our algorithm. In data pre-processing, after the extraction and preparation of data, the final database contains: the title of paper, its author(s), key- words, paper posted time, the conference of publication, the given research paper cites, the download rates, also the average publica- tion/keyword, article number and finally the order of paper.

M. El Mohadab, B. Bouikhlaene, S. Safi, Towards an efficient algorithm for ranking scientific research papers, in: 2017 2nd IEEE international scientific event on internet of things: Recent innovations and challenges (SEIT). Presented at the 2017 2nd IEEE international scientific event on internet of things: Recent innovations and challenges (SEIT), Rabat, Morocco.

