COVID-19 is a pandemic disease that began to rapidly spread in the US, with the first case detected on January 19, 2020, in Washington State. March 9, 2020, and then quickly increased with total cases of 25,739 as of April 20, 2020. Although most people with coronavirus 81%, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), will have little to mild symptoms, others may rely on a ventilator to breathe or not at all. SEIR models have broad applicability in predicting the outcome of the population with a variety of diseases. However, many researchers use these models without validating the necessary hypotheses. Far too many researchers often developed are unlikely to stand validity check on a separate group of population and regions. The researcher remains unaware that overfitting has occurred, without attempting such validation. In the paper, we present a combination algorithm that combines similar days features selection based on the region using Xgboost, K- Means, and long short-term memory (LSTM) neural networks to construct a prediction model (i.e., K-Means- LSTM) for short-term COVID-19 cases forecasting in Louisana state USA. The weighted k-means algorithm based on extreme gradient boosting is used to evaluate the similarity between the forecasts and past days. The results show that the method with K-Means-LSTM has a higher accuracy with an RMSE of 601.20 whereas the SEIR model with an RMSE of 3615.83.

efficient at the person to person transmission. According to guidance for diagnosis and treatments for COVID-19 issued by the World Health Organization, COVID-19 was transmitted through respiratory aspirates, droplets, contacts, and feces, and aerosols transmission is highly possible [2]. Since its initial detection, the COVID-19 has spread rapidly; it has been declared a pandemic and has infected over 5.2 million people in more than 210 countries [3,4]. Despite measures implemented in China during the initial phase of spread,

The rapid spread of COVID-19 has highlighted the need to under- stand how population dynamics interact with pandemics [8]. For example, the effects of the virus are more severe in the elderly. Popu- lation aging is currently more pronounced in wealthier countries, which may lessen the impact of this pandemic in lower-income countries with weaker health systems and younger age structures. Climate variables can also be a direct cause of biological interactions between COVID-19 and humans. Optimal temperature, humidity, and wind speed are vari- ables that can determine the survival and transmission of the SARS virus in mortality rates due to pneumonia [12]. The extreme weather condi- tions that accompany long-term climate change may also contribute to the spread of the West Nile virus in the United States and Europe [13]. Certain climatic conditions can be considered as the top predictors of respiratory diseases such as SARS.

Demographic data for the State of Louisiana was downloaded [16]. The following variables were collected: parish name, parish population, parish population density, race (white, African American, Asian, other, or unknown), ethnicity (Hispanic or non-Hispanic), age by categories, average daily temperature, average daily humidity, and the median age in the parish. In the analysis, we included only parish demographics data, which were reported with the COVID-19 cases repository managed by John Hopkins University.

First, we estimate the probability of COVID-19 from age and race for each parish in Louisiana mentioned below. Then, a clustering algorithm is applied to the features to find the optimal grouping of time series data of COVID-19 confirmed cases and parishes. After clustering, each cluster of time series data of COVID-19 confirmed cases and parishes would go through a.

To improve learning performance and quality extraction features, data must be preprocessed and more features displayed to promote model learning. Feature extraction is used to compress large data sets utilizing dimensionality reduction procedure in time series data mining. Using feature extraction, computational efficiency can be increased, and the use of more sophisticated algorithms is possible. Most methods of extraction of the features are standardized in nature; the features extracted are typically based on application. Therefore, one set of fea- tures that work well on one application may not be relevant to another application. The identification feature involves the application of Datamining techniques like clustering algorithms to derive usage pat- terns from the data. Extracting the simplified characteristics of data from time series will offer a more significant reduction in dimensionality (Features) compared to other approaches.

Xgboost [25] is an improved decision-making algorithm based on the gradient boosting tree and can create boosted trees efficiently and run in parallel. The core of the algorithm is to optimize the value of the objective function. Unlike the use of the feature vectors to calculate the similarity between the forecasting and history days, gradient boosting constructs the boosted trees to intelligently obtain the feature scores, thereby indicating the importance of each feature to the training model. The value of a feature depends on how the predictive output changes dramatically when replacing such a feature with random noise. With the

Clustering is the most useful tool for data mining, compression, probability density estimation, and many other essential tasks. There are many clustering algorithms like K-means, PAM, DBSCAN, many more. K-means algorithm is the most used clustering method. J. Macqueen originally proposed the K-Means algorithm in 1967 [26].

The K-Means-LSTM model was evaluated for different parishes. The proposed K-Means- LSTM can fit the case count by parish well using demographics, population density, average age, temperature, humidity, average household income per year, and risk of COVID-19 for the parish. In general, the model fits well where the case counts (data points) are higher than 45, and as data becomes richer, the fit improves significantly.

LSTM is used for this analysis to forecast the COVID-19 outbreak for Lousiana. This study suggests K-Means-LSTM as a useful tool for modeling the outbreak based on the results reported here and given the complex nature of the COVID-19 outbreak and its parish-to-parish behavioral variation. Training data is used to train the algorithm and ascertain the best set of parameters to be used in K-Means-LSTM. K- Means- LSTM has three main advantages. First, the model learns not

In comparison, we note that the width of prediction intervals made by K-Means-LSTM decreases on average as more data is used for pre- dictions. It can partially be attributed to the larger number of cases and the longer initial forecast time seen in many parishes. K-Means- LSTM outperforms the commonly used SEIR, but more features and input data are needed to estimate the trends. Although we have promising results for data from Louisiana, these new approaches need to be further assessed on other datasets. However, the findings presented are encouraging and will inspire the group to adopt these new tools quickly.

