Abstract Accurate long-term prediction of time series data (TSD) is a very use- ful research challenge in diversified fields. As financial TSD are highly volatile, multi-step prediction of financial TSD is a major research problem in TSD min- ing. The two challenges encountered are, maintaining high prediction accuracy and preserving the data trend across the forecast horizon. The linear traditional models such as autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) and gener- alized autoregressive conditional heteroscedastic (GARCH) preserve data trend to some extent, at the cost of prediction accuracy. Non-linear models like ANN maintain prediction accuracy by sacrificing data trend. In this paper, a linear hybrid model, which maintains prediction accuracy while preserving data trend, is proposed. A quantitative reasoning analysis justifying the accuracy of proposed model is also presented. A moving-average (MA) filter based pre- processing, partitioning and interpolation (PI) technique are incorporated by the proposed model. Some existing models and the proposed model are applied on selected NSE India stock market data. Performance results show that for

Engle in 1982 introduced ARCH model [7] which is known for forecasting high- ly volatile TSD. An improved version of ARCH model called generalized ARCH also known as GARCH model [8] was introduced by Bollerslev, Engle, and Nel- son in 1994. Several extensions of GARCH model are found in the literature. Some of the extensions are extensively surveyed in [9]. In [10] a simple (linear) GARCH(1,1) model is applied on Swiss market index and the results show that the model provides a good parametrization for the daily returns. GARCH model is further explored and studied in [11] and showed that the presence of outliers has an impact on the forecast results. In [12] GARCH models are used to forecast hourly prices in the deregulated electricity markets of Spain and California and the results outperform ARIMA model when volatility and price spikes are present. Some times GARCH models are inappropriate to model as they assume Gaussian distribution. In such cases student-T distribution can be assumed. This fact is fur- ther investigated in [13].

[21] or variability of prices or returns of a given TSD [22]. The popular measure of volatility is the conditional standard deviation, rt, given in (2), which is the vari- ance of TSD available till the time lag t. In (2), rt represents the returns data. If rt changes slowly with time, the TSD is identified as low volatile, else it is highly volatile.

sample data points. On this data, a linear interpolation is done to obtain Tr data points. This process is repeated on each of the partitions and P different TSD are obtained, each consisting of Tr sample data points. Thus interpolated TSD parti-

Let a TSD, referred as raw data here, have 500 data points. If 10 partitions are done, each partition will have 50 points. In this case, the first partition has the data points 1; 11; 21; .. . ; 491, second partition has data points 2; 12; 22; .. . ; 492, and

The advantages of the proposed model are that, it is well suited for long term pre- diction. Also, being a linear model, the data dynamics i.e. data trend is preserved and the prediction accuracy is high, better than the popular ANN. The ANN on the other hand uses the training data and learns from the data before prediction. It blindly tries to maximize the overall prediction accuracy. In this process, the data dynamics are sacrificed. This reasoning supports the fact that the proposed prediction model is better than the ANN model. The proposed model is clearly better than ARIMA, GARCH and Wavelet ARIMA models also, because the nature of the given time series data is clearly accounted at every stage in the model.

The limitation of the proposed model is that, the number of partitions P is decided based on trial and error. If the estimation of P for a given data set is possible, it will improve the model, though complexity increases. Also, in this paper, the covariates are not considered. The proposed model is shown to work well for univariate data. If the covariates are considered, the prediction accuracy still further improves because taking the effect of covariates, implies the dependen- cies of the data are completely being accounted. The drawback will be the model complexity and tuning of the increased number of model parameters [22]. So this study is not included in this paper.

number of trades data of Tata Steel. A 20-step ahead prediction is performed in both the cases. This implies using the data values available till yesterday, the data values from today till another 20 days are predicted. In both these TSD cases, the proposed method outperformed other models in terms of prediction accuracy and also in preserving data trend.

