Although, consensus can be achieved utilizing several different methods [2], Proof of Work (PoW) powered blockchains currently account for more than 90% of the current market share [3] and include some of the largest cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin and Ethereum. These two blockchains alone account for a market cap of over US$1.6 trillion (approximate as of November 2021) [4]. This demonstrates that considerable financial assets are stored and maintained by blockchains, their transactions and therefore the underlying consensus algorithms.

First, however, in the following section, we will discuss PoW as it is understood today, finishing with a formal definition of PoW that allows us to perform rigorous mathematical analysis. Then we derive, from first principles, the quantum advantage for PoW. In Section 3 we discuss how this advantage can be used in adversarial situations, i.e. in cyberattacks against a cryptocurrency. In Section 4 we switch to discussing the use of quantum advantage for non-adversarial purposes,

In the following section we will explore the quantum computa- tional advantage in PoW as described here. We will then explore the cybersecurity threat of quantum attacks on blockchain networks. Finally, we will analyze the possibility, and possible profit, of using this quantum advantage for the more benign purpose of more efficient cryptocurrency mining.

Furthermore, this comparison has been made on the Bitcoin net- work, which has, by far, the largest hashing power of all blockchains [28]. Other comparatively smaller blockchain networks would be vul- nerable far sooner than suggested here. For example, if network hash rates of blockchains such as Monero (1.28 Giga-Hashes per Second

In short, not only do quantum computers provide an asymptotic quadratic efficiency increase for current PoW systems, they do so for any likely possible PoW system as well. Compare this to custom-built ASIC chips which also provide a speed increase in mining crypto- currencies, but are however limited to constant-factor speed-increases. This results in a single quantum computer being able to launch dev- astating attacks on the cryptocurrency network, in the foreseeable future.

Here, we will study the viability of using a quantum computer for the purpose of legitimately mining a cryptocurrency such as Bitcoin. In order to do this effectively and profitably, a quantum computer does not have to be more powerful than the whole network, it only needs to be more efficient (in terms of resource-cost per block approved by the network) than a single classical miner. Hence, we can expect quantum supremacy, in the field of cryptocurrency mining, to be achieved much sooner than the previously discussed dates given for 51% quantum attack viability.

has been abstracted to a single function. The exact reward gained per block mined is another element which varies based on the cryptocur- rency being considered and duration of the operating period. When performing the profitability calculations, this needs to be taken into careful consideration as, for some cryptocurrencies, the block reward can change across the lifespan of any particular cryptocurrency. For example, Bitcoin halves its block reward every 210,000 blocks, mean- ing that though it originally rewarded 50 bitcoins (BTC) per block mined [34], the current value is 6.25 BTC. The reward is expected to approach 0 by approximately 2140 [35].

Increasing the difficulty parameter of PoW has been shown to solidify the quadratic advantage of quantum computers as miners. This advantage means that there will be greater incentive for investment into quantum mining technologies as the profit margin when compared with their classical counterparts will increase. This greater incentive will once again increase the number of quantum miners on the network, thereby decreasing the block-time and increasing the PoW difficulty in turn. This creates cycle within which quantum computing technologies will, eventually, completely replace classical miners, as the later cease to be cost-effective.

This cascading effect also has a security benefit for the network itself. As soon as the majority (roughly) of the miners are quantum, the network itself become impervious to 51% attacks based on quantum advantage alone. It would still be technically possible to mount such an attack, but such an attack would only succeed by using other methods such as miner-collusion, rather than by merely leveraging quantum advantage.

Over time the increased difficulty parameter of PoW will lead to classical miners being made obsolete. The increase in difficulty will cause the PoW problem to become exponentially harder for both classical and quantum devices. However, the impact to classical min- ers is quadratically worse, over time, than the impact to quantum miners. Eventually, this will lead to all quantum miners being more cost-effective than classical miners (regardless of their initial setup costs).

Quantum computation gives a definite advantage over classical computation for the purpose of calculating PoW for blockchains. As we have seen, in Section 3, this quantum advantage can be used by an adversarial party, in order to attempt what are called 51% attacks, on the cryptocurrency. The possibility of these types of attacks is, however, in the reasonably distant future.

The authors would like to acknowledge funding through the EPSRC, United Kingdom Quantum Communications Hub (EP/T001011/1), and from the Casper Association Academic Grants Program. The authors would also like to thank Joanna I. Ziembicka for useful comments during the preparation on this manuscript.

Alagic G, Alagic G, Alperin-Sheriff J, Apon D, Cooper D, Dang Q, Liu Y-K, Miller C, Moody D, Peralta R, et al. Status report on the first round of the NIST post-quantum cryptography standardization process. US Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards and Technology . . . ; 2019.

