According to the problem of emitter characteristic parameters are showed by interval and uneasy to identify, an emitter fusion recognition method based on the PSO-BP neural network is proposed. The method train the network by training samples which are reasonable structured according to the distribution in the interval, so as to determine the network structure and confirm the emitter type through the emitter characteristics parameters. At the same time, the BP neural network is optimized by Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm. The coding method of the network output, training data size and deviation rate on the influence of the recognition are researched by simulation, and the validity of this method are verified by the results.

methods, including method based on the bayesian theory, method based on the fuzzy pattern recognition, method based on the rough set theory [2], method based on evidence theory, method based on artificial neural network, and so on. These methods have relatively successful applications in recognition of radiation sources. But these methods are generally aim at the measured parameters showed by the scalar form, and solve the problem of radar emitter recognition whose parameters are measured with some error. For another case of the measured parameters are interval type is less discussion.

A kind of emitter recognition method based on PSO-BP neural network is proposed. The biggest difference related to the method of fixed value of characteristic parameters is the construction of sample data. The deviation rate is defined in the model to reflect the degree of the value of the characteristic parameters deviate from its center, and then the deviation rate influence on recognition rate is studied in the simulation. PSO algorithm is applied to improve the BP neural network. The simulation results show that the PSO algorithm can effectively overcome the defects of the BP neural network. Simulation experiments also studied the influence of the neural network output coding and sample data size to recognition rate. The final results show that the proposed target recognition method is effective and it has some value in engineering. The main problem of model is no considering the characteristic parameters with discrete value in the selection of emitter parameters, such as modulation information MOP. The next research focus is to construct model of more general while without losing practicality.

