There have been many papers discussing IoT since 2000. The research directions and fields are quite diverse. The authors of [2] have collected some relevant smart city methods and compared them to yield a general reference framework for the design of an urban IoT. This paper has observed uncertainty and the problems caused by such a framework to meet the needs of a massive integrated network. In Ref. [3], the au- thors use principal components analysis (PCA) to conduct data compression and anomaly detection, and divide the concept of edge computing into detailed steps, endpoint device computing, and fog computing. The attempt purposes to optimize the PCA model by calcu- lating data from the endpoint devices on the server, and updating pa- rameters of the PCA to the fog computing device in real-time. This allows IoT to correct uncertainties and errors in Ref. [2] when facing diversified environments.

As time evolves, the features of IoTs have to be refined. The new network architecture is no longer based on the traditional internet models to discuss the distribution of computation or scale-up only but to deal with the complete system by considering total services and appli- cations. The research task [23] proposes the concept of self-adaptive frameworks and the platform-as-a-service model. It emphasizes the importance of application-independent decentralized services and various IoT applications by the same devices.

As described, the specific characteristics of the IoT system exist in cross-domain applications or services. Therefore, the development of machine intelligence is imperative. However, most of the previous studies show high dependence on data amount making their de- velopments limited by the speed of data collection. In Ref. [24] the

The Feedback has two modes: Response and Reflex. Response is like that one endows the overall IoT system with a thinking capability. When data is transmitted to the server, the respective computing resource re- sponds accordingly. Reflex, on the other hand, is analogous to the human nervous system, it reacts and acts in real time when receiving a stimulation.

As for the transmission system, the IoT, which can be widely used, might no longer be entered from the perspective of information theory. Rather, it is appropriate to discuss from the perspective of biological cells. The major difference is that traditional network structures are to preset a goal to achieve and divide the goal into different specific pro- cesses and finally to complete the detailed implementation.

module is differentiated into various functional cells. Since electronic devices cannot duplicate by themselves, we thus introduce the feature of self-renewal. It is expected that all devices can be replaced fluently without the need for complicated parameter settings as those in the traditional IoTs. Based on the feature analogy, we name the transmission system as the stem cellular network (SCN).

and compression. Regarding the interaction with other quadrants, three memory zones are needed: RunTime Management In-formation, Meta- White Data, and Smart Tangram Pattern. RunTime Management In- formation records the operating status of each part of the system, which includes authorization, environment, and connection quality. Meta-White Data records the effective features obtained by all end ob- jects, which include time, value, upstream route, surrounding object parameters, etc. Smart Tangram Pattern records data structure, which include original data samples, their representative meaning, and inter- pretation; it also includes the system operating rules and the changing history. The importance of this part is to make data to be arranged reasonably. It can restore digital data to reality and define the procedure for incorporating new objects.

data but the clear relationship between the physical environment and data. For example, temperature measurement within an oven or in the living room may use a similar sensor but with a totally different control strategy. The goal of this quadrant is to distinguish the usage or scenario of sensors by interpreting the received information across time, space, and type. Also, because the way of interpretation can be changed ac- cording to the content of the Memory quadrant, it is thus called Recognition. If the above narrative is difficult to understand when this function or program comes to the real world, this paper suggests some thinking directions that can be used as design guidelines: i) How to construct the state machine of edge devices. ii) Who can provide infor- mation and its format. iii) To whom to respond, its response rules and information contained.

Early prevention and control of diseases are the keys to maintaining a healthy body status. These could be done by measuring and recording the condition or state of the body or bodily functions regularly and periodically. Although physiological measurement products have been widely developed on the market, perennial data are still not efficiently generated or collected. The major reason is that current approaches for collecting measured data rely heavily on tedious human operations. Nowadays, the digitization of data for most instruments still stays in a semi-automatic stage. Even for some of the advanced instruments that

As SCN is the transmission channel of the IoT, it exhibits features of low power consumption, small size, and discrete data. Through stan- dardized interfaces, it can be combined with various instruments. Ac- cording to the instrument type and purpose, cells here are divided into active, status, transmission, and hub. Among them, the active cell refers to objects that are deliberately used or can be actuated in response to instructions. The status cell refers to an object that represents the status of an individual rather than a deliberately used one, which is built into the individual identification bracelet in this research. The transmission cell transmits data packets to communicate between the active and hub cells. The hub cell is the interface with CS. Details of which are explained in the follows.

The active cell automatically senses information of the neighboring state cells, receives the value of its matching instrument, and packs it into a data packet before transmission. Since this research task puts force on health care, the state cell design includes residents and nursing members only. Therefore, each active cell is specified to receive at most two-state cells when activated.

The purpose of SCN is to provide a wide-area and lightweight transmission network. Therefore, the hub cell being densely arranged like a Wi-Fi router is not expected. When a transmission cell cannot directly deliver data packets to the hub cell, it needs to be directed to connect through other transmission cells. However, this results in another problem, i.e. excessively complex routing rules will increase difficulty of computing the transmission cell, which violates the principle of lightweight. Under the premise of not using complex routing rules, to avoid data packets from echoing in the network, a polarity setting is included in the transmission cell. The transmitting cell com- pares the polarity of the data packet with itself to determine the trans- mission direction.

Following the feature mentioned, the transmission cell detects the hub cell and other transmission nodes within the signal range and sets its own polarity according to the environment. After the transmitting cell completes the initialization and polarity setting, it will be able to receive data packets from the state and the active nodes. When the active cell is activated, i.e. the instrument has completed measurement, it detects the status node information, and sends data packets to the hub cell through the transmitting cell.

The role of the comprehension unit is to expand data to a high-level format. It includes data decompression, decryption, and format con- version. That is to convert data into information. The signal of the object is re-directed to the physical meaning through the virtual data. For example, it converts the biological resistance value to the body fat scale. An important feature of the IoT is to interact with users through real- time feedback. There are two parts, reflex unit and response unit, which are designed to generate feedback signals. Both of which refer to the definition of a Recipe block to determine the object and content of the feedback. The Recipe block stores parameters of the reflex and response units. The reflex unit feedback to the measuring instrument depends solely on the input signal that makes users get reactions instantly. The response unit refers to the information in the database to generate simple, combine, complex, and real-time. The simple type stores sin- gular data such as weight or temperature. Data of the combined type are mutually supportive such as blood pressure, systolic blood pressure, and diastolic blood pressure. Those are related data and cannot be utilized separately. For example, the feature vector obtained by face recognition should only be interpreted by other models. Only the key information being stored is classified as the complex type. Real-time type is for time- sensitive data, i.e. the data will be expired in a limited period.

field created by the hub and transmission cells, it will automatically match the object with the field to set the appropriate working mode as the resident mode or the nursing. mode. Here, we define the resident mode as institutional residents and the nursing mode as caregivers.

it will obtain the closest resident mode state cell and nursing mode state cell information. We presume that the residents of the organi- zation are the main measurement objects, the information of the resident mode state cell will be placed in the PID, and the nursing mode state cell will be placed in the SID. After necessary information are integrated, a data packet is sent out wirelessly so that the transmission cell or the hub cell can deliver it to the CS thereby completing one measurement collection.

Data Re-Transform: The function for reconverting the measured information. For example, the general household body fat meter is measured by the bioelectrical impedance analysis method, which needs to be matched with other physiological data for accuracy alignment. Therefore, the instrument itself only outputs the measured value of its human body impedance, and the correct data should be obtained after conducting necessary conversion.

surely, there are still issues worthy of further investigation. For example, the efficiency and stability when facing the high concurrency situation. However, the lightweight modular architecture designed for this work makes it easy to maintain and modify, in addition, it brings up a sig- nificant potential for performance or functional evolution.

bility. The ideal IoT introduced here aims to challenge the problem by providing an alternative solution. Through emulating organisms and human behavior, this research task has implemented the core parts, i.e. SCN and CS, in a health-care center and demonstrated their functions.

