improved management practices (Connor et al., 2011; Sacks and Kucharik, 2011). Technological advancements have helped fine-tune management with increased adaptation of yield simulation (Ali and Deo, 2020; Ali et al., 2018a), field monitoring (Rao and Sridhar, 2018), and other data-driven practices (Pathak et al., 2018). Most recently, pre- cision in resource management has been continuously fine-tuned through crop models and use of satellite navigation systems (Abbasi et al., 2014; Basso et al., 2001; Lobell and Burke, 2010).

ities and more than three layers. Both of these techniques are widely used (Chen et al., 2014; LeCun et al., 2015; Schmidhuber, 2015). How- ever, a comparative study among these techniques showed the superi- ority of the DL-based model to ANN to estimate biochemical oxygen demand and total phosphorus loads at watershed scales (Song et al., 2016). In another study by Khaki and Wang (2019), a deep neural net- work (DNN) model was designed for predicting crop yield, and the re- sults were compared against a shallow neural networks (SNN) model. Overall, the predictive model based on DNN outperformed the SNN model.

1992) was used to develop a model for forecasting weekly solar radia- tion (Prasad et al., 2020), and the non-dominated sorting genetic algo- rithm (Deb et al., 2002) was used in the development of a long-term precipitation model (Ali et al., 2020).

In this study, several environmental input variables were consid- ered, including precipitation and irrigation, maximum temperature, minimum temperature, and solar radiation. 800 variables were intro- duced for a 200-day growing season. Irrigation was added in combina- tion with precipitation to generate the total water applied in mm per day. To generate the model's training data, 100 different climate scenar- ios were considered. These climate scenarios were combined with 100,000 random irrigation scenarios and applied to a crop model, which generated 10,000,000 records of maize yields. Data related to cli- mate variabilities were produced by weather generators as described below.

Providing daily precipitation, temperature, and solar radiation in ad- dition to irrigation amounts, is essential for assuring the accuracy of crop model outputs. One-year field weather data was collected and used to generate different weather realization scenarios. The monthly temperature, solar radiation, and precipitation were collected from the nearest weather station to the study site (PRISM, 2011). A weather sto- chastic disaggregation tool was used to generate daily weather informa- tion from the environmental variables' monthly historical records (Hansen and Ines, 2005). This tool generated daily weather information by disaggregating average monthly data from historical records. To ac- curately simulate weather in the study area, 30 years of data were namically model over 40 different crops and has been widely used in the past 30 years by researchers and academic institutes worldwide (Hoogenboom et al., 2015; Jones et al., 2003a, 2003b; Nurudeen, 2011). According to the DSSAT website (Hoogenboom et al., 2019), the model has been used by more than 14,000 researchers, educators, consultants, extension agents, growers, and policy/decision-makers in over 150 countries. DSSAT's software application package includes soil, weather, crop management tools, and experimental data. DSSAT simulates and models crop growth, development, and yield as a func- tion of the soil, weather, and plant dynamics.

To obtain data for the purposes of DNN model training, a maize irri- gation experiment was setup in DSSAT and calibrated based on the re- sults from the experimental study site at the Irrigation Research Park. The growing season comprises 200 days (Hoogenboom et al., 2015). The DSSAT input files were setup using maize cultivar (McCurdy 84aa) with planting and harvesting dates of February 16 and May 7, re- spectively. Ten irrigation applications were selected to generate random scenarios within the growing season to further train the DNN model ir- rigation applications. Irrigations occurred within the growing season, with amounts ranging from 10 mm to 250 mm of water per day.

class 1 represent 1000 to 2000 kg/ha. Different combinations of hidden layers with neurons (computation nodes) within each layer were used in the DNN to form the crop models. Activation functions of the same type were assigned for all neurons. The TanH (tangent hyperbolic) acti- vation function was used for all hidden layers and the SoftMax (normal- ization constraint on the total output probability function) activation function was used for the output layer (Costa, 1996). Once the DNN structure was created, training is necessary and was performed as detailed in the next section.

Principal Component Analysis (PCA) feature extraction is an orthog- onal transformation for converting correlated variables to a smaller set of uncorrelated variables. PCA feature extraction method uses ei- genvalues of XT X to calculate linear transformations between these two sets. This method is called feature/variable extraction (Khalid et al., 2014).

In this study, a python library (sklearn.decomposition.PCA) was used to perform this analysis. This library used the LAPACK imple- mentation of the full Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) or a ran- domized truncated SVD, a method introduced by Halko et al. (2011).

0.86 s, which is 193 times faster. A decrease in the overall runtime of the DNN crop model can help with the application of these types of models at the large scale that is necessary for policymakers to make an informed decision at the national and international levels.

In this study, we examined the possibility of developing a simpler deep learning model with comparable accuracy through the application of different variable reduction methods (i.e., Bayesian Variable Selec- tion, Spearman Rank Correlation, and PCA variable extraction method). The Bayesian Variable Selection method was identified as the most robust method of the three evaluated in this study. However, calculating the posterior probability for each variable is very time-consuming. The Spearman Rank Correlation was ranked the second best with similar ac- curacy to the Bayesian Variable Selection method. The performance of these models were also examined against the recently improved mRMR technique. In general, the models based on the mRMR technique are less accurate than the ones based on the Bayesian and the Spearman Rank Correlation techniques. Finally, the DNN models that were devel- oped based on the PCA feature extraction method had the highest accu- racy during the training tests, but the lowest levels during testing.

Nurudeen, A.R., 2011. Decision Support System for Agro-technology Transfer (DSSAT) Model Simulation of Maize Growth and Yield Response to NPK Fertilizer Application on a Benchmark Soil of Sudan Savanna Agro-ecological Zone of Ghana (Doctoral Dis- sertation). Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology Kumasi.

