fabrication process. Moreover, the obtained view would be assistive to devise proper management strategies for inventory of tillage systems and thereby, it could remarkably reduce total cost of crop production systems, repair, maintenance, fuel, ownership, and other involved oper- ational issues. On the other hand, performance results of tractor- implement system in plowing process could be applied to develop ex- haustive information bank for multivariate analysis through partitioned graphical descriptions.

Among soft computing models, the ANN performs regarding intelli- gent computational scenario with self-learning algorithm. The FIS works on the basis of predetermined linguistic transparency in form of IF and THEN rules. The ANFIS includes advantages of both the ANN and the FIS. Therefore, the ANN and ANFIS soft computing scenarios are generally known as intelligent powerful modeling tools for dynamic, uncertain, and multidimensional and highly nonlinear interrelations, especially when physical relationships between input and output data are not fully understood.

Literature review concerning application of the ANFIS computer simulation workplace for prognostication of several output parameters indicated that the investigators completed desired simulations by means of development of a simulation workplace including several ANFIS sub-environments, each for one output parameter, based on the same multiple input variables (Shafaei et al., 2016a; Shafaei et al., 2018a; Shafaei et al., 2018c; Shafaei et al., 2019c). Although, this simu- lation scenario obviated inherent drawback of structure of the ANFIS

The two flow meters were utilized for measuring tractor fuel con- sumption. The first one was embedded between the injector pump and fuel filter of the tractor. The second one was also embedded in the line between injection pump and fuel tank and thereby, excess fuel returned to the tank was measured. The difference between two mea- sured values obtained from the flow meters was considered as the trac- tor fuel consumption value.

The field operations were conducted in a half day (10 AM to 4 PM) on January 16, 2017 in predetermined plots. For each implement type, arrangement of the plots was randomized and blocked based on split plot design with three replications. In this design, plowing depth and forward speed were considered as major and minor treatments, respectively.

In the plots, as the tractor-implement system reached the first installed flag marking, data collection for the master performance pa- rameters was started utilizing the digital instrumentation system. The data collection process continued until end of the plot, and it was stopped as the tractor-implement system passed the second installed flag marking. At end of each plot, a headland area was allocated for turn- ing the tractor-implement system in order to enter into the next plot.

values of ten performance parameters of tractor-implement systems in plowing process were imported into output layer, too. Therefore, the ANN scenario was established with three and ten nodes in input and output layers, respectively. In input layer of the simulation workplace, to have possibility of arbitrary selection of the implement, the integers 1, 2 and 3 were assigned for moldboard, disk, and chisel plow imple- ment, respectively.

The first order Takagi-Sugeno-Kang type of the ANFIS scenario was used to prognosticate ten performance parameters of the tractor- implement systems in plowing process, on the basis of three indepen- dent input variables of plowing depth, forward speed, and implement type. The ANFIS is a five-layered structure including different nodes in each layer. The nodes in each layer connect with the nodes in the previ- ous layer and receive input data coming from the previous nodes. These five layers are known as fuzzification, normalization, fuzzy rule, defuzzification, and output layer, respectively. The ANFIS simulation scenario is completed through passing data sets in these five layers. The scenario is described in the following paragraph.

When input data are assigned to the first layer nodes, they are graded between zero and one by input membership functions (con- stant, triangular, generalized bell (Gbell), gaussian, trapezium, and sig- moid). The graded data are shifted to the second layer nodes as input data. The numerical weights are allocated to the data in the second layer. Furthermore, the second layer normalizes the weighted input data. The weighted input data are transferred to the third layer nodes as input data of fuzzy rules. These rules are defined based on the IF and THEN structure. Output data obtained by the rules are gathered and aggregated to one output value in the fourth layer nodes. This value is converted to desired output variable by defuzzification method (weighted sum and weighted average) of the inference system. Output membership functions (constant and linear) are used for this job. The desired output variable is finally obtained in the fifth layer node.

The second layer of the ANFIS scenario normalizes the weighted input data by training itself. Training process is performed similar to that of the ANN scenario. The Hybrid algorithm is commonly used to train the simulation workplace. The algorithm is a combination of back-propagation and least square error algorithm. In the ANFIS sce- nario, the rules are also tuned automatically regarding relationships be- tween input and output data. As it has been mentioned in Section 1.2, definition of fuzzy rules based on the structure of IF and THEN is very = 2 km/h and plowing depth = 10 cm) and the highest (forward speed = 6 km/h and plowing depth = 30 cm) level of combination of the treatments, respectively, for the implements. These results for vari- ation of the fuel consumption are in compliance with the findings of previous researchers for strip tillage machine (Sarauskis et al., 2017).

From analogical point of view, the minimum and maximum values of specific volumetric fuel consumption were obtained in different levels of combination of the treatments against those of fuel consump- tion per working hour and fuel consumption per tilled area. The mini- mum and maximum values of specific volumetric fuel consumption were obtained in the forward speed = 6 km/h and plowing depth = 30 cm, and the forward speed = 2 km/h and plowing depth = 10, re- spectively, for the implements. The variation range of the fuel consump- tion observed in the current research is consistent with the results of Parvanloo et al. (2015).

= 2 km/h and plowing depth = 10 cm) level of combination of the treatments, respectively, for the implements. The observed results are in general agreement with the results of previous studies conducted by Inchebron et al. (2012) and Far et al. (2015a).

In this research, there was no precise relationship between perfor- mance parameters and implement type (nominal variable). Hence, weakness of several trained ANN simulation scenario based on neural strategy, to sufficiently prognosticate performance parameters resulted in uncovering this imprecise relationship. The neuro-fuzzy strategy can extract sophisticated relationship between output and input parame- ters using both neural and fuzzy benefits. The fuzzy strategy can prog- nosticate output based on multiple input variables using defined rules which are ascertained by expert knowledge. Unlike the neural strategy, the fuzzy strategy cannot find relationship between input and output parameters by training itself. On the other hand, to appropriately prog- nosticate target, the neural strategy based simulation workplace trains itself and the fuzzy strategy based simulation workplace uses defined fuzzy rules. The neuro-fuzzy strategy finds proper fuzzy rules based on training itself. Hence, an outstanding ability of the neuro-fuzzy strat- egy based simulation scenario is to find compound and uncertain rela- tionships between output and input parameters. In this research, it was found that the prominent MANFIS and MANFIS+MNE simulation workplaces could detect exhaustive relationships between performance parameters (dependent variables) and independent numeral variables of plowing depth and forward speed, and nominal variable of imple- ment type. These relationships were ruled in fuzzy form and then trained to attain minimum value of simulation residual errors.

those announced by Mouazen and Ramon (2002) and Naderloo et al. (2009) for subsoiler implement in a sandy loam soil and moldboard plow implement in a clay loam soil, respectively. Besides, the increasing effect of forward speed on the draft force has been addressed for one- way disk with seeder (Cullum et al., 1989) and cultivator (Novak et al., 2014), which is paralleled to the results of the present research.

The same trend of fuel consumption increment as affected by plowing depth increment was previously described by Sirhan et al. (2002) and Ajav and Adewoyin (2012). This phenomenon was also found by Serrano et al. (2003) and Gulsoylu et al. (2012) for forward speed increment of offset disk harrow and chisel plow implement, respectively.

These remarkable conclusions are in response to the fundamental questions presented in the Section 1.4. Hence, it is desired to apply the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace and related physical perceptions by technical farmer associations involved in the decision-making of ag- ricultural machinery management in plowing process.

