Wireless Data Gateway collects the raw data from Positioning-Assistant Terminals. It analysis the data, calculates the location of the Mobile Positioning Device and sends the result to the Data Center. To calculate the detail location of the Mobile Positioning Device, DTOA[4] (Different Time of Arrival) is used and Trilateration is applied. And each time when the Wireless Data Gateway receives packets through four or more than four Positioning-Assistant Terminals from the same Mobile Positioning Device with the same sent timestamp, the location of the Mobile Positioning Device is worked out, and stores to the Data Center. To avouch the location service, each Mobile Positioning Device should approach to at least four Positioning- Assistant Terminals.

Data Center receives the location data from Wireless Data Gateway through a wired cable. It uses relevant database and supports Oracle, SQL Server and DB2. Data Center provides web services interfaces to the Monitoring Terminals. In order to be compatible with varied of Monitoring Terminals, Data Center provides specific interfaces in web service. Standard three-layer architecture is exploited to develop the web service.

Monitoring Terminal displays the structure of the building in the fire, and shows the location of all the firemen in the structure drawings. It helps the FCC or headquarter scheme out the rescue actions. Taking advantage of the location technology, graphic technology, database technology, and software application technology, Monitoring Terminal provides real-time positioning service, emergency alarm service, and history moving trace service.

When fireman encounters emergency, a SOS signal, which would finally receive by the Wireless Data Gateway, is sent out through the Mobile Positioning Device. Once the Data Center gets an alarm packet, it pushes the alarm to all the connected Monitoring Terminals. The FCC or headquarter can be aware of the emergency, and do the prompt response. Also, if a Mobile Positioning Device stay steady for some setting time, an alarm would still be triggered.

The system helps to locate the fireman. It reduces the risks of the fireman in a fire rescue activity. Once a fireman became bogged down, headquarter can quickly do the rescue with the help of the location service provided by the system.

Based on the study of the current location technology and its application in building fire rescue, this paper presents a reliable location scenario. It mainly contains five parts: mobile positioning device, positioning- assistant terminal, wireless data gateway, data center, and monitoring terminal. Mobile Positioning Device, Positioning-Assistant Terminal and Wireless Data Gateway compose of a wireless network, which uses short waveforms to transmit the signal, exploits IEEE standard to transfer the data. Data Center and Monitoring Terminal can be installed in a same computer server.

