Linear Discriminate Analysis (LDA) have been widely used. In recent studies, the researchers are using deep neural networks for the classification of motor imagery tasks. This paper provides a comprehensive review of dominant feature extraction methods and classification algorithms in brain-computer interface for motor imagery tasks. Authors discuss existing challenges in the domain of motor imagery brain-computer interface and suggest possible research directions.

M. Rajya Lakshmi et al. [40] briefly describe the feature extraction techniques, which are Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Independent Component Analysis (ICA), Auto Regressive Model (AR), Wavelet Transform (WT) and Wavelet Packet Decomposition (WPD). Further- more, the paper has explored the signal processing methods used in each stage of brain computer interface.

Lotte et al. [41] discussed the classification algorithms used for EEG based brain computer interfaces. The authors described the properties of algorithms in detail and compared the performances of the classifiers. Based on the performances the authors provide the guidelines for selecting the best-suited classifier.

The Signal Acquisition Module is liable for recording the electro- physiological signals that provide input to the BCI. These signals are recorded from the scalp or from the surface of the brain or neuronal activity [43]. BCI might use either invasive methods or non-invasive methods for signal acquisition. Invasive methods are electrocardio- grams (ECoG) and single-neuron recordings [43,44] and have better signal quality as compared to non-invasive methods. Non-invasive methods are Electroencephalogram (EEG), Magnetoencephalogram (MEG), Positron Emission Tomography (PET), Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) and Near-Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRs) [44].

There are various key components in the BCI closed loop, one is feature extraction and the other is classification. There is a large diversity of feature extraction and classification methods that have been explored in BCI for motor imagery tasks. This paper gives an extensive review of these two components that are described in the following sections.

(SBCSP) [55] was proposed in which EEG signals are decomposed into sub-bands. CSP is applied to each sub-band that defines sub-band score and then these scores are fused together to derive the final decision. SBCSP has improved classification accuracy when compared to CSSP and CSSSP.

LDA has been successfully used for classification of right and left-hand motor imagery [41]. The main drawback of LDA is that it provides the poor result on complex nonlinear EEG data [65]. Regularized Fisher LDA [27], an enhancement of LDA has also been used for right and left-hand motor imagery that uses decision boundary or hyperplane in feature space for classifying features in distinct classes. Fisher LDA obtains better generalization capabilities and gives better results than LDA [65].

SVM gives high-quality results but is not able to handle the multiclass problem and dynamic nature of EEG signal effectively. Robust classifiers give better performance but need more time; therefore, there is a tradeoff between accuracy and speed. As the neural network provides reasonable tradeoff, it has been extensively used in BCI research. There are several NN architectures used in the field of BCI, the one that has been specifically created for BCI is the Gaussian classifier [65,66]. Each unit of this NN is a Gaussian discriminant function representing a class proto- type. This classifier has been applied with success to motor imagery [22] and mental task classification [34]. Other NN architectures such as Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), neural network based on Radial Basis Function (RBF), spiking neural network [67] that uses Online Meta neuron based Learning Algorithm (OMLA) has been applied for classifi- cation of MI tasks. NN has also been successfully applied for multiclass multiuser MI tasks [22] classification.

to upper limb imageries. Among the classification methods, SVM is commonly used and has promising results. Although Shallow CNN has shown the promising results in MI BCI research; still the deep neural networks is lagging in performance due to unavailability of the large training dataset. The earlier studies focus on two class motor imagery that is now shifting towards multiclass and multilabel motor imageries in recent studies.

rithm. The combination of architecture used by the author resulted in a small and consistent increase in all subjects. The author has suggested research directions in preprocessing of data, optimization of hyper- parameter in parameter selection and in proposing a modified architec- ture that should be based on the combination of static and dynamic energy features.

The author in Ref. [28] presents an algorithm for determining fea- tures that used a combination of temporal, spectral and spatial infor- mation. The proposed algorithm is a four-phase method based on the static selection of subject-specific information to reduce classification error. The authors suggested that automatic subject selection and multivariate feature selection methods might be used further to enhance the accuracy of the system.

Chih-Yu Chen et al. [26] proposed a novel classification method that has used CSP for feature extraction and LDA for classification to solve the misclassifying problem. The proposed method is efficient and has high accuracy. The author also suggested having algorithm-device integration processing. Thus, there is a need to test and validate classification algo- rithms online as they are computationally efficient and can be used in real time. Further, in order to provide a reasonable tradeoff between accuracy and efficiency, robust classifiers have to be developed that can be easily used online and are able to work with non-stationary data efficiently. Furthermore, the authors in Refs. [19,74] suggested a new generation of classification methods considering the user in the loop has to be developed to ensure efficient brain computer interfaces.

This paper also discussed the various classification methods currently used for motor imagery BCI. Classification methods are detailed by various categories: linear, non-linear, neural network and deep learning. Support vector machine is the commonly used classifier as it is insensitive to curse of dimensionality. In recent studies, several deep learning ar- chitectures were also used as a classification method for motor imagery tasks, among that shallow convolutional neural network is the prominent architecture and has outperformed the traditional methods of classification.

Future work related to MI BCI should focus on developing informa- tion extraction techniques that consider the automatic selection of sub- ject relevant temporal information. Additionally, robust classifiers needs to be evolved so as to work with noisy signals and high dimensionality data. There is also a need to develop the new generation of classification methods that should consider the user in the loop to provide feedback from which the user can learn; and help to build an accurate and efficient BCI system.

Yang Huijuan, et al. On the use of convolutional neural networks and augmented CSP features for multi-class motor imagery of EEG signals classification. In: Engineering in medicine and biology society (EMBC), 2015 37th annual international conference of the IEEE. IEEE; 2015.

