The tourism sector, one of the biggest sectors globally [1], is a crucial component of the social and economic activity of a plethora of countries as it generates job openings and business opportunities [2]. The tourism industry steadily increases its growth yearly, with tourist arrivals having reached the amount of 1.19 billion in 2015, from 528 million in 2005, while it is expected to grow even more than 1.8 billion by 2030.2017 statistics indicate that the tourism industry contributed directly the tremendous amount of approximately 2.57 trillion U.S dollars, creating millions of jobs worldwide [3]. The realization that the travel industry can be highly beneficial for a country has led to the demanding need to make tourism destinations as appealing as possible, both for the less traveled and also for the well-established ones.

Contributing to theory and improving it, is both a challenging and an important task. Theory can aid to the development of science as it offers structure and cohesion to several research questions [55,65]. It helps understanding what factors should be studied, the relation between them as well as how they can be applied to practical situations [65]. In the Smart Tourism sector too, there is a number of papers that attempt to offer theoretical insight.

In the present literature review a wide number of systems that focus on context awareness are included, such as a context-aware recom- mender system named Madrid Live [32] and HotCity [61]. A user-centered service mechanism based on context awareness is pre- sented in Ref. [56]. The structure of the proposed Smart Tourism system is composed of data deriving from human input and sensors, the platform that offers high data processing ability and compatibility that can be supported by cloud computing and finally the Service that adapts to tourist needs. Another context-aware recommender system that makes use of user contextual information so as to also generate the personalized recommendations that shall enrich user experience is presented in Ref. [47]. Based on the fact that only appropriate contextual factors should be taken into account in a recommender app, authors in Ref. [47] propose a method that predicts the contextual factors that affect users when rating an item so as to use the aforementioned factor in the recommendation process and thus result in more accurate recommendations.

In the tourism business sector, a potential way of how businesses should take advantage of smart technologies, enhance tourism experi- ence and increase their competitive advantage is presented in Ref. [45]. Based on the fact that smart technologies via personalization may assist tourists to develope their own memorable experiences [78], Neuhofer et al. in their research attempt to present how smart mobile technologies can lead to these personalized experiences in the tourism and hospitality industry. A case study of a hotel that exploits a unique platform that offers dynamically formed personalized experience between guests and employees is presented.

Another attempt to improve User Experience is presented in Ref. [55], where authors aim at resolving the usability problems in an Augmented Reality context. Though AR offers a great potential in the way informa- tion is delivered to users, it also comes with the risk to impose users with data overload or result in a system with high usability issues [54,55]. In order to overcome that issue, authors developed through 4 rounds of iterative development a tourism AR application named ToARist, which is based on User-Centered design.

A highly promising concept in the augmented reality field and the Smart Tourism sector in general is the one of image based localization. Image-based localization methods attempt to calculate the position from which an image is taken, in terms of both location and orientation [85]. As these methods can be exploited in a plethora of application such as tourism guides, robotics, augmented reality etc., they draw increasing attention [87,95]. Authors in Ref. [86], having located this academic and industrial interest, present an overview of image-based camera locali- zation approaches. Moreover, authors in Ref. [87], attempt to develop a faster localization method that could increase the performance of augmented reality applications as well as real-time navigation ones, amongst others that ultimately could facilitate the development of Smart Tourism systems.

Augmented reality offers a great potential in the way information is delivered to users, but is also accompanied by the risk to impose users with data overload, or result in systems with high usability issues [54, 55]. Aiming to resolve the usability problems in the AR context, the authors of [55] developed through 4 rounds of iterative development a tourism AR application named ToARist which is based on User-Centered design. Individuals taking part in the development of the aforementioned app remarked it as simple and useable, nevertheless challenges still exist that need to be faced.

With the Heritage term, we are referring to two major categories, namely both cultural and natural heritage. When referring to cultural heritage elements as tradition, history, language and folklore are included [30]. Cultural Heritage and tourism are two concepts highly connected, with cultural tourism being a powerful tool for economic and social change [92], leading to a wide number of cultural-based regen- eration policies being developed in several regions [93].

Based on the presented analysis, there is a plethora of research efforts conducted during the last six years that focus on the Smart Tourism sector. As a result, there is a substantial number of challenges that need to be addressed. While at the time of writing there is a significant amount of papers that propose systems and application in the Smart Tourism sector, still the evaluation of such systems with a wide number of actual tourists needs to take place. It is of great importance in this multidimensional sector, which attracts attention of researchers and practitioners in diverse a number of devices for sensing, data exchange, as well as connecting to social networks, internet and/or a network of things. A challenge here must be faced so as to have all these heterogeneous devices and data sources work together efficiently [30]. Along with that, the rapidly changing technological environments along with the fast changing user attitudes should be considered in order to ensure the success and viability of Smart Tourism systems [57].

