Handling congestion in urban traffic through next generation artificial intelligence techniques is an important research area. Various models and approaches have been developed using soft computing techniques to tackle with this problem. Major soft computing approaches for this purpose are Fuzzy Approaches, Neural Network and Genetic Algorithms, Petri Nets and many more. Also, multi-agent systems are highly applicable in this approach. This paper is an effort towards revisiting such approaches in developing modern traffic control systems.

This paper has been divided into 6 sections. Section 2 revisits the fuzzy techniques in the development of traffic control systems. Various simulation based approaches are revised in section 3 and different cognitive/learning approaches are discussed in section 4. Section 5 consists of other approaches.

Traffic signal control system is not efficient controlling congestion in urban areas. A model based multi agent fuzzy system with three levels of control is proposed in [1].To control traffic at an intersection; parameters used are intensity of traffic, recommendations from near about intersections and a knowledge repository which gives information about data at any particular time. A traffic observer is used to deliver data to data management component according to which the decision making layer makes the decision.

For minimizing the waiting time of the commuters in the queues, signals of the adjacent intersections are coordinated. In [18] multi agent coordination is done using RMM (recursive modelling method). To update the knowledge base and selecting the correct model for other agents, Bayesian learning is used along with.

A distributed control approach for controlling traffic is used where for every intersection a local agent acts as the traffic signal controller. Based on this two models are proposed in [27]. In first model, agents update their knowledge using multistage online learning process and accordingly take decisions. Second model uses perturbation stochastic approximation theorem with fuzzy neural networks. PARAMICS simulation program is used proving the efficiency of proposed models.

Online reinforcement learning can be used by multi agents for computing the green time. In [28] sensors are used at each intersection to compute green time on the basis of historic traffic patterns and information from agents of adjacent intersections. Proposed approach results in reduced mean time delay.

Traffic operators need to take the best control measure corresponding to the prevailing traffic situation. For this, they need to predict the possible outcomes of these control measures. A multi agent based simulation approach is proposed in [33] which allows on line, real time evaluation of the traffic situation.

A hierarchical multi-agent architecture is proposed in [39] where each agent is responsible for any one task such as collection of data, pre-processing of data and decision making. A policy based management model is proposed to develop an intelligent algorithm for coordination among the agents. It aims at reducing the average size of the queue, average waiting time and travelling time.

