bands, and smartphones embedded with fused sensors (e.g., acceler- ometers, gyroscopes, and magnetometers) open up new opportunities for real-time monitoring of human daily life activities. The utilization of these wearable sensors for monitoring studies has been in practice and demand, but there is still a need for a system capable of recognizing activities with limited contextual information [6]. In essence, activity data collected from multiple dimensions are analyzed in order to recognize and monitor various motion patterns and behaviors. As a result, recognition of daily living activities, including walking, standing, sleeping, and cooking, is particularly pivotal for smart homes and elderly care monitoring. However, the system can not always accurately

Wearable sensors have transformed every aspect of human daily life, from e-health care to personal living comfort. With the advancement of wearable-based inertial sensors, these sensors are playing a significant role in our daily lives by allowing us to access our environments such as temperature, humidity, and thermostat, etc. Fortunately, greater affor- dances, capabilities, and features are emerging with advancements in wearable sensors. Additionally, these wearable-based inertial sensors have resulted in significant demand in research for healthcare, security and surveillance-based systems, wellbeing, and biofeedback systems [7, 8]. Furthermore, each of these real-world applications involves real-time and continuous monitoring. These applications enable vital access to information about the wellbeing of vulnerable elderly in- dividuals and children by incorporating multiple wearable-based iner- tial sensors on different parts of the body [9,10]. Similarly, security and surveillance-based systems are capable of detecting potentially hazard- ous or odd events in their vicinity and notifying emergency response teams immediately. With regard to fitness tracking, wearable inertial

Recently, we have a variety of inertial sensors at our disposal, such as accelerometers, gyroscopes, and magnetometers, to facilitate us in recognizing environmental changes [11,12]. The fusion of these sensors enables these devices to extract vital information about human complex body patterns in three-dimensional space. For example, an accelerom- eter is a type of sensor generally used for HAR and can measure both static (such as gravity) and dynamic (vibrations) acceleration forces impacting on the sensors, providing relevant data for the detection of complex motion patterns. The gyroscope is another popular sensor that can measure angular velocity. In the context of wearable sensors, magnetometer sensors analyze the relative changes in existing magnetic field intensity and provide compass calibration information. In general, these three sensors are fused to enhance the capability of human activity monitoring. The augmentation of accelerometers, gyroscopes, and magnetometers into a single device is stated as an inertial sensor or inertial measurement unit (IMU) [13].

HDAR and vision-based sensors. Section III addresses the details of the proposed architecture of our HDAR model. In Section IV, we evaluate the experimental setup for three public benchmark datasets and also present the empirical comparison of the various metrics for that purpose.

class, weighted SVM is utilized to handle unbalanced life-log activity datasets to enhance the recognition accuracy. In Ref. [27], Cillis et al. developed a pervasive solution for four human locomotion patterns, including walking, standing, and ascending and descending stairs via a wearable inertial-based triaxial accelerometer sensor. Their proposed solution incorporates minimum feature descriptors to recognize and detect four distinct locomotion patterns. The experimental results indi- cate a better recognition rate when dealing with static activities, but a lower rate for dynamic activities such as ascending and descending stairs.

IMU is highly sensitive to even the least amount of fluctuations, so any unintended shift is able to affect the signal shape entirely and also disrupt the feature descriptor extraction and optimization phase. Therefore, during the signal processing and denoising phase, we initi- ated by analyzing the noise interference associated with the inertial signals. After analyzed the abnormal signal intensity in the frame data, we opted for a third-order median filter, a denoising method that deals with the rigorous motion pattern in the framed signal without comprising any significant information.

In the field of image and signal processing, the Haar wavelet trans- form (HWT) has emerged as a state-of-the-art technology. Generally, wavelets are based on mathematical methods for partitioning functions hierarchically. In our proposed approach, the Haar feature descriptor is utilized for pattern detection at a particular interval to analyze signal variability. Additionally, HWT has a wavelet-like structure, which makes it an efficient and robust signal processing tool [28,29]. Also,

In the proposed HDAR approach, feature descriptors are optimized via a well-known optimization algorithm, stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Then, the acquired optimized vector is catered to the random forest (RF) algorithm. The results of random forest are compared with multilayer perceptron and support vector machine (SVM).

extensive. To address this issue, we introduced the Stochastic Gradient Descent method (SGD) with minibatch as an optimizer that does not consume all of the training data [33]. However, minibatch SGD paired with random data selection reduces the cost and variability associated with conventional stochastic gradient descent. As a result, minibatch needs careful consideration while employing adaptive learning rates with initial parameters to achieve the lowest loss function. Thus, the learning parameters are corrected and the output is acquired dependent on the learning rate. Therefore, initially, a 0.0100 learning rate is set and the total number of iterations is preset at 1000, tuned via regularization parameters, the number of passes over the training set.

After the hybrid feature selection step, we catered acquired optimal feature descriptors to a random forest (RF) classifier in order to classify human physical activities. Random forest is an ensemble learning method utilized for classification and other related tasks that functions by training a substantial number of decision trees and generating a class that is the mean of the particular trees [34]. Additionally, the random forest comprises a unique variant of bagged trees, a technique for generating a training set. Bagging extracts samples from all three physical activity datasets, including IM-WSHA, USC-HAD, and MOTIONSENSE datasets. For each sample, a model is developed and used to make classification-based decisions. Finally, based on maximum votes, all of the decisions are combined to get the final result and de- cisions. Mainly, random forest is an ensemble classifier that is both exceptionally accurate and has a rapid training period.

tionally, it is comprised of various sensors, fused with a gyroscope and an accelerometer, that provide real-time orientation information. These inertial sensors are embodied at the front right hip in order to get relevant signal data. A group of 14 individuals engaged in 12 distinct activities (including, jumping up, standing, sitting, sleeping, walking for- ward, elevator down, elevator up, running forward, walking left, walking right, downstairs, and upstairs). The sampling rate of the sensors employed in this experiment is 100 Hz.

The IM-WSHA database [36] involves data from three IMU sensors, such as accelerometers, gyroscopes, and magnetometers. These IMU sensors are positioned at three distinct body locations, including the thigh, wrist, and chest, to continuously capture significant features of human life-log activities. Ten respondents, including five males and five females, covered 11 distinct tasks in a smart home scenario (such as, cooking, ironing, vacuum cleaning, drinking, exercise, phone conversation, reading book, walking, brushing hair, watching tv and using computer).

Our implementation of the HDAR framework is being developed to attain a high F-measure score and recognition accuracy by considering all three benchmark datasets. In this work, we proposed a robust and effective model that accurately extracts features from different body locations and generates a hybrid set of features. Initially, denoising is carried out over the inertial signals to remove extra motion artifacts and noise. For denoising, we have utilized a third-order median filter to remove the noise ratio without losing any vital information. After signal processing, hybrid feature descriptors are extracted from a different domain to attain better performance. Following that, acquired features are optimized via stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with minibatch in order to select optimal feature descriptors. Finally, various classifiers are used to evaluate the performance of the proposed HDAR system. Addi- tionally, physical activities from three benchmark datasets are classified over the random forest classifier, which has shown a significant recog- nition rate over other state-of-the-art methods.

