On the basis of the results obtained for joints of dissimilar metals such as copper-tantalum, iron-silver, it has been cleared out the reason of immiscible suspensions mixing upon explosion welding. It has been found that the interface (waveless or wavy) is not smooth and contains inhomogeneities, namely, cusps and local melting zones. The role of granulating fragmentation providing partitioning of initial materials as a main channel of input energy dissipation has been revealed. It has been shown that in joints of metals possessing normal solubility the local melting zones are true solutions, but if metals possess no mutual solubility the local melting zones are colloidal solutions. During the solidification emulsion is a danger to the joint continuity because of possible delamination, and suspension, by contrast, can contribute to the dispersion hardening of joint.

In addition to the grey zone the transition one contains zones of copper and tantalum. According to TEM analysis, these zones do not experience melting and have typical structure produced by severe plastic deformation. Cellular structure, stripped structure, high dislocation density and recrystallized areas are observed.

The employment of different welding regimes for the same copper-tantalum pair was extremely useful. The interface has a different shape: waveless in one case, wavy in the other. But in both cases, the interface is not smooth, because it contains cusps and local melting zones.

The granulating fragmentation (GF) in principle differs from well-known one, the existence of which is proved by many observations of material structure produced by severe plastic deformation. The traditional fragmentation includes dislocation and twin generation, formation of different structures, and recrystallization. Similar structures were observed in titanium-aluminide joints [6]. Taking into account the two types of fragmentation is the basis of new approach to welded joint structure describing. Both types of fragmentation occur at different distances from the interface. GF takes place near the interface, while traditional fragmentation proceeds a bit farther from the interface.

The chemical reactor vessel scheme is made of carbon steel-copper-tantalum composite material by means of explosion welding [8]. The inner shell consists of tantalum, corrosion resistance of which is the key moment of the reactor design. The outer shell consists of carbon steel. The direct welding of carbon steel and tantalum is difficult due to the brittle phase formation, and copper is used as a interlayer. As shown in [8], both of the interfaces have wavy shape. Welding parameters used in [8] somewhat differs from that used in current investigation for (Cw) joint obtaining.

This work was financially supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research, project no. 10-02- 00354, projects 12-2-006-UT, 12-U-2-1011, 12-2-2-007 of the Ural Division of the Russian Academy of Sciences, and by the National Target Program of Ukraine "Nanotechnologies and Nanomaterials", no. 1.1.1.3_4/10_D.

