The 3D data can be extracted by measuring healthy hip joint, which is the basis of making proper artificial hip conform to right physiological characteristics. In this paper, firstly, we use adaptive windows directed by neighbouring CT slices for reducing ranges of searching. Secondly, a method based on 2D contour characteristic points matching in multilayer is proposed to effectively correct contours. Thirdly, according to complexity in the primary contours, location and fitting quasi-circular contours femur head with circle are used to adjust contours of femur head. Finally, a projecting method based on distance transform has been used for locating key points of hip joint such as intersection of head and neck, which meets anatomy features, can obtain effective and efficient 3D data. In fact, experiment in this paper shows that the method in paper can accurately extract 3D data on proximal femur in CT Series Images.

Hip joint consists of femur head, neck and backbone. Femur head is the round end between femur and pelvic bone, surrounding by muscles. It looks like circularity in appearance. Femur neck is smaller which connects femur head and femur backbone. Femur below femur neck appears tubular. In order to make artificial hip fit the biological and physical characteristics, and matching the structure of acetabular bone better,

Extracting hip contour is the premise of 3D data extracting. The segmentation of bones is difficult because of the irregular physiology bones structure, fuzziness of the contour line caused by conjunction of femur head and acetabular bone, low contrast and noise etc. No-seed region segmentation is employed in [1], this method is very useful since there are some holes in the region which can be ignored, but it depends on initial value too much. Non parameter Level Set method for image segmentation which proposed in [2] has great adaptability for images with low contrast, however it is complicated to calculate. In [3] the solution is introduced that extracting the dental contours from frame to frame with region growing method combined with radial line method. The new solution can get good segmentation if quasi circular bone parameters are fixed and interactive input is specific, but it seems not adaptive enough to resolve quasi circular femur segmentation with flexible radius, so its level of automation is not high.

