duction and diffusion has also been extensively studied [32,38], and collaborations can facilitate the improvement of research quality, result- ing in more effective scientific production [34]. Many studies are con- cerned on the co-author networks [33], co-citation networks [20], co- word networks [39], international collaborations [21,37,38], and cross- institution collaborations [7], in publications (e.g. papers and journals), which adopt the social network analysis (SNA) to study the relation- ships involved in the networks. However, to our knowledge, there is no bibliometric and collaboration network analysis based on patents in this inter-disciplinary research field.

patent authorities [28]. Key elements of records include patent num- ber(s), priority application information, DMCs, titles, designated states, application details, inventor(s), assignee(s), patent details, IPC classifi- cation number, cited patents, cited articles. Each of these patent family records is showed as a single patent. After manually removing dupli- cates, 3610 items of single patent information are acquired [43]. The data of assignees and patent quantity information is cleaned, grouped, and rearranged in an Excel spreadsheet.

Regarding the quantities of partners and co-owned patent applica- tions, the French public health agent of Assisance Publique-Hopitaux de Paris (AP-HP) holds the first place, of which the patents contain claims for the biomarkers combination for the prognosis of hepatic fibrosis or Hepatitis C Virus treatment. The AP-HP possesses 31 co-ownership patents with 10 co-assignees. The deeply multilateral cooperation of AP- HP might be in connection with its international strategy that develops larger-scale cooperation projects with other institutions, for the benefit of global health [3].

trends, e.g. G06T-G06K (AI in medical image recognition), G06N-G06K (AI in medical diagnostic system), G16B-C12Q (prediction of enzyme activity), etc. The results suggest that the application of AI technolo- gies in the medical field mainly focuses on medical image recognition, computer-aided diagnosis, disease monitoring, disease prediction, bioin- formatics, and drug development, etc.

