Software CalA allows solving of 2D non-steady state of temperature field using method of control volumes. For details, see [2] and [3]. In this software, there was created computational geometry in vertical and also horizontal section. Result gives surface temperature distribution in peripheral panel, which allows comparison with thermo-graphic image. Obtained temperature field also allows evaluation of thermal bridges in peripheral prefabricated panel, mainly in a place of connection. By using thermal fluxes it is also possible to determine linear coefficient of thermal bridges.

Prefabricated peripheral panel of dimensions 3550 x 1170 x 260 mm is made of reinforced concrete load- bearing parts of thickness 160 mm, insulated by foam polystyrene 50 mm thick and provided by surface reinforced concrete layer of thickness 50 mm. Connection of peripheral panel on the height is done by vertical drain and in opposite direction connection is done by tooth. Contact joints are sealed by microspore rubber and imbedded by asphalt known as permanently flexible sealant. Computational geometry of prefabricated peripheral panel was made in squared computational web with dimensions 5 x 5 mm.

Using experimental thermo-graphic measurement, strong thermal bridges were found in reinforced concrete skeleton MS-OB. The most problematic part of peripheral wall is horizontal and vertical connection of peripheral prefabricated panels. This panel connection was simulated in software CalA as steady two dimensional thermal field. Obtained surface temperatures were compared with surface temperatures from thermo-graphic measurement.

This work has been supported from the state budget of the Czech Republic, through the Specific research at universities of the Ministry of education, youth and sports, the grant No. FAST-J-12-1781. This article originates also with the financial support of the European Union's "Operational Programme Research and Development for Innovations", No. CZ.1.05/2.1.00/03.0097, as an activity of the regional Centre AdMaS "Advanced Materials, Structures and Technologies".

