In a smart home healthcare scenario, a BAN (Body Area Network) provides the direct information about the individual and the home environmental sensors are deployed to gather information about the environment and possible situation of the person. The system receives the various sensor data via wireless communication protocols (i.e. bluetooth, zigbee). The raw sensor data provides the basic data building the context models for

The remote monitoring services, data mining services, and real-time reasoning services are all essential services that run concurrently. The more recent implementation of the system involves a hybrid reasoning framework combining case-based reasoning and fuzzy rule-based reasoning, (Although introducing case- based reasoning offers advantages in the reasoning tasks, the efficiency of CBR suffers as the size of the case base grows, and therefore eventually a cloud-based solution will be incorporated to lessen load on resource- constrained clients.) In this paper, we focus on some transparency issues associated with using a system with these more sophisticated techniques. Transparency and clarity is important in all systems but especially so in a sophisticated system attempting to provide intelligent services for a human subject in possibly critical situations.

The hybrid architecture analyses the context information (derived from sensors and other information sources) using both case-based reasoning and fuzzy logic based rule engine. Fuzzy logic rules supplement case-based reasoning with expert insight and the ability to disambiguate between cases using domain knowledge. In line with the goal of transparency, rules are described, as much as possible, by means of linguistic terms using user-friendly range-type values derived from expert knowledge. Thus, and example of a rule might be "If the room temperature is very low and the room is occupied then turn on the heater". Fuzzy logic is used for rules to provide a more nuanced approach. It allows the system to make use of imperfect data (e.g. lacks precision, is noisy or ambiguous) and can apply rules to reach a conclusion. In effect, it tries to may become too complex and difficult to understand for both subject and caregiver. Transparency and clarity are therefore important concerns that must be addressed. These concerns are especially important as the system aims to provide intelligent assistance for (possibly vulnerable) individuals in possibly critical situations.

The hybrid reasoning architecture incorporates both rule-based and case-based reasoning; this enables CARA to be more robust and to adapt to a changing environment by continuously retraining with new cases. An important issue of transparency arises for each of the reasoning methods. For the rule-based part, an important goal is that the rules used in the smart-home analysis should be transparent enough to support the subject or caregiver inspecting and maybe modify these rules. The use of a structured natural language and incorporation of fuzzy logic aims to satisfy this goal. Transparency and clarity in interpreting the results of case-based reasoning are also important, and this concern leads to more critical analysis of the test results and indicates the need for appropriate metrics to be used.

