In large antenna servo control systems, Linear Quadratic Gaussian (LQG) controller is superior to the proportional integral (PI) controller in terms of stability, rapidity and wind disturbance suppression. However, there is still no deterministic method to design the weight matrixes that affect the performance of LQG controller. To solve this problem, a method based on the artificial bee colony (ABC) algorithm is proposed, which aims at optimizing the close-loop system transient response performance. Global searching and local searching are conducted in each iterative step in the ABC algorithm so that searching efficiency is greatly improved. Applied in a weight matrixes optimization problem for a large antenna servo with LQG controller, the algorithm is satisfactory in simulation result, the control effect is better than that based on the trial and error method.

A bionic intelligence algorithm called artificial bee colony algorithm (ABC) which imitates bee colony searching for food resource was proposed by Karaboga et al. [2] in 2007. Although still in its beginning, ABC algorithm has been more and more studied by scholars, because it has less adjusting parameters and is easy to implement. Compared with genetic algorithm (GA) and particle swarm optimization (PSO), ABC conducts global and local searching in each iteration step so that it is more possible to find the global optimal solution and avoid the local optimal solution. It has been successfully applied to unconstrained numerical optimization [2-3], constrained numerical optimization [4], neural network training etc. These studies conducted typical tests to ABC algorithm and obtained satisfactory simulation and experimental results.

In this paper, an optimization method to obtain the weight matrixes in LQG controller based on artificial bee colony algorithm is proposed. A reference model is obtained with the expected close-loop performance, weight matrixes are optimized so that the designed servo system can have the most identical characteristics with the reference model. ABC algorithm can automatically select and optimize the weight matrixes of LQG controller, eliminating the cumbersome and complex trial and error process and improving the efficiency of LQG controller design. Simulations on a large antenna servo system demonstrate the feasibility and effectiveness of the algorithm. Applying the optimized weight matrixes into a large antenna servo system, rapidity, stability and overshoot of the system are greatly improved than before.

