The technological advance of drone technology has augmented the existing capabilities of flying vehicles rendering them a valuable asset of the modern society. As more drones are expected to occupy the airspace in the near future, security-related incidents, either malicious acts or accidents, will increase as well. The forensics analysis of a security incident is essential, as drones are flying above populated areas and have also been weaponised from radical forces and perpetrators. Thus, it is an imperative need to establish a Drone Digital Forensics Investigation Framework and standardise the processes of collecting and processing such evidence.

The rest of this manuscript is organised as follows. First, we present the related work by first providing an overview of the drone and the most relevant forensics tools for drones. Then, in Section 3, we discuss which are the primary sources for evidence in a drone and their types, to proceed with a generic overview of the cases that a forensics investigator would have to face. To facilitate her task, we accompany the latter with a comprehensive and prioritised list of evidence for each case. In Section 4.1, we first present the relevant forensic models and standards to discuss the primary challenges in the forensics investigation in the form of a gap analysis afterwards. The key differences of drones and their particularities indicate that we are currently missing not only the needed tools but also the procedures to address the upcoming forensics cases. The article then concludes and streamlines some key findings and open issues for the further development of the field.

/light Controller: The most critical component of a drone since it contains a variety of sensors (e.g. accelerometer, gyroscope) and software, or as widely know as the autopilot, to allow the execution of autonomous commands and more complex flight scenarios. The flight controller can also receive input from sensors (e.g. lidar, infrared) and adjust the flight path to avoid collision with nearby objects without any human interaction.

The presence of a large variety of devices also provides a large source of evidence collection. Each device in the UAS will most likely have a storage unit where the drone forensics investigator can uncover details about the activity of the drone and its operator. The presence of multiple evidence on different devices means that if the drone or a device of the UAS is rendered unrecoverable due to, e.g. a damage or anti-forensics techniques5 (e.g. encrypted internal drone memory), there is a high possibility that other evidence can be retrieved. The most common devices that can contain evidence of a drone flight are described below:

Going a step further, we have to consider cases of malicious physical acts either from the drone or towards it. On the one hand, we consider physical attacks towards the drone that include but are not limited to, physical damage or theft of the drone or its payload. On the other hand, we consider acts where the drone is used to perform malicious physical acts which include, among others interception, surveillance, theft, delivery of illegal products, and use of armoury.

Using the collected evidence, the investigator has firstly to assess the nature of the incident and whether it is an offence, e.g. whether it is an accident or a malicious act. Based on the scene under investigation, the collected evidence and the visible incurred damages, the investigator

Standards are a vital necessity to ensure conformance and mutual compliance across the geographical and jurisdictional border. There are currently numerous standards and established practices provided by organisations worldwide using accepted methods. The technical details on how to forensically approach the investigation differs, depending on the device. The analysis of electronic evidence is typically categorised into the following phases: identification, collection, acquisition, preser- vation and disposal, although the exact phases naming may vary due to the usage of different forensic model that each organisation finds appropriate for their needs.

Procedure Model (ACSPM) [14], the integrated digital forensic process model of Kohn et al. [15], the Systematic digital forensic investiga- tion model (SRDFIM). [16], and the advanced data acquisition model (ADAM) [17]. In general, law enforcement agencies follow variants of the ACPO (Association of Chief Police Officers) guidelines [18].

ETSI is a European Standards Organization that produces standards for ICT systems and services that are used all around the world, collaborating with numerous organisations. In 2020 ETSI published TS 103 643 V1.1.1 (2020-01) [21], a set of techniques for assurance of digital material in a legal proceeding, to provide a set of tools to assist the legitimate presentation of digital evidence.8

The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has released guidelines for organisations to develop forensic capability, based on the principles of forensic science in the aspect of the application of science to the law but should not be used on digital forensic investi- gations due to subjection to different laws and regulations, as clearly stated on their manual. The scope on NIST guidelines is incorporating forensics into the information system life cycle of an organisation. The most relevant guidelines are 800-86 [22] for Integrating Forensic Tech- niques into Incident Response and 800-101 [23] for Mobile Device Forensics.

The Scientific Working Group on Digital Evidence (SWGDE) is an organisation engaged in the field of digital and multimedia evidence to foster communication and cooperation as well as to ensure quality and consistency within the forensic community. SWGDE has released a number of documents to provide the current best practices on a large variety of state of the art forensics subjects. Nonetheless, none of them is targeting nor addressing the particularities of drone forensics.

Nevertheless, in none of the aforementioned standards is there any reference to drones. While someone could oversee this omission as the procedures could cover the procedures needed for UAV forensic investigations. However, for the collection of forensic evidence from a UAV one cannot always access the data and may need to exploit the device to gain access to them. As will be discussed in the next paragraphs, such processes are not foreseen by any standard. Moreover, the contradicting records in the log files of the UAV and the GCS; also discussed in the following paragraphs, are not considered by any

As previously mentioned, the UAS consists of multiple devices, and it is not always clear which one would be available during a forensic investigation. For instance, the UAV may have been collected by the incident responder but may not have access to the GCS device either because it was destroyed or not found during the investigation. The inverse may also apply, that is the UAV cannot be recovered, and the investigator has access only to the GCS device. Therefore, there is no full access to possible evidence sources. Despite the lack of a source of evidence, a big challenge is to determine which source should be trusted in the case that the two sources have contradictory or missing logs. Note that the differences may stem from various reasons as the problem is amplified by the lack of proper authentication mechanisms. Since in most UAVs the commands are not authenticated via crypto- graphic primitives one may craft the log files in any of the two devices. Even if this is not the case, the differences from the sensors (see the discussion above for the differences in GPS) introduce further issues for the investigator.

Currently, there are also numerous drone models that lack essential security features that may hinder the forensic investigation, into for- mally presenting the case. The lack of encryption and authentication on commercially available products is a profound example. Due to their absence, the received commands are not authenticated, and their source can be questioned. Therefore, it is not evident who issued a command to the drone, that in the case of an autonomous mission could significantly deviate from the expected flight path or pattern. On the contrary, when there is encryption used on the device, the key may not always be available, so the acquisition from forensics tools might not be possible.

Since there is no standardised procedure to conduct a digital foren- sics investigation on drones, researchers have to resolve to already established practices that apply to similar devices. This raises the following question: What kind of device is a drone or relevant to, to select a method to proceed with the forensics triage. A valid argument would be that a drone has many similarities with a mobile phone regarding the hardware (e.g. processor architecture) and the sensors (e.g. GPS receiver, accelerometer). It should be noted here that there is also no standard for handling mobile digital forensics case, yet an initiative has recently started by the FORMOBILE H2020 project.11

Due to the continuous adoption of UAVs in various domains from shipping and delivery to agriculture, and from disaster management and smart city monitoring to search and rescue operations, the skies are being populated continuously with more and more flying vehicles. The fact that UAVs can save both time and costs while offering novel services implies that this trend will continue. Moreover, we have al- ready witnessed their malicious usage in various acts, both physical and digital. Based on the above one can easily understand that the increase in the numbers of drones coupled with their exploitation from adversaries is going to soon make digital forensics investigations on drones a norm. Insurance companies, law enforcement agencies, secu- rity firms and individuals will have to extract evidence from a drone to investigate a case. Nonetheless, as already discussed in this work, a UAV is very different compared to traditional computing devices. In fact, its physical nature, its mobility, and duality; in terms of control, create a very complex environment. The latter aspects are not covered by existing standards, further perplexing the investigations.

This work was supported by the European Commission under the Horizon 2020 Programme (H2020), as part of the projects Cyber- Sec4Europe, Greece (Grant Agreement no. 830929) and LOCARD, Greece (Grant Agreement no. 832735). The content of this article does not reflect the official opinion of the European Union. Responsibility for the information and views expressed therein lies entirely with the authors.

