The importance of food supply chain was largely felt after the decla- ration of Covid-19 pandemic in March 2020 (WHO, 2020). The food sup- ply chains throughout the world faced intermittent disruption due to the lockdowns and restrictions imposed by the governments (Galanakis, 2020). The United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC or U.S. CDC) which acts as the national public health agency of the United States reported over 16,000 Covid-19 cases and 239 deaths among workers of the country in meat processing facilities across 19 states (Dyal et al., 2020). Similarly, China noticed traces of the virus on the beef imports reaching the country from Australia, Brazil, New Zealand, and Bolivia (Singh and Liu, 2020). Similar incidents were also reported from other countries of the world which led to ban on imports and severe measures leading to adverse impact on trade and tariffs.

impact of the scholarly publications and the influence as a measure of scientific quality (Van Raan, 2003). However, to our best of knowledge, there is no previous study of a global bibliometric analysis on the aspect focusing the future of food safety using traceability-based solutions. The current article explores the application of traceability solutions in the domain of food safety using different technological applications. The major goal of the paper was to offer a comprehensive overview of recent developments in the realm of food safety and traceability. To ac- complish our goal, we used the Scopus database to undertake a biblio- metric study of documents published in food safety and traceability area. The following were some of the major takeaways from the paper: (1) the distribution and trend of publications over time (2) the distribution of publications from various nations (3) organizations engaged in the area that have published more than two papers (4) rela- tionship between different authors and co-authors (5) authors in the domain who has published more than five documents (6) source and citation relationship of the sources (7) top journals where over ten doc- uments were published (8) top documents which have at least 100 citations, and (8) collaboration between different countries in context of research publication. This paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, we briefly describe the materials and methods adopted for the study. In the third section, we present the findings based on the da- tabase and methodology of the study. In Section 4, we conclude the paper in the light of previous literature.

The bibliometric analysis was performed using articles published until May 2021 in Scopus indexed journals (https://www.scopus.com/). Out of various document types, only research articles and conference pa- pers were selected for the study because we are interested in checking the research evidence concerning our major keywords, food safety and traceability.

asterisk (*) is a commonly used symbol to broaden a search by finding words that start with the same letters. It is typically used at the end of a root word. Search terms are not case sen- sitive, so words can be entered in upper case or lower case.

different ways along with the functionality of zooming, scrolling, and searching. The popular maps developed using the software are co-authorship, keyword co-occurrence, citation, bibliographic coupling, or co-citation map based on bibliographic data (Van Eck and Waltman, 2010). The maps on VOSviewer are better visualized when the database contains a large number of items (i.e., at least 100 items or more). The other computer programs used in the bibliometric analysis cannot display the maps in such an explicit manner (Pal et al., 2021). The com- prehensive science mapping analysis including the worldwide distribu- tion map of publications and collaborations within the countries was conducted through bibliometrix R-package. The tool is programmed in open source platform R which employs specific tools for both bibliomet- ric and scientometric quantitative research. The co-occurrence network

(50.67) though it produced only three documents with 138 citations. The remaining four universities received less than 20 average citations per document and produced three documents in the research area. From the analysis, it can be concluded that the School of Food and Bio- logical Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China and China Ag- ricultural University, Beijing, China, plays a significant role in the field of research.

and Wu, L. were more impactful than the others. The average citation per document of Thakur, M. was 31.00 (fourth position) and Zhang, J. was in the fifth position with an average citation score of 27.30. Interest- ingly, Wang, J. was at the first position with 16 documents in the re- search area, indicating that even though Wang, J. is a prolific researcher with strong networking and collaboration skills, his research findings are rarely recognized.

The results presented in our study showed an increasing trend par- ticularly from the year 2014. The majority of publications and collabora- tions were from countries like the China, US and countries of the European Union. The sources analysis indicated that the organizations publishing more than two documents in the area were mostly from China, Singapore and New Zealand. The findings support the efforts of the developed countries in prioritizing traceability of agricultural countries. Also, the highest collaboration in publications were observed between USA and China. The results are in consistence with the interna- tional collaboration publication output of China and USA which has showed exponential growth in the past two decades. The growth of science in China during the period has led to major collaboration with G7 countries at the research field (He, 2009; Verbeek et al., 2002). The major limitation of the study could be the reliance on the Scopus data- base which is subject to continuous change and updating in the number of indexed journals (Durieux and Gevenois, 2010; Uthman, 2008). This implies that a bibliometric analysis after an interval of few years may provide substantial variations in the results since the researches in the area is continuously growing with the emergence of several novel tech- nologies. There could be a possibility to combine different databases for better depiction of content in the research area. However, the results obtained in the study can help the researchers to dive deeper into the research area and investigate possible research gaps for future study.

AS was responsible for conceptualization, drafting the manuscript, reviewing and editing. PP assisted in data analysis and visualization. MS contributed in supervision and validation of results, DD assisted in reviewing and editing. The authors discussed the results and implica- tions of the manuscript at all stages.

