

Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 273 (2011) 21–31
www.elsevier.com/locate/entcs
Constructive Description Logics Hybrid-Style
Valeria de Paiva 1
School of Computer Science Birmingham University, United Kingdom
Edward Hermann Haeusler 2
Dep. Inform´atica PUC-Rio, Brazil
Alexandre Rademaker 3
EMAp
Funda¸c˜ao Getulio Vargas, Brazil

Abstract
Constructive modal logics come in several different flavours and constructive description logics, not surpris- ingly, do the same. We introduce an intuitionistic description logic, which we call iALC (for intuitionistic ALC, since ALC is the name of the canonical description logic system) and provide axioms, a Natural Deduction formulation and a sequent calculus for it. The system iALC is related to Simpson’s constructive modal logic IK the same way Mendler and Scheele’s cALC is related to constructive CK and in the same
way classical multimodal K is related to ALC. In the system iALC, as well as in cALC, the classical prin- ciples of the excluded middle C Н чC = T, double negation ччC = C and the definitions of the modalities ER.C = ч6R.чC and 6R.C = чER.чC are no longer validities, but simply non-trivial TBox statements used to axiomatize specific application scenarios. Meanwhile in iALC, like in classical ALC, we have that the distribution of existential roles over disjunction i.e. ER.(C Н D)= ER.C Н ER.D and (the nullary case) ER.⊥ = ⊥ hold, which is not true for cALC. We intend to use iALC for modelling juridical Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems and we describe briefly how.


Introduction
Description Logics are an important knowledge representation formalism, unifying and giving a logical basis to the well known AI frame-based systems of the eighties. Description logics are very popular right now. Given the existent and proposed applications of the Semantic Web, there has been a fair amount of work into finding

1 Email: valeria.depaiva@gmail.com
2 Email: hermann@inf.puc-rio.br
3 Email: alexandre.rademaker@fgv.br

1571-0661 © 2011 Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.entcs.2011.06.010

the most well-behaved system of description logic that has the broadest application, for any specific domain. As discussed in [7], considering versions of constructive de- scription logics makes sense, both from a theoretical and from a practical viewpoint. There are several possible and sensible ways of defining constructive description log- ics, whether your motivation is natural language semantics (as in [7]) or Legal AI (as in [9]).
Description logics tend to come in families of logical systems, depending on which concept constructors you allow in the logic. Since description logics came into existence as fragments of first-order logic chosen to find the best trade-off pos- sible between expressiveness and tractability of the fragment, several systems were discussed and in the taxonomy of systems that emerged the one called ALC (for Attributive Language with Complements) has come to be known as the canonical one. The basic building blocks of description logics are concepts, roles and individ- uals. Think of concepts as unary predicates in usual first-order logic and of roles as binary predicates, used to modify the concepts.
As far as constructive description logics are concerned, Mendler and Scheele have worked out a very compelling system cALC [12], based on the constructive modal logic CK [2]), a favorite 4 system of ours. However in this note we follow a different path and describe a constructive version of ALC, based on the framework for constructive modal logics developed by Simpson (the system IK) in his phd thesis [17]. We call our system iALC for Intuitionistic ALC. (For a proof-theoretic comparison between the constructive modal logics CK and IK one can see [14]).
Our motivation, besides Simpson’s work, is the framework developed by Brau¨ner and de Paiva in [5] for constructive Hybrid Logics. We reason that having already frameworks for constructive modal and constructive hybrid logics in the labelled style of Simpson, we might end up with the best style of constructive description logics, in terms of both solid foundations and ease of implementation. Since sub- mitting this paper we have been told about the master thesis of Cl´ement [6] which follows broadly similar lines. Cl´ement proves soundness and completeness of the system called IALC and then provides a focused version of this system, a very in- teresting development, as focused systems are, apparently, very useful for proof search.
We first recall Simpson’s framework for constructive modal logics and Brau¨ner and de Paiva’s system for constructive hybrid logics. Then we introduce our version of intuitionistic description logic, denoted iALC. We briefly describe the immediate properties of this system and most importantly we discuss a case study of the use of iALC in legal AI and conclude with some interesting directions of further work.
Constructive modal and hybrid logics
Traditionally modal logics are classical propositional logics augmented with modal- ities for necessity, possibility, obligations, provability etc. While by no means the most popular ones, there are several reasonable systems of constructive modal logics

4 This system has categorical semantics, which are not very easy to obtain for modal logics.

in the literature too. Surprisingly, very little is known about the inter-relationships between several of these systems. Many of these systems take the semantics of propositional modal logics in terms of Kripke frames as their fundamental intuition and modify it to account for an intuitionistic basis, instead of the classical one. In this paper we are mostly concerned with the framework proposed by Simpson [17]. This consists of a series of Natural Deduction systems, which arise from interpret- ing the usual possible worlds definitions in an intuitionistic meta-theory. The main benefit of these Natural Deduction systems over axiomatizations is their suscep- tibility to proof-theoretic techniques. Strong normalization and confuence results are proved for all of the systems described. On the downside the basic structure of Natural Deduction needs to be extended to deal with assumptions of the form world x is R-related to world y, which is written as a second kind of formula xRy. Building up from Simpson’s framework for constructive modal logics, in [5], Brau¨ner and de Paiva introduced intuitionistic hybrid logics, denoted by IHL. Hybrid logics add to usual modal logics a new kind of propositional symbols, the nominals, and also the so-called satisfaction operators. A nominal is assumed to be true at exactly one world, so a nominal can be considered the name of a world. If x is a nominal and X is an arbitrary formula, then a new formula x : X called a satisfaction statement can be formed. The part x : of x : X is called a satisfaction operator. The satisfaction statement x : X expresses that the formula X is true at one particular world, namely the world at which the nominal x is true. Constructing a system of intuitionistic hybrid logic, based on Simpson’s Natural Deduction is relatively straightforward. The hard work is to prove that the whole machinery of nominals and satisfaction operators is orthogonal enough to the intuitionistic characteristics of the basis and that we can still have the expected proof-theoretical properties of the hybrid system, as desired. In hindsight one can see that Simpson’s formulation of modal logic (called here IML, for intuitionistic modal logic) shares with hybrid formalisms the idea of making the possible-world semantics part of the deductive system. While IML makes the relationship between worlds (e.g., xRy) part of the deductive system, IHL goes one step further and sees the worlds themselves x, y as part of the deductive system, (as they are now nominals) and the satisfaction relation itself as part of the deductive system, as it is now a syntactic operator, with
modality-like properties.
Out of these tightly connected systems of intuitionistic modal logic IML and intuitionistic hybrid logics IHL, we want to carve out our system of intuitionistic description logic iALC. However, for some of our applications, we prefer to work with a sequent calculus, as opposed to a Natural Deduction system. For this reason, we make use of Negri’s well-developed proof theory for modal systems [13].
Towards the system iALC
Like classical ALC [1] the intuitionistic version iALC is a basic description language whose concept constructors are described by the following grammar:
C, D ::= A |⊥|T| ¬C | C H D | C H D | C ± D | ∃R.C | ∀R.C

where A stands for an atomic concept and R for an atomic role, given an initial set of role names and of atomic concepts names. This syntax is more general than standard ALC in that it includes subsumption ± as a concept-forming operator. In a constructive setting subsumption behaves somewhat like strict implication. (We will have no use for nested subsumptions, but they do make the system easier to define, so we keep the general rules.) Negation can be represented via subsumption, as ¬C can be defined as C ± ⊥, but we find it convenient to keep it in the language. The constant T can also be omitted since it can be represented by ¬⊥.
Following Mendler and Scheele we say a constructive interpretation of iALC is a structure I = (ΔI, ≤I, ·I) consisting of a non-empty set ΔI of entities in which each entity represents a partially defined individual; a refinement pre-ordering ≤I on ΔI, i.e., a reflexive and transitive relation; and an interpretation function ·I mapping each role name R to a binary relation RI ⊆ ΔI × ΔI and each atomic concept A to a set AI ⊆ ΔI which is closed under refinement, i.e., x ∈ AI and x ≤I y implies y ∈ AI. The interpretation I is lifted from atomic ⊥,A to arbitrary concepts via:
TI =df ΔI
(¬C)I =df {x|∀y ∈ ΔI.x ≤ y ⇒ y /∈ CI}
(C H D)I =df CI ∩ DI
(C H D)I =df CI ∪ DI
(C ± D)I =df {x|∀y ∈ ΔI.(x ≤ y and y ∈ CI) ⇒ y ∈ DI}
(∃R.C)I =df {x|∀y ∈ ΔI.x ≤ y ⇒ ∃z ∈ ΔI.(y, z) ∈ RI and z ∈ CI}
(∀R.C)I =df {x|∀y ∈ ΔI.x ≤ y ⇒ ∀z ∈ ΔI.(y, z) ∈ RI ⇒ z ∈ CI}
Our setting is a simplification of Mendler and Scheele’s where we dispense with infallible entities, since our system iALC satisfies ∃R.⊥ = ⊥, just like classical ALC. Semantic validity can be introduced as follows: say “x satisfies C in the inter- pretation I”, written as I,x |= C, if x is in the interpretation of C, x ∈ CI. Say I |= C if this happens for all x in ΔI. Finally say |= C if for all interpretations I
we have I |= C. These definitions are usually extended to sets of concepts.
Typical reasoning in description logics is done via TBoxes and ABoxes. If we use Γ for a TBox, i.e. a collection of concepts and subsumptions and Θ for an ABox, a collection of instantiations of concepts then we can say Θ, Γ |= C if for all interpretations I, which are models of all the concepts in Γ it is the case that every x in I which satisfy the axioms in Θ must also satisfy C, or
∀I.∀x ∈ ΔI.(I |= Θ and I,x |= Γ) implies I,x |= C
A Hilbert-style axiomatization of iALC is easy to provide. It consists of all axioms of intuitionistic propositional logic plus the axioms and rules displayed in Figure 1.
Proving soundness and completeness of the Hilbert version of iALC above, as it is done by Mendler and Scheele [12, p. 7] poses no problems. Repeating their work we can say: Let the symbol ▶H denote a Hilbert deduction, that is Γ ▶H C if there


exists a derivation C0, C1, C2,..., Cn where the last concept Cn = C and each Ci is either a hypothesis (Ci is in Γ) or is a substitution instance from one of the axioms above or obtained via the rules MP and Nec from earlier concepts Cj,j ≤ i. The Hilbert calculus implements TBox reasoning and we have, just doing cut-and-paste from [12]:
Theorem 3.1 The Hilbert calculus described in Figure 1 is sound and complete for TBox reasoning, that is Γ, ∅ |= C if and only if Γ ▶H C.
A sequent calculus for iALC
Working to give a Gentzen sequent-style presentation for iALC we move first to a labelled system in the style of Simpson’s framework. Simpson’s original system is a Natural Deduction system, where the rules for modalities are meant to capture exactly the intuitions of possible worlds. Restricting Simpson’s IK to the description logic fragment gives the rules in Figure 2, where we elided the rules for H and H, which are well-known.
A sequent calculus version of Simpson’s rules is discussed by Negri [13] (in the classical case) and we prefer to use the sequent calculus. We have to adapt Negri’s sequent calculus to the description logic fragment and to make it intuionistic, which seems easy enough. The rules are in the Figure 3 below. Note that our version, which is constructive, has restrictions to a single conclusion formula in the rules for subsumption and universal-quantification-role on the right, which are essential to keep the system intuitionistic, in the propositional setting.
There are two main modifications from usual, non-labelled sequent calculus for modal logic. First, of course we need to add the labels, which intuitively describe the world where the concept is being asserted. Thus x : C means that the concept C is asserted to exist in the world x. Secondly we have the relational kind of premises in the deductive system, assertions of the form xRy, which mean that the role R relates worlds x and y. Both of these additions would seem sensible in the description logic setting: it is reassuring to see the same rules for roles in Straccia’s 4-valued Description Logic [18].



Fig. 2. Natural Deduction iALC Rules
The rules for the propositional connectives (H, H) are basically the same as for classical ALC, we just have to add worlds everyehere, but these do not change with the application of rules. (Similarly the rules for subsumption ± are just the rules for intuitionistic implication with worlds added). The main modification comes for the modal (or role quantification) rules, which now follow exactly the intuitions of Kripke relational semantics. Since the intuitive semantics of box (necessity) says
x |= 2C iff for all y, xRy implies y |= C
and we are reading ∀R.C as 2C (following Schild [16]) we derive a rule that says if y : C can be derived for an arbitrary y that is R-related to x then x : ∀R.C holds, or

Γ, xRy ⇒ y : C
Γ ⇒ x : ∀R.C
∀-r

The fact that y must be arbitrary is reflected in the usual condition that y is not
(free) in Γ. Reading the semantics again, the converse gives us the left rule for the universal role,

Γ,x : ∀R.C, y : C, xRy ⇒ Δ
Γ,x : ∀R.C, xRy ⇒ Δ
∀-l

as if x : ∀R.C and y is accessible from x then y : C, where we need to repeat the
formula x : ∀R.C to make the rule invertible. Similar reasoning, from the intended semantics, get us the rules for existential quantification. We say
x |=  C iff there exists y, xRy and y |= C


The left to right direction gives us
Γ, xRy,y : C ⇒ Δ Γ,x : ∃R.C ⇒ Δ

∃-l

while the right to left direction gives the binary rule
Γ ⇒ Δ, xRy	Γ ⇒ Δ,y : C
Γ ⇒ Δ,x : ER.C
which is turned into the equivalent unary rule
Γ, xRy ⇒ Δ,y : C, x : ER.C

Γ, xRy ⇒ Δ,x : ER.C
E-r

where the concept x : ER.C is repeated in the antecedent, just for invertibility rea- sons. As traditional in first-order logic, the rules 6-r and E-l have the side condition that y is not in the conclusion.

Fig. 3. iALC Sequent Rules
The system iALC described here is related to Simpson’s IK the same way Mendler and Scheele’s cALC [12] is related to constructive CK [2] and [11] and in the same way classical multimodal K is related to ALC[16]. In the system iALC we defined, as well as in cALC, the classical principles of the excluded middle C H чC = T, double negation ччC = C and the definitions of the modalities ER.C = ч6R.чC and 6R.C = чER.чC are no longer validities, but non-trivial TBox statements used to axiomatize specific application scenarios. Meanwhile in iALC, like in classical ALC, we have that the distribution of existential roles over disjunction i.e. ER.(C H D)= ER.C H ER.D and in the nullary case ER.⊥ = ⊥ hold, which is not true for cALC.

Properties of iALC
Soundness and completeness of a sequent calculus version of iALC are easy to prove. This is similar to the proof indicated in [12, page 10], although the sequent calculus we proposed in Figure 3 is different from theirs. Our sequents are simpler, as we do not insist in carrying negative information along derivations. Our modal rules are different enough. Nonetheless we have:
Theorem 5.1 The sequent calculus for iALC in Figure 3 and the Hilbert calculus described in Figure 1 are equivalent. For any TBox Θ and concept C, we have that Θ, ∅ ▶H C if and only if the sequent Θ ⇒ C has a derivation using the rules in Figure 3.
The proof of soundness and completeness of the sequent calculus for iALC does not come straight from Straccia’s work, as our rules for roles are the same, but our semantics are different. (He insists on 4-valuedness, we want constructiveness.)
Theorem 5.2 The sequent calculus described in Figure 3 is sound and complete for TBox reasoning, that is Θ, ∅ |= C if and only if Θ ▶S C.
We still have to contend with the criticism levelled by Bozzato et al in [4] that a constructive description logic ought to satisfy the ﬁnite model property, which is not clear from our (original) formulation. Bozzato et al have a formulation of constructive hybrid logic based on closing the logic down under Kuroda’s axiom, by construction. Other researchers (including Mendler and Scheele) have proved the finite model property and decidability for (variants) of the description logics we consider. In particular Simpson has proved the finite model property for IK [17, page 157] but for his birelational models. We leave as future work to do the same for iALC.
Applying iALC
Mendler and Scheele cite auditing of business as their motivational application. We envisage applying our system to legal AI, as one of us (Hausler) is tasked with developing prototypes for legal AI systems. We have presented a simplified case study of this application in [9] and [8]. We repeat its rationale here, in a simplified form.
One of the main problems from legal theory is to make precise the use of the term “law”. In fact, the problem of individuation, namely, the problem of deciding what counts as the unit of law, seems to be one of the fundamental open questions in jurisprudence. That is, any discussion of law classification must be preceded by an answer to the question “What is to count as one complete law?” ([15]). There are two main approaches to this question. One is to take as the law all (exist- ing) legally valid statments as a single, whole entity. This totality is called “the law”. This approach is predominant in legal philosophy and jurisprudence owing its significance to the Legal Positivism tradition initiated by Hans Kelsen (for a contemporary reference see [10]). The coherence of “the law” plays a central role

in this approach, whilst a debate on whether coherence is built-in by the restric- tions induced by Nature in an evolutionary way, or whether it should be object of knowledge management, seems to be a long and classical debate. The other ap- proach to law definition is to take into account all legally valid statements as being individual laws. This view, in essence, is harder to be shared with jurisprudence principles, since those principles are firstly concerned with justifying the law. This latter approach seems to be more suitable to Legal AI. It is also considered by legal theoreticians, at least partially, whenever they start considering ontological com- mitments, such as, taking some legal relations as primitive ones (Hohfeld, 1919), primary and secondary rule (Hart, 1961) or even a two-level logic to deal with dif- ferent aspects of law (see logic-of-imperation/logic-of-obligation from [3]). In fact, many Knowledge Engineering (KE) groups pursue the definition of legal ontologies on this basis. We also follow this route. It is important to note that the pure use of a deontic logic has been shown to be inadequate to accomplish this task. In [19] it is shown that deontic logic does not properly distinguish the normative status of a situation from the normative status of a norm (rule).
From the semantic point of view, iALC seems to be adequate to model the legal theoretic approach pursued by KE as described above. Let us consider an iALC model having as individuals each of the possible legal statements. The ≤ relation is the natural hierarchy existing between individual legal statements. For example, sometimes conflicts between legal statements are solved by inspecting the age of the laws, the difference between enforcement scope of each law, etc. Any of these relations can be considered transitive and reflexive. If C is a concept symbol in the description logic language, its semantics is a subset of legal statements representing a kind of legal situation. Roles in the description logic language are associated to relations between these legal situations, imposed by the relationship between each pair of individual legal stls -l atements.
The main reason to use an intuitionistic logic in legal reasoning is to have the ability to express partiality and incomplete information, beyond the standard open world assumption. Because the semantic meaning of our concepts should be context dependent, we need a constructive version of undefinedness that allows for intrinsic refinement of concepts. Classical description logic assumes that each concept is static and that at the outset either it includes a given entity or not. This corresponds to a binary truth interpretation. If we trade this static setting for a constructive notion of truth we believe this will provide us with a well-understood and more sophisticated way of dealing with refinement of concepts. Of course it remains to be seen if we can keep the other features that made description logics as useful as they have proved themselves, so far.

Conclusions
We presented rules leading up to a new system of constructive description logic called iALC. This system is the natural restriction of Simpson’s framework for constructive modal logic to the description logic setting and fits in naturally with

Brauner and de Paiva’s intuitionistic hybrid logic IHL. The results we prove about the system are not very surprising. What is unsettling is the number of design choices left to us and the difficulty in obtaining hard criteria for choosing between the multiple systems available. We have not much to report on this, yet.
Besides further investigating the relationship between systems based on IK and systems based on CK, especially their semantics counterparts, we would like to implement a framework that would allow us to construct proofs in the three systems iALC, IK and IHL. The main application we envisage for our system at the moment is in knowledge engineering of juridical systems, as one of us (Hauesler) leads a project on this topic. This project is just beginning and time will tell if the initial intuitions concerning simplicity of modeling coupled with ease of implementation will bear fruit or not.

References
Baader, F., D. Calvanese, D. McGuinness, D. Nardi and P. Patel-Schneider, editors, “The Description Logic Handbook: theory, implementation, and applications,” Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Bellin, G., V. de Paiva and E. Ritter, Extended curry-howard correspondence for a basic constructive modal logic, in: Procs of Methods for the Modalities, 2001.
Bentham, J., J. Burns and H. Hart, “An introduction to the principles of morals and legislation,” Oxford University Press, USA, 1996.
Bozzato, L., M. Ferrari and P. Villa, A note on constructive semantics for description logics., in:
M. Gavanelli and F. Riguzzi, editors, CILC09 - 24-esimo Convegno Italiano di Logica Computazionale, 2009, available from http://www.ing.unife.it/eventi/cilc09/papers/cilc09_submission_29.pdf.
Brau¨ner, T. and V. de Paiva, Intuitionistic hybrid logic, Journal of Applied Logic 4 (2006), pp. 231–255.
Cl´ement, I., “Proof Theoretical Foundations for Constructive Description Logic,” Master’s thesis, School of Computer Science. McGill University, Montrel (2008).
de Paiva, V., Constructive description logics: what, why and how, Technical report, Xerox Parc (2003).
Haeusler, E. H., V. de Paiva and A. Rademaker, Intuitionistic logic and legal ontologies, in: Proceedings of JURIX 2010. The 23rd International Conference on Legal Knowledge and Information Systems (2010), pp. 155–158.
Haeusler, E. H., V. de Paiva and A. Rademaker, Using intuitionistic logic as a basis for legal ontologies, in: Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Legal Ontologies and Artificial Intelligence Techniques, CEUR Workshop Proceedings (CEUR-WS.org) 605 (2010), pp. 69–76.
Kelsen, H., “General theory of norms,” Oxford University Press, USA, 1991.
Mendler, M. and V. de Paiva, Constructive ck for contexts, in: Procs. of the Worskhop on Context Representation and Reasoning, Paris, France, 2005.
Mendler, M. and S. Scheele, Towards constructive DL for abstraction and refinement, Journal of Automated Reasoning 44 (2010), pp. 207–243, also at Proc. 21st Intl Workshop Description Logics.
Negri, S., Proof analysis in modal logic, Journal of Philosophical Logic 34 (2005), pp. 507–544.
Ranalter, K., Embedding constructive k into intuitionistic k, Electr. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci. 262
(2010), pp. 205–219.
Raz, J., Legal principles and the limits of law, Yale Law Journal 81 (1972), pp. 823–854.
Schild, K., A correspondence theory for terminological logics: preliminary report, in: IJCAI’91: Proceedings of the 12th international joint conference on Artificial intelligence (1991), pp. 466–471, also published at TR 91, Technische Universitat Berlin.
Simpson, A., “The Proof Theory and Semantics of Intuitionistic Modal Logic,” Ph.D. thesis, University of Edinburgh (1993), revised September 1994.

Straccia, U., A sequent calculus for reasoning in four-valued description logics, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 1227 (1997), pp. 343–357.
Valente, A., “Legal knowledge engineering: A modelling approach,” IOS Press Inc, Amsterdam, 1995.
