


 HOSTE D BY 
e g ypti an j o ur nal o f b a sic and a pp l i e d sci en c e s 2 ( 201 5 ) 13 e18 




Factor analysis of traditional cardiovascular risk traits in Punjabi adolescents in India
Badaruddoza*, Sandeep Kaur Brar
Department of Human Genetics, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar 143005, Punjab, India



a r t i c l e i n f o 


Article history:
Received 20 August 2014 Received in revised form 15 November 2014
Accepted 20 November 2014
Available online 7 December 2014


Keywords:
Factor analysis Anthropometric traits Cardiovascular risk Punjabi adolescents
a b s t r a c t 

The accuracy of different anthropometric indices to predict cardiovascular diseases is still debated in adolescent age groups and few data are available in state of Punjab in India. We compared the factor loadings of different anthropometric cardiovascular risk factors. A total of 1530 boys and 1530 girls, adolescents aged 10e18 years were recruited for the present study to identify cardiovascular risk factors. Principal component factor analysis (PCFA) was applied to extract orthogonal components from anthropometric and physio- metric variables. Association between components were explained by factor loadings. PCFA reduced 14 risk factors to 4 uncorrelated components that explained 84.06% and 83.15% of total variance among boys, girls and combined subjects respectively. Factor 1 has high loading of the traits that reflects thickness of skinfolds. Comparably, factor 2 is loaded with SBP, DBP and pulse rate. Factor analysis reduced 14 inter-correlated cardiovascular risk factors to 4 newly defined factors. These uncorrelated factors can be interpreted to represent a distinct risk factor for cardiovascular disease in Punjabi adolescents aged 10 e18 years.
Copyright 2015, Mansoura University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc-nd/3.0/).









Introduction

The cardiovascular diseases (CVD) have grown significantly over the last two decades. The prevalence of CVD in India is known to be very high. However, not many data are available related cardiovascular disease in Indian adolescents, although consistent evidences are found from epidemiological studies on cardiovascular risk factors among adolescent in worldwide study [1e5]. The increasing prevalence of adolescent obesity is one of the major causes to be hypertensive in adulthood. It has also been suggested that the recessive gene or genes could be held responsible for higher BP in children [6]. Several studies
have found a strong linear relationship of body mass index (BMI), waist circumference (WC) and skinfold thickness with hypertension, dyslipidemia, and ischemic heart disease in In- dian population [7e12]. Ethnic differences in the different risk factors for hypertension have been well documented in different studies in adults and childhood populations [1,13,14]. Body mass index (BMI) and waist circumference (WC) were widely used to predict the risk of cardiovascular diseases. Some have also advocated waist to hip ratio (WHR), waist to height ratio and skinfold thickness indices for adverse cardio- metabolic risk profile in adolescents [15e21]. However, various statistical methods have been applied to examine the performance of anthropometric indices for the identification of



* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: doza13@yahoo.co.in ( Badaruddoza).
Peer review under responsibility of Mansoura University. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejbas.2014.11.002
2314-808X/Copyright 2015, Mansoura University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY- NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).

14	e gypti an j o ur nal o f b a sic  and a pp l i ed sci e n c e s  2 ( 201 5 ) 13 e18 




adverse cardiovascular risk profile [22e24]. Therefore, to quantify the magnitude of cardiovascular risk in the present study, multivariate data reduction techniques such as principal component factor analysis (PCFA) have been used to extract uncorrelated factors from various inter-correlated variables [24,25]. In the view of above consideration, the present work was undertaken to determine the significant traditional risk factors through principal component factor analysis (PCFA) among population based Punjabi adolescents aged 10e18 years. Punjab is one of the most prosperous states in India.
(HC) (cm) and three skinfolds (biceps, triceps and sub scap- ular). All anthropometric measurements were taken on each individual using standard anthropometric technique [26,27]. The height was measured using anthropometric rod with the standing erect position with the head in eareeye plane. The reading was then, recorded to the nearest 0.1 cm. The weight of the subject was measured in kilograms by making them stand on a weighing machine with minimal clothing. Weight was recorded with an allowance deducted for clothing to the nearest 0.5 kg. Waist circumference was measured using a steel tape. The measurement was taken mid-way between the

		inferior margin of the last rib and crest of the ilium in a hor-

Subjects and methods

The study population included a total of 3060 (1530 boys, 1530 girls) adolescent subjects were recruited for the present study to identify effective traditional cardiovascular risk factors using principal component factor analysis (PCFA). The data were collected from educational institutes from various dis- tricts of Punjab. This study was approved by appropriate ethical research committee of Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar in year of 2010. This study population included ad- olescents from 10 to 18 years of age, of both sexes, enrolled in private higher secondary schools. This cross sectional study was carried out through classroom selection process divided into two stages. In the first stage, 25 Government and private schools were selected. The schools were randomly selected with respect to the proportional probability of school in the stratum. In the second stage, classrooms with respect to age group were selected by simple random sampling. The number was proportional to the population of students in each age group (10e18 years). All the selected students from the groups were considered eligible to participate in the present study after their parents had given written consent beyond student's
verbal consent. Exclusion criteria were adolescents with or-
thopedic problems that prevented anthropometric measure- ments, no parental consent and adolescent pregnancy (if any).

Measurements

The anthropometric measurements were taken height (cm), weight (kg), waist circumference (WC) (cm), hip circumference
izontal plane with relaxed abdomen. The tape was fitted snuggly without compressing the soft tissue. Hip circumfer- ence of the subject was taken with steel tape fitted around the pelvis at the point of maximal protrusion of buttocks while the subject was standing with his/her feet close to each other. The readings were recorded for waist and hip circumferences to the nearest 0.1 cm. A Lange skinfold calliper was used to measure the skinfolds to the nearest 0.2 mm. Two subsequent measurements were taken and averages were used in the analysis [28]. The body mass index (BMI) expressed as the ratio of the body weight divided by body height squared (in Kg/m2) and waist to hip ratio (WHR) defined as waist circumference divided by hip circumference. The physiometric variables included systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pres- sure (DBP) and pulse rate. The blood pressure was measured with standardized mercury sphygmomanometer and a stethoscope by following the recommendations of American Heart Association [29]. Two consecutive readings were recor- ded for each SBP and DBP and the average were used. Pulse rate was counted over one minute. Pulse Pressure was calcu- lated as SBP-DBP. The age of the adolescents was determined directly from their reported date of birth in the school records. All the measurements were taken by second author.

Statistical analysis

Data was screened using SPSS version 17.0. The comparison of means between males and females were done by using stu- dent's t test. Principal Component Analysis was used to

e g ypti an j o ur nal o f b a sic and a pp l i e d sci en c e s 2 ( 201 5 ) 13 e18	15

































extract orthogonal factors from cardiovascular and obesity related measurements. Obesity related traits included BMI, WC, HC, weight, thickness of skinfold. Cardiovascular related traits included SBP, DBP, pulse rate and pulse pressure. Prin- cipal Components were simplified by orthogonal rotation (varimax). Relationships between components are explained by factor loadings. The values greater than or equal to 0.4 were used to indicate meaningful correlations between the component and the variable. Principal Components were retained with eigenvalues greater than or equal to 1. The probability values less than or equal (two-tailed) to 0.05 were considered to be significant.
































correlated which demonstrate the structure of the factors among male and female Punjabi adolescents.
The characteristics of derived principal components have been given in detail in Table 3 among Punjabi adolescents. The PCFA extracted four factors, which explained 84.21%, 84.06% and 83.15% of the total variance of the 14 original quantitative traits among boys, girls and combined subjects respectively. Factor 1 has high loading of the traits that reflect adiposity such as waist circumference, BMI and skinfolds among both sexes. However, waist circumference and body mass index are the indicator of abdominal obesity which increases the risk of cardiovascular diseases. The loadings of these two traits have been found maximum in girls adolescents (WC = 0.924;

		BMI = 0.905). Therefore, factor 1 is the strong indicator of

Results

Table 1 displayed the sex specific means, standard deviation and comparison of the original measurements which are used in the principal component factor analysis for Punjabi ado- lescents aged 10e18 years. All studied quantitative pheno- types except body mass index, diastolic blood pressure and pulse rate indicated significant (P < 0.05) sex specific differ-
ences in the trait variance. Boys were observed to have
significantly higher values for height, weight, waist circum- ference, waist to hip ratio, systolic blood pressure and pulse pressure as compared to girls. Girls had significantly (P < 0.05) higher mean values of hip circumference, biceps, triceps and sub scapular skinfolds than boys. It is also revealed that BMI, diastolic blood pressure and pulse rate among boys were slightly higher but statistically not significant.
Pearson's correlations among 14 normally distributed var- iables are presented in Table 2. The upper triangle correlations correspond to the boys and lower triangle refers to girl ado-
lescents. In both the groups strong correlations were observed among BMI, WC, SBP, DBP and thickness of skinfold. Therefore all the anthropometric variables are  significantly  inter-
atherosclerosis in adolescents. Factor 2 is predominantly loaded with blood pressures and related traits (SBP, DBP, MBP and pulse rate) which reflect the risk of essential hypertension in adolescent girls and combined subjects, whereas, factor 2 loaded with obesity related traits among boys (weight and hip circumferences). Comparably, factor 3 is loaded with blood pressures among boys and with height and WHR among girls, while factor 4 contains high loadings of pulse pressure among boys, girls and combined group of adolescents.

Discussion

The current study is focussed to determine the significant traditional factors through Principal Component Factor Analysis (PCFA) among adolescents aged 10e18 years in urban areas of Punjab. The systematic studies of cardiovascular risk factors and prevalence of abdominal adiposity among ado- lescents in Punjab are very scanty. In the epidemiological studies, anthropometry has been well established method for tracking cardiovascular diseases among adolescents [30e34]. Punjab is one of the economically advanced and prosperous












e g ypti an j o ur nal o f b a sic and a pp l i e d sci en c e s 2 ( 201 5 ) 13 e18	17



states in India with western lifestyle. Therefore, this popula- tion is unique to study complex multifactorial lifestyle disor- ders. We performed PCFA with varimax rotation to reduce 14 inter-correlated variables into four independent factors. These four factors explained 83% of total variance among combined adolescent subjects. The present data reduction method identified four distinct components for cardiovascu- lar disease risk in the population. The first factor which is accounted for the largest portion of variance was strongly loaded by the factors relating to obesity which increases the risk for developing cardiovascular disease among girl adoles- cents than boys. The second largest component, factor 2, re- flected traits of hypertension loaded with SBP, DBP and pulse rate among girls and combined subjects. Therefore, increased WC, BMI, SBP and DBP are the indicators of metabolic syn- drome and a strong predictor of cardiovascular disease. The factor 3 also reflected the risk of essential hypertension in boys. Therefore, the present analysis has shown that girl ad- olescents are more susceptible to develop essential hyper- tension than boys. It is interesting to observe the pattern of variables. The thicknesses of three skinfolds (biceps, triceps and sub scapular) seem to load more than any other traits in both sexes for first factor and explained 50.57%, 47.36% and 48.31% of total variance among males, females and combined subjects, respectively. Therefore, the cluster of three skinfold measurements could be classified as an important indicator for central obesity and this cluster is equally associated with adolescent boys and girls. Hence, it may be concluded that measurement of skinfolds would be good predictor to the occurrence of cardiovascular disease among adolescent age groups. The association of central obesity and hypertension with respect to different biomarkers has been observed in a number of population groups in adult and children group worldwide [22,32,35e42]. Furthermore, in the present study the second factor which are namely blood pressure and pulse rate for girls and combined subjects explained 17.39%, 16.16% of the total variance, respectively. Whereas, in boys the sec- ond factor, that is height, weight and hip circumference explained 15.04% of total variance. However, the third factor that is SBP and DBP explained 10.91% of total variance. Therefore, the factors such as blood pressures are more pre- disposed among adolescent girls than boys due to their sedentary lifestyle.
However, many statistical techniques have been used to
examine the association between risk factors and cardio- vascular diseases. Principal component factor analysis (PCFA) is one of the most sophisticated statistical methods to identify these associations. Very little work has been so far undertaken in India among adolescent age groups. Hence the present work may be helpful for further studies. The present findings support the hypothesis that clustering of cardio- vascular risk factors is more important than to identify any single trait due to its underlying heterogeneous nature of cardiovascular related phenotypes. The present study has some limitations beyond its strength such as (i) some inconsistent loading pattern for different variables has been observed (ii) the study is cross-sectional in nature (iii) it has been observed that certain risk traits have low eigenvalues which were eliminated from the analysis but act as impor- tant predictors.


Acknowledgments

The financial assistance (to SKB), Maulana Azad National Fellowship from UGC, New Delhi is gratefully acknowledged.


references 


Prasad DS, Kabir Z, Dash AK, Bhagabati CD. Childhood cardiovascular risk factors in South Asian: a cause of concern for adult cardiovascular disease epidemic. Ann Pediatr Cardiol 2011;4:166e71.
Gupta R, Misra A, Vikram NK, Kondal D, Gupta SS, Agrawal A, et al. Younger age of escalation of cardiovascular risk factors in Asian Indian subjects. BMC Cardiovasc Disord 2009;9:28.
Kim HM, Park J, Kim HS, Kim DH, Park SH. Obesity and cardiovascular risk factors in Korean children and adolescents aged 10e18 years from the Korean National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1998 and 2001. Am J Epidemiol 2006;164:787e93.
Lane DA, Gill P. Ethnicity and tracking blood pressure in children. J Hum Hypertens 2004;18:223e8.
Steinberger J, Daniels SR. Obesity, insulin resistance, diabetes, and cardiovascular risk in children: an American Heart Association scientific statement from the Atherosclerosis, Hypertension, and Obesity in the Young Committee (Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young) and the Diabetes Committee (Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism). Circulation 2003;107:1448e53.
Badaruddoza, Afzal M. Age specific differences in blood pressure among inbred and non-inbred North Indian children. J Biosci 1999;24:177e84.
Badaruddoza, Gill K, Kamal P. Factor analysis of anthropometric, physiometric and metabolic risk traits associated with cardiovascular diseases in north Indian Punjabi adults. J Appl Sci 2011;11:2843e8.
Badaruddoza, Gill K, Kumar R. Association of anthropometric and metabolic variables with cardiovascular diseases among urban and rural origin. Am J Appl Sci 2011;8:953e61.
Ghosh JR, Bandhyopadhyay AR. Comparative evaluation of obesity measures: relationship with blood pressures and hypertension. Singap Med J 2007;48:232e5.
Gupta R. Trends in hypertension epidemiology in India. J Hum Hypertens 2004;18:73e8.
Gupta R. Burden of coronary heart disease in India. Indian Heart J 2005;57:632e8.
Ghosh A, Bose K, Das Chaudhuri AB. Comparison of anthropometric characteristics between normotensive and hypertensive individuals among a population of Bengalee Hindu elderly men in Calcutta, India. J R Soc Promot Health 2000;120:100e6.
Goran MI, Ball GD, Cruz ML. Obesity and risk of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease in children and adolescents. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2003;88:1417e27.
Whincup PH, Gilg JA, Papacosta O, Seymour C, Miller GJ, Alberti KG, et al. Early evidence of ethnic differences in cardiovascular risk: cross sectional comparison of British South Asian and White children. Brit Med J 2002;324:635.
Bovet P, Arlabosse T, Viswanathan B, Myers G. Association between obesity indices and cardiovascular risk factors in late adolescence in the Seychelles. BMC Pediatr 2012;12:176e84.
Ashwell M, Gunn P, Gibson S. Waist to height ratio is better screening tool than waist circumference and BMI for adult cardiometabolic risk factors: systematic review and meta- analysis. Obes Rev 2012;13:275e86.

18	e gypti an j o ur nal o f b a sic  and a pp l i ed sci e n c e s  2 ( 201 5 ) 13 e18 



Knowles KM, Paiva LL, Sanchez SE, Revilla L, Lopez T, Yasuda MB, et al. Waist circumference, body mass index, and other measures of adiposity in predicting cardiovascular disease risk factors among Peruvian Adults. Int J Hypertens 2011. http://dx.doi.org/10.4061/2011/931402.
Taylor DW. The burden of non-communicable diseases in India. Hamilton: The Cameron Institute; 2010.
Lee CM, Huxley RR, Wildman RP, Woodward M. Indices of abdominal obesity are better discriminators of cardiovascular risk factors than BMI: a meta-analysis. J Clin Endem 2008;61:646e53.
Yusuf S, Hawken S, Ounpuu S, Bautista L, Franzosi MG, Commerford P, et al. Obesity and the risk of myocardial infarction in 27,000 participants from 52 countries: a case- control study. Lancet 2005;366:1640e9.
Dobbelsteyn CJ, Joffres MR, Maclean DR, Flowerdew G. A comparative evaluation of waist circumference, waist-to-hip ratio and body mass index as indicators of cardiovascular risk factors. The Canadian Heart Health Surveys. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 2001;25:652e61.
Kaur M, Badaruddoza, Kumar R. Principal component factor analysis of cardiovascular risk factors among Punjabi female population. World Appl Sci J 2012;16:616e21.
Badaruddoza, Kumar R. Cardiovascular risk factor and familial aggregation of blood pressure with respect to anthropometric variables in a scheduled caste population in Punjab, a North Indian state. Anthropol Anz 2009;67:111e9.
Bellis C, Hughes RM, Begley KN, Quinlan S, Lea RA, Heath SC, et al. Phenotypical characterisation of the isolated Norfolk Island population focusing on epidemiological indicators of cardiovascular disease. Hum Hered 2005;60:211e9.
Goodman E, Dolan LM, Morrison JA, Daniels SR. Factor analysis of clustered cardiovascular risks in adolescence: obesity is the predominant correlate of risk among youth. Circulation 2005;111:1970e7.
Weiner JS, Lourie JA. Practical human biology. London: Academic Press; 1981.
Singh IP, Bhasin MK. Anthropometry. Delhi: Kamla Raj Enterprises; 1968.
Brar SK, Badaruddoza. Better anthropometric indicators to predict elevated blood pressure in North Indian Adolescents. J Biol Sci 2013;13:139e45.
American Heart Association. Report of Subcommittee of Postgraduate Education Committee recommendations for human blood pressure determination by sphygmomanometer. Circulation 1981;64:501Ae9B.
de Moraes ACF, Falcao MC. Lifestyle factors and socioeconomic variables associated with abdominal obesity in Brazillian adolescents. Ann Hum Biol 2013;40:1e8.
Mokha JS, Srinivasan SR, Dasmahapatra P, Fernadez C, Chen W, Xu J, et al. Utility of waist-to-height ratio in assessing the status of central obesity and related cardiometabolic risk profile among normal weight and overweight/obese children: the Bogalusa Heart study. BMC Pediatr 2010;10:73.
Badaruddoza, Kaur N, Barna B. Inter-relationship of waist-to- hip ratio (WHR), body mass index (BMI) and subcutaneous fat with blood pressure among university-going Punjabi sikh and Hindu females. Int J Med Med Sci 2010;2:5e11.
Moreira S, Ferreira A, Lima R, Arsa G, Campbell C, Simoes H, Pitanga F, et al. Predicting insulin resistance in children: anthropometric and metabolic indicators. J Pediatr 2008;84:47e52.
Neovius M, Linne Y, Rossner S. BMI, waist circumference and waistehip-ratio as diagnostic tests for fatness in adolescents. Int J Obes 2005;29:163e9.
Cox HC, Bellis C, Lea RA, Quinlan S, Hughes R, Dyer T, et al. Principal component and linkage analysis of cardiovascular risk traits in the Norfolk isolate. Hum Hered 2009;68:55e64.
Wu CJ, Lin JD, Li JC, Hsiao FC, Hsich CH, Kuo SW, et al. Factor analysis of metabolic syndrome using direct measurement of insulin resistance in Chinese with different degree of glucose tolerance. Indian J Med Res 2008;127:336e43.
Ghosh A. Factor analysis of metabolic syndrome among the middle-aged Bengalee Hindu men of Calcutta, India. Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2005;21:58e64.
Hanley AJG, Karter AJ, Festa A, Agostino RD,
Wagenknecht LE, Savage P, et al. Factor analysis of metabolic syndrome using directly measured insulin sensitivity.
Diabetes 2002;51:2642e7.
Cox BD, Whichelow MJ, Prevost AT. The development of cardiovascular disease in relation to anthropometric indices and hypertension in British adults. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 1998;22:966e73.
Olza J, Aguilera CM, Gil-Campos M, Leis R, Bueno G, Valle M, et al. Waist to height ratio, inflammation and CVD risk in obese children. Public Health Nutr 2014 Jan 2:1e8.
Olza J, Garcia CA, Ruperez A, Gil-Campos M, Leis R, Orth DF, et al. Influence of FTO variants on obesity, inflammation and cardiovascular risk biomerkers in Spanish children: a case control multicentre study. BMC Med Genet 2013;14:123.
Olza J, Aguilera CM, Gil-Campos M, Leis R, Bueno G, Martinez-Jimenez MD, et al. Myeloperoxidase is an early biomarker of inflammation and cardiovascular risk in prepubertal obese children. Diabetes Care 2012;35:2374e6.
