Available online at www.sciencedirect.com


Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 346 (2019) 473–484
www.elsevier.com/locate/entcs

Fast Winning Strategies for the Maker-Breaker Domination Game
Valentin Gledel
LIRIS
Universit´e Lyon 1 Lyon, France
Vesna Irˇsiˇc
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics University of Ljubljana
Ljubljana, Slovenia
Sandi Klavˇzar
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics University of Ljubljana
Ljubljana, Slovenia

Abstract
The Maker-Breaker domination game is played on a graph G by Dominator and Staller. The players alternatively select a vertex of G that was not yet chosen in the course of the game. Dominator wins if at some point the vertices he has chosen form a dominating set. Staller wins if Dominator cannot form a dominating set. In this paper we introduce the Maker-Breaker domination number γMB(G) of G as the minimum number of moves of Dominator to win the game provided that he has a winning strategy and is

the first to play. If Staller plays first, then the corresponding invariant is denoted γ′
(G). Comparing the

two invariants it turns out that they behave much differently than the related game domination numbers. The invariant γMB(G) is also compared with the domination number. Using the Erd˝os-Selfridge Criterion a large class of graphs G is found for which γMB(G) > γ(G) holds. Residual graphs are introduced and used
to bound/determine γMB(G) and γ′  (G). Using residual graphs, γMB(T ) and γ′  (T ) are determined for
an arbitrary tree. The invariants are also obtained for cycles. A list of open problems and directions for further investigations is given.
Keywords: Maker-Breaker domination game, Maker-Breaker domination number, domination game, perfect matching, tree, cycle

Maker-Breaker games (as well as other positional games) have been introduced by Erd˝os and Selfridge in [13], and since then have been the subject of numerous studies, see [2,3,14,15]. Maker-Breaker games are played on hypergraphs by two players called Maker and Breaker. They take turns and at each turn the current player selects a new vertex. Maker wins if at some point of the game he has selected

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.entcs.2019.08.042
1571-0661/© 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

all vertices from one of the hyperedges, while Breaker wins if she can keep him from doing it. See [1] and [16] for general introductions on this field.
Very recently, the Maker-Breaker domination game was introduced in [12]. The game is played on a graph G with two players named Dominator and Staller. These names were selected to emphasize the domination nature of the game and to be consistent with the usual domination game where these two names are standard by now. (The domination game was introduced in [4] and further studied in dozens of papers, cf. [6,11,22,23,24].) The players alternatively select a vertex of G that was not yet chosen in the course of the game. Dominator wins if at some point, the vertices he has chosen form a dominating set. Staller wins if Dominator cannot form a dominating set. Note that the Maker-Breaker domination game is a Maker- Breaker game. Indeed, if for a graph G we build a hypergraph F with the same set of vertices as G, and in which the hyperedges are the dominating sets of G, then Dominator wins the Maker-Breaker domination game on G if and only if Maker wins the Maker-Breaker game on F.
In several papers on Maker-Breaker games the authors were interested in the smallest number of moves needed for Maker to win, see [7,8,15]. Also, in [12] it was emphasized that when dealing with the Maker-Breaker games, there are two natural questions: (i) which player has a winning strategy and (ii) what is the minimum number of moves if Dominator has a winning strategy. In the seminal paper question (i) is investigated, while in this paper we study (ii). For this sake we say that if G is a graph, then the Maker-Breaker domination number γMB(G) of G is the minimum number of moves of Dominator to win the game provided that he has a winning strategy and is the first to play. Otherwise we set γMB(G)= ∞.

Similarly, γj
(G) denotes is the minimum number of moves of Dominator in the

game in which Staller plays first.
We proceed as follows. In the next section we list additional definitions and several known results needed in this paper, as well as prove some basic results on the Maker-Breaker domination number. In Section 2 we first compare γMB(G) with
j	(G) and find out that they behave totally different than the related game domi-
nation invariants. We also compare γMB(G) with the domination number and using the Erd˝os-Selfridge Criterion prove that if the number of γ-sets of G is not too big, then γMB(G) > γ(G). In Section 3 we introduce residual graphs, determine
(resp. bound) γj	(G) (resp. γMB(G)) in terms of the residual graph, and determine

γMB(T ) and γj
(T ) for an arbitrary tree. In the next section we obtain the invari-

ants for cycles. We conclude with a list of open problems and directions for further investigations.

Preliminaries
Let G = (V, E) be a graph. A vertex of G adjacent to a leaf is a support vertex of G. A perfect matching of G is a set of pairwise independent edges that cover V (G). The order of G will be denoted with n(G). If u is a vertex of G, then N [u] denotes the closed neighborhood of u. If v is another vertex then we set N [u, v]= N [u] ∩ N [v].

A set D ⊆ V (G) is a dominating set of G if ∪u∈DN [u] = V (G). The domination number γ(G) is the size of a smallest dominating set of G. A dominating set of size γ(G) is called a γ-set of G.
The Maker-Breaker domination game is called a D-game (resp. S-game) if Domi- nator (resp. Staller) is the first to play a vertex. The sequence of vertices selected in a D-game will be denoted with d1, s1, d2, s2,.. ., and the sequence of vertices selected in an S-game with sj , dj , sj , dj ,... Suppose that Dominator wins a D-game. Then
1	1	2	2
the last vertex played is by Dominator, let it be dk. By the definition of the game,
{d1,..., dk} is a dominating set of G. Similarly, if Dominator wins an S-game and the last vertex played by Dominator is dj , then {dj ,..., dj } is a dominating set of
l	1	l
G. We say thata move of Staller isa double threat if it creates two possibilities for
her to win in the next move and consequently Dominator cannot prevent Staller to win.
Let G be a graph, k ≥ 1, and u1,..., uk, v1,..., vk pairwise different vertices of
G. Then we say that X = {{u1, v1},..., {uk, vk}} is a pairing dominating set if
k
N [ui, vi]= V (G) .
i=1
If X = {{u1, v1},..., {uk, vk}} is a pairing dominating set such that uivi ∈ E(G) holds for i ∈ [k], then we say that X is a dominating matching.
In the rest we will use this concept via the following interpretation proved in [12, Proposition 9].
Lemma 1.1 Let u1,..., uk, v1,..., vk be pairwise different vertices of a graph G, and let X = {{u1, v1},..., {uk, vk}}. Then X is a pairing dominating set if and only if every set {x1,..., xk}, where xi ∈ {ui, vi}, i ∈ [k], is a dominating set of G.
A direct application of this Lemma is the following fact.
Fact 1.2 [12, Proposition 10] If G admits a pairing dominating set, then Dominator has a winning strategy on G in the D-game as well as in the S-game.
The converse of Fact 1.2 does not hold in general. For instance, in [12, Figure 4] a chordal graph is presented on which Dominator has a winning strategy in both games but admits no pairing dominating set. On the other hand, the converse holds in the class of trees because if Dominator has a winning strategy on a tree T , then it was proved in [12] that T has a dominating matching. Moreover, the converse also holds for cographs.
Lemma 1.3 (No-Skip Lemma) In an optimal strategy of Dominator to achieve

γMB(G) or γj
(G) it is never an advantage for him to skip a move. Moreover, if

Staller skips a move it can only be an advantage for Dominator.
If G is a graph and S ⊆ V (G), then let G|S denote that graph G in which the vertices from S are declared to be already dominated, that is, Dominator is not obliged to dominate them in the rest of the game. Then we have the following

Continuation Principle, a proof of which is much simpler that the corresponding principle for the domination game [21].
Remark 1.4 (Continuation Principle) Let G be a graph with A, B ⊆ V (G). If

B ⊆ A, then γMB(G|A) ≤ γMB(G|B) and γj
(G|A) ≤ γj
(G|B).

Indeed, the remark follows from the fact that Dominator can apply the same strategy in G|A as in G|B.
Suppose that γMB(G) < ∞. Then in any winning strategy of Dominator, he will play at most half of the vertices (because Staller will play the other half) which in turn implies that
1 ≤ γMB(G) ≤	 .	(1)
n(G)

The bound is sharp, consider for instance the disjoint union of K1 and several copies of K2. It is also easy to see that all the possible values from (1) can be realized by considering the disjoint union of a complete graph and an appropriate number of

K2s. Similarly, for the S-game, assuming that γj
(G) < ∞, we have


1 ≤ γj
(G) ≤ , n(G), ,	(2)


where again all the values can be realized.
Later we will apply the celebrated Erd˝os-Selfridge Criterion for Maker-Breaker games that reads as follows.
Theorem 1.5 (Erd˝os-Selfridge Criterion [13]) If F is a hypergraph, then


2—|A| < 1
2
⇒ F is a Breaker’s win .

A∈7
This theorem together with its proof can also be found in the book [16, Theorem 2.3.3].
Maker-Breaker domination numbers

In this section we first compare γMB(G) with γj
(G) and construct graphs for all

possible values of the invariants. In the second part we compare γMB(G) with the domination number and using the Erd˝os-Selfridge Criterion find a large class of graphs G for which γMB(G) > γ(G) holds.
Realizations of Maker-Breaker domination numbers
One of the fundamental theorems on the domination game proved in [4,21] asserts that the difference between the value of the game domination number when Domina- tor starts and when Staller starts is bounded by 1, that is to say |γg(G) −γj (G)|≤ 1 holds for every graph G. The next result reveals that the situation with the Maker- Breaker domination number is dramatically different.

Theorem 2.1 If G is a graph, then γ(G) ≤ γMB(G) ≤ γj
(G). Moreover, for any

integers r, s, t, where 2 ≤ r ≤ s ≤ t, there exists a graph G such that γ(G) = r,

γMB(G)= s, and γj
(G) = t.

Note that if γ(G) = 1, then also γMB(G) = 1. Hence Theorem 2.1 does not extend to the case r = 1. On the other hand, if Gt, t ≥ 1, is the graph obtained from t disjoint triangles by identifying a vertex from each of the triangles (so that

this new vertex is of degree 2t), then γ(Gt)= 1, γMB(Gt) = 1, and γj
(Gt)= t.

Theorem 2.1 extends also to highly connected graphs. To see this, consider the graphs Hk,r,s,t, 2 ≤ r ≤ s ≤ t, k ≥ 1, that are schematically drawn in Fig. 1. Here, each vertex of a Kk clique is adjacent to each vertex of the clique Kk+r. One can

see that γ(Hk,r,s,t)= r, γMB(Hk,r,s,t)= s, and γj
(Hk,r,s,t)= t. Moreover, Hk,r,s,t

is (k + 1)-connected.
t — r +1	s — r +1 

Fig. 1. Graph Hk,r,s,t


Relation with the domination number
As already observed above, γMB(G) = 1 if and only if γ(G) = 1. In general it would be interesting to characterize the graphs G such that γMB(G) = γ(G) = k, where k ≥ 2 is a fixed integer. For k = 2 the answer is simple:
Proposition 2.2 Let G be a graph with γ(G) = 2. Then γMB(G) = γ(G) = 2 if and only if G has a vertex that lies in at least two γ-sets of G.
Proposition 2.2 can be rephrased to hold for larger k also, but this would be more or less just rephrasing the definitions. It would be more interesting to find a structural characterization of the corresponding graphs. This task, however, seems difficult. On the other hand, the Erd˝os-Selfridge Criterion gives a sufficient condi- tion for γMB(G) > γ(G). Let Xγ(G) be the number of γ-sets of a graph G, cf. [9]. Then:
Proposition 2.3 If G is a graph and Xγ(G) < 2γ(G)—1, then γMB(G) > γ(G).
Consider the cycles C3k—1, k ≥ 1. It is known and easy to see that γ(C3k—1)= 
k. We now determine the number of γ-sets of C3k—1. Each vertex from a γ-set

dominates itself and its two neighbors. As there are k such triplets and 3k − 1 vertices in the graph, there is only one vertex that is dominated by two vertices from the γ-set, all others are dominated exactly once. Thus if the vertex that is dominated twice is fixed, then the γ-set of the cycle is uniquely determined. As there are 3k − 1 choices for this vertex, we have Xγ(C3k—1)= 3k − 1. If k ≥ 5, then Xγ(C3k—1)= 3k − 1 < 2k—1 = 2γ(C3k−1)—1, and by Proposition 2.3, we conclude that γMB(C3k—1) > k = γ(C3k—1). Actually, γMB(C3k—1) is much bigger than γg(C3k—1) as we will see in Section 4.
The converse of Proposition 2.3 does not hold as the following example shows. If k ∈ {3, 4}, then Xγ(C3k—1)= 3k − 1 > 2k—1 = 2γ(C3k−1)—1, but as we will see in Section 4, γ(C3k—1)= k < k +1 = 3k—1 = γMB(C3k—1).
Residual graphs
In this section we study the Maker-Breaker domination number on a construction that might be of independent interest and that will be later used to determine the invariant for trees.
If G is a graph, then we say that the residual graph R(G) of G is the graph obtained from G by iteratively removing pendant paths P2 until no such path is present. By a pendant P2 we mean P2 attached to G with an edge. Hence, when such a pendant P2 is removed, exactly two vertices and two edges are removed. When G = P2, we can also remove it and obtain the empty graph.
Note that H = R(G) for some graph G if and only if H is the empty graph, H = K1, or each support vertex of H has degree at least 3. This is in particular true if H has no support vertices. We further observe:
Lemma 3.1 If G is a graph, then R(G) is unique (up to isomorphism).
Note that also that if R(G) /= K1, then G \ V (R(G)) is unique. To see that it is not unique in general, consider a path P2k+1, k ≥ 2, and different sequences of removing pendant P2s.
Lemma 3.2 Let G be a graph and R(G) a residual graph of G. Then
G \ V (R(G)) is a forest that has a unique perfect matching, and
G has a perfect matching if and only if R(G) has a perfect matching.
For the proof of the main result of this section, we also need the following.
Lemma 3.3 If T is a tree that admits a perfect matching and v ∈ V (T ), then Staller has a strategy for the S-game such that Dominator has to select at least n(T )
vertices to dominate T and v is played by Staller in her last move.
Proof. We prove the claim by induction on n(T ). If T = P2 and v ∈ V (P2), then Staller can play on v and Dominator has to reply on the other vertex.
Let now n(T ) ≥ 4 and consider T as a BFS-tree rooted at an arbitrary vertex
r. Let x be a leaf of this BFS-tree at the largest distance from r and let y be the

neighbor of x. Then deg(y) = 2 because T has a perfect matching. Let z be the other neighbor of y. Set T j = T \ {x, y}. As T has a perfect matching, xy belongs to it, hence T j also has a perfect matching. If v ∈ V (T j), then Staller starts on y, Dominator has to reply on x (otherwise Staller would win) and then Staller applies her strategy on T j (by the induction hypothesis). If v ∈ {x, y}, then she applies her strategy on T j with her last move on z, and then plays v in her last move. Note that if Dominator plays on v while Staller is playing on T j, then Staller wins the game as she can prevent Dominator from playing on one pair of vertices from the matching in T j.
From the above strategy of Staller we conclude that the total number of Domi- nator’s moves was n(T ′) +1 = n(T ) .	2
2	2
Note that by the strategy from the proof of lemma 3.3, unless Staller wants to play on a leaf, she plays on the support vertex, forcing Dominator to reply on its neighboring leaf and separating this P2 from the rest of the graph.
Theorem 3.4 Let R(G) be a residual graph of G and let H = G \ V (R(G)). Then

γj	(G)= n(H) + γj
(R(G)),

MB	2	MB
n(H) + γMB(R(G)) − 1 ≤ γMB(G) ≤ n(H) + γMB(R(G)).
2	2
Proof. (i) H has a perfect matching and is a forest by Lemma 3.2(i). Let S-game be played on G and consider the following strategy of Staller. By Lemma 3.3 she can play on each tree of H and play last on the vertex of this tree adjacent to R(G). Dominator has to reply on the matching (otherwise Staller wins the game). Thus, Dominator makes (at least) n(H) moves on H. Moreover, Staller plays on vertices adjacent to R(G), hence no vertex in R(G) will be dominated by the time Staller makes her first move in R(G). Next, Staller is the player to make the first move

on R(G) and she follows her optimal strategy there to ensure at least γj
(R(G))

moves of Dominator.
On the other hand, Dominator’s strategy is to then reply wherever Staller plays,
H or R(G), with its strategy on this graph. As H has a perfect matching, Dominator

makes no more than n(H)
moves on H. Moreover, he makes at most γj
(R(G))

moves on R(G). Hence, we have γj	(G)= n(H) + γj
(R(G)).

MB	2	MB
(ii) Suppose now that the D-game is played on G. To prove the upper bound,
Dominator’s strategy is to start on R(G) and then reply on R(G) or H if Staller plays there. As H has a perfect matching, Dominator makes no more than n(H) moves on H. Moreover, he makes at most γMB(R(G)) moves on R(G). Hence we get the upper bound γMB(G) ≤ n(H) + γMB(R(G)).
To prove the lower bound, consider the following strategy of Staller depending on the first move of Dominator. We will distinguish two cases, the second with two subcases, which are schematically depicted in Fig. 2.
The first move of Dominator is on R(G).
Staller first applies her strategy from Lemma 3.3 on each tree of H, playing the vertex adjacent to R(G) as her last move on each of the trees. With this,




Case 2.1

Case 1

Case 2.2
Fig. 2. Representations of the cases from the proof of Theorem 3.4

she forces Dominator to play (at least) n(H) moves on H. After that we have an ordinary D-game played on R(G), so at least γMB(R(G)) moves are made on it by Dominator if Staller follows her strategy there.
The first move of Dominator is on H.
Let d1 be the vertex Dominator plays in his first move, let T be the connected component of H containing d1 (recall that T is a tree), let P be the shortest path between d1 and R(G) in T , and let M be the unique perfect matching of T (cf. Lemma 3.2(i)).
In this case, Staller first applies her strategy from Lemma 3.3 on all the other trees of H, playing the vertex adjacent to R(G) as her last move on each tree. Next, Staller applies her strategy from Lemma 3.3 on the edges from M , which are not incident with P . Additionally, she plays last on the vertices closest to
P . After that, only R(G), P , and maybe some vertices adjacent to P , remain undominated.
At least one vertex adjacent to P is still undominated (see Fig. 2).
Let u be an undominated vertex adjacent to P . Staller plays on its neighbor on P , forcing Dominator to reply on u. Staller does so on each such vertex. After that, the only undominated vertices lie on P , moreover, up to now, at least one move of Dominator was played on each already completely dominated edge from M .
As long as there are some more undominated edges from M on P , at least one of them, say e ∈ M , is incident to a vertex s of P already played by Staller. Her strategy is to play on the vertex of e which is at distance 2 from s. Then Dominator has to reply on the other vertex of e, otherwise Staller wins by playing it. Hence, Staller can force Dominator to reply on all remaining edges.

The only undominated vertices in H lie on P .
Staller’s strategy is to play on the vertex v of P at distance 3 from d1. Dominator has to reply on a neighbor of v, otherwise one of the neighbors of v is not dominated and Staller can win by playing that vertex and creating a double threat. Indeed, in this case, two undominated adjacent vertices are played by Staller, and no matter where Dominator answers, she can play another consecutive vertex and win the game.
Let xi be a vertex at distance i from v on P in the direction of d1, and yi be a vertex at distance i from v on P in the direction of R(G) for all possible i ≥ 1, see Fig. 2 again.
If Dominator replies on x1, then Staller’s next move is y2. Now, Domi- nator has to reply on y1, otherwise Staller wins. Then Staller repeats this strategy until P is dominated, i.e., she plays on the vertices y2k in the increasing order, and Dominator is forced to reply on y2k—1.
If Dominator replies on y1, then Staller replies on x2. After that, Dom- inator has to play x1. Next, Staller applies the same strategy as before, taking y1 as the new d1.
In both cases, Dominator is forced to play at least one move on each edge of the matching M , hence at least n(T ) moves are made on T . On H − T , at
least n(H—T ) moves are made by Lemma 3.3.
After T is completely dominated, Staller follows her optimal strategy on R(G), but it might happen that one vertex u in R(G) is already dominated (by a move of Dominator in H close to R(G)). As Staller’s strategy on H forces Dominator to answer on H, Staller will be the first player to play on
R(G). But as she can imagine that Dominator’s move was u, we have


j	(R(G)|u) ≥ γj
(R(G)|N [u]) ≥ γMB(R(G)) − 1 ,

hence the total number of moves on R(G) is at least γMB(R(G)) − 1.
In either case, Dominator played at least n(H) + γMB(R(G)) − 1 moves, which proves the lower bound.	2
Note that in the inequality γj	(G|u) ≥ γMB(G) − 1 from the above proof, the
equality can be attained. For example, consider the graph G on Fig. 3. Clearly,

γMB(G)=2 and γj
(G|u)= 1.

u
Fig. 3. The graph G with the property γ′  (G|u)= γMB(G) — 1.
Appending to G some trees with perfect matchings, where at least one of them is attached to u, we get graphs that attain the lower bound from Theorem 3.4(ii). To conclude the section we apply the residual construction to determine the Maker-Breaker domination number of trees. This contrasts the domination game
where no such result is known, cf. [5,17,18].

Theorem 3.5 If T a tree, then

⎪	∼
⎨ n(T )—1 ;	R(T ) = K1,
2	;	R(T ) = K1,k for k ≥ 3,
⎪



and
⎩∞;	otherwise,

  n(T ) ;	T has a perfect matching,



Note that by Theorem 3.5, γMB and γj
of trees are polynomial.

Cycles
The D-game domination number and the S-game domination number of cycles are given with the following formulas:
  n − 1;	n ≡ 3	mod 4,	j	  n—1 − 1;	n ≡ 2	mod 4,

γg(Cn)= 
 n ;	otherwise,	γg (Cn)= 
 n—1 ;	otherwise.


This fundamental result was first obtained in an unpublished manuscript [20]. The result appeared for the first time in press in the paper [19], where an alternative proof is given. For the total domination game, parallel results were obtain in [10]. The latter paper investigates the total domination game on paths and cycles only. So the (total) game domination number of cycles is far from being straightforward. Here we determine the Maker-Breaker domination number of cycles, a task that turned out to be less involved.
Using Lemma 1.1 and Fact 1.2 it is easy to see that Dominator has a winning strategy on even cycles. By observing that removing the neighborhood of any vertex of an odd cycles leaves this graph with a perfect matching we can also see that Dominator has a winning strategy on odd cycles. However it is interesting to remark that Dominator cannot do better than these strategies.
Theorem 4.1 If n ≥ 3, then


γMB
(Cn

)= γj

(Cn
)=  n  .

Concluding remarks
To conclude the paper we list several problems and directions for further investiga- tion of the Maker-Breaker domination number.
For the upper bound in (1) we have provided examples of graphs that attain the equality. These examples are not connected and it is not difficult to achieve

the equality with connected graphs of even order. However, we do not know of any connected graph of odd order (different from K1) for which the equality in (1) is achieved. More generally, we ask for a characterization of the extremal graphs with respect to (1) and (2).
As we already mentioned, it would be interesting to find a structural charac- terization of the graphs G for which γMB(G) = γ(G) = k holds, where k ≥ 2 is a fixed integer.

It would also be interesting to investigate γMB(G  H) and γj
(G  H), where

G and H are arbitrary graphs and G  H is the Cartesian product of G and
H.  In particular, it would be interesting to determine γMB(Pn  Pm) (and

j	(Pn  Pm)), as well as γMB(G  K2) (and γj
(G  K2)) for an arbitrary

graph G.
If G is a cograph, then it is not difficult to determine whether Dominator or Staller wins the Maker-Breaker domination game [12]. On the other hand, it does not seem straightforward to determine the Maker-Breaker domination numbers of cographs.
In this paper we have considered the Maker-Breaker domination number which is an optimization problem from Dominator’s point of view. It would likewise be of interest to consider the Staller’s point of view, that is, assuming that Staller wins on a graph G, what is the minimum number of moves with which she can achieve the goal?

References
Beck, J., ”Combinatorial Games”, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2008.
Bednarska, M. and T. L- uczak, Biased positional games for which random strategies are nearly optimal, Combinatorica 20 (2000) 477–488.
Ben-Shimon, S., M. Krivelevich and B. Sudakov, Local resilience and Hamiltonicity maker-breaker games in random regular graphs, Combin. Probab. Comput. 20 (2011) 173–211.
Breˇsar, B., S. Klavˇzar and D. F. Rall, Domination game and an imagination strategy, SIAM J. Discrete Math. 24 (2010) 979–991.
Breˇsar, B., S. Klavˇzar and D. F. Rall, Domination game played on trees and spanning subgraphs, Discrete Math. 313 (2013) 915–923.
Bujtas, C., On the game domination number of graphs with given minimum degree, Electron. J. Combin. 22 (2015) #P3.29.
Clemens, D., A. Ferber, M. Krivelevich and A. Liebenau, Fast strategies in Maker-Breaker games played on random boards, Combin. Probab. Comput. 21 (2012) 897–915.
Clemens, D. and M. Mikalaˇcki, How fast can Maker win in fair biased games?, Discrete Math. 341 (2018) 51–66.
Connolly, S., Z. Gabor, A. Godbole, B. Kay and T. Kelly, Bounds on the maximum number of minimum dominating sets, Discrete Math. 339 (2016) 1537–1542.
Dorbec, P. and M. A. Henning, Game total domination for cycles and paths, Discrete Appl. Math. 208 (2016) 7–18.
Dorbec, P., G. Koˇsmrlj and G. Renault, The domination game played on unions of graphs, Discrete Math. 338 (2015) 71–79.

Duchˆene, E., V. Gledel, A. Parreau and G. Renault, Maker-Breaker domination game, arXiv:1807.09479 [cs.DM] (25 Jul 2018).
Erd˝os, P. and J. L. Selfridge, On a combinatorial game, J. Combinatorial Theory Ser. A 14 (1973) 298–301.
Ferber, A., M. Krivelevich and G. Kronenberg, Efficient winning strategies in random-turn Maker- Breaker games, J. Graph Theory 85 (2017) 446–465.
Hefetz, D., M. Krivelevich, M. Stojakovi´c and T. Szab´o, Fast winning strategies in Maker-Breaker games, J. Combin. Theory Ser. B 99 (2009) 39–47.
Hefetz, D., M. Krivelevich, M. Stojakovi´c and T. Szabo´, ”Positional Games”, Birkh¨auser/Springer, Basel, 2014.
Henning, M. A. and C. L¨owenstein, Domination game: extremal families for the 3/5-conjecture for forests, Discuss. Math. Graph Theory 37 (2017) 369–381.
Henning, M. A. and D. F. Rall, Trees with equal total domination and game total domination numbers, Discrete Appl. Math. 226 (2017) 58–70.
Koˇsmrlj, G., Domination game on paths and cycles, Ars Math. Contemp. 24 (2017) 125–136.
Kinnersley, W. B., D. B. West and R. Zemani, Game domination for grid-like graphs, manuscript, 2012.
Kinnersley, W. B., D. B. West and R. Zemani, Extremal problems for game domination number, SIAM
J. Discrete Math. 27 (2013) 2090–2107.
Nadjafi-Arani, M. J., M. Siggers and H. Soltani, Characterisation of forests with trivial game domination numbers, J. Comb. Optim. 32 (2016) 800–811.
Schmidt, S., The 3/5-conjecture for weakly S(K1,3)-free forests, Discrete Math. 339 (2016) 2767–2774.
Xu, K., X. Li, S. Klavˇzar, On graphs with largest possible game domination number, Discrete Math. 341 (2018) 1768–1777.
