


Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 56 (2001) http://www.elsevier.nl/locate/entcs/volume56.html  190 pages




Formal Veri cation based on
Boolean Expression Diagrams



Poul Frederick Williams



























 c 2001 Published by Elsevier Science B. V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.










Abstract



This dissertation examines the use of a new data structure called Boolean Expression Diagrams (BEDs) in the area of formal veri cation. The recently developed data structure allows fast and eÆcient manipulation of Boolean formulae. Many problems in formal veri cation can be cast as problems on Boolean formulae. We chose a number of such problems and show how to solve them using BEDs.
Equivalence checking of combinational circuits is a formal veri cation problem which translates into tautology checking of Boolean formulae. Us- ing BEDs we are able to preserve much of the structure of the circuits within the Boolean formulae. We show how to exploit the structural information in the veri cation process.
Sometimes combinational circuits are speci ed in a hierarchical or mod- ular way. We present a method for verifying equivalence between two such circuits. The method builds on cut propagation. Assuming that the two circuits are given identical inputs, we propagate this knowledge through the circuits from the inputs to the outputs. The result is the knowledge of how the outputs of the two circuits correspond, e.g., are the outputs of the two circuits pairwise equivalent? The circuits and the movements of cuts can be described using Boolean formulae.
Symbolic model checking is a technique for verifying temporal speci - cations of nite state machines. It is well known how nite state machines and the evaluation of the temporal speci cations can be expressed using Boolean formulae. We show how to do these manipulations using BEDs. We concentrate on examples which are hard for standard symbolic model checking methods.
Determining whether a formula is satis ability is a problem which occurs in veri cation of combinational circuits and in symbolic model checking. Often satis ability checking is associated with detecting errors. We examine how satis ability checking can be done using the BED data structure.
Finally, we take a look at how it is possible to extend the BED data

iii

iv


structure. Among other operations, we introduce an operator for computing minimal p-cuts in fault trees. A fault tree is a Boolean formula expressing whether a system fails based on the condition (\failure" or \working") of each of the components. A minimal p-cut is a representation of the most likely reasons for system failure. This method can be used to calculate approximately the probability of system failure given the failure probabilities of each of the components.
As part of this research, we have developed a BED package. The ap- pendix describes the package from a user's point of view.

Note Added in Print
This book is a slight revision of the author's Ph.D. thesis [Wil00].
