Available online at www.sciencedirect.com


Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 293 (2013) 83–96
www.elsevier.com/locate/entcs

Parameter Identification and Assessment of Nutrient Transporters in AM Symbiosis through Stochastic Simulations ?
Eva Sciaccaa,1 Salvatore Spinellaa,1 Cristina Calcagnoa,b,2 Ferruccio Damiani a,1 Mario Coppo a,1
a Universit`a di Torino, Dipartimento di Informatica
b Universit`a di Torino, Dipartimento di Biologia Vegetale

Abstract
This paper presents a methodology for identifying the kinetic parameters of a biological system and their relationships with the concentration variations of the species by means of in silico experiments. A nonlinear goal programming technique is employed to identify the kinetic parameters that best satisfy the biological hypothesis of the system behaviour. The simulations are performed on a stochastic simulator for the Calculus of Wrapped Compartments. The extraction of parameters with optimization techniques is usually applied to systems modeled by means of differential equations. Its application in a stochastic framework is rather new. The methodology may open a new path for the investigation of a broader class of biochemical systems (including those that cannot be easily modeled by differential equations) when in vitro experimental measurements are unavailable. The methodology is applied to model the nutrient exchanges in arbuscular mycorrhiza, the most wide-spread plant/fungus symbiosis focusing in particular to a newly discovered ammonium transporter: LjAMT2;2. This case study of ammonia and phosphate plant uptake from the fungus has been dissected in known and hypothetical mechanisms. The results of the analysis provide setting of recent experimental results of carrier LjAMT2;2 and support new insights into biological hypotheses to be put in place.
Keywords: Systems Biology, Formal Calculi, CWC, Mycorrhizal Symbiosis, Optimization, Parameter Identification


Introduction
The modelling of biological systems must tackle problems such as incomplete or un- certain data and qualitative information about the relationships among the various elements of the system [17]. Optimisation techniques are often used for parameter identification in the context of biochemical systems: given a set of experimental

٨ This research is funded by the BioBITs Project (Converging Technologies 2007, area: Biotechnology-ICT), Regione Piemonte
1 Email: {eva.sciacca,salvatore.spinella,ferruccio.damiani,mario.coppo}@unito.it
2 Email: cristina.calcagno@unito.it

1571-0661 © 2013 Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.entcs.2013.02.020

data, calibrate the model in order to reproduce the experimental results at best [25,43,31] or attempting to use constraints based modeling to achieve desired perfor- mance as it has been done using linear programming [42,40] or non-linear downhill methods [26]. The parameter identification problem, however, is usually applied to models in which the biological system are described essentially by differential equations.
This paper presents a methodology to coordinate the data resulting from the analysis of a sequence of stochastic simulations into an optimization flow in order to identify unknown parameters related to metabolic activities. Only recently, this problem has been addressed in the context of stochastic simulations [33]. The aim is to provide biologists with a tool to assess unknown quantities by means of in-silico experiments.
A useful and flexible tool of mathematical programming to solve this kind of problems is the goal programming [22,34]. It uses a special formulation of the prob- lems that can easily be “translated” in terms of constrained minimization that allows to phrase the search of a good parametrization to control the system through several objectives. Moreover, unlike the multi-objective stochastic search methods based on evolutionary paradigms [24], the goal programming represents the problem as a set of constraints and develops solutions to satisfy them with less computational effort. The formulation of goal programming allows to define the parametrization of a biological model in terms of performance metrics that must be satisfied. Each of these performance measure is then translated into a goal. The overall objec- tives, together with constraints that the biological system must satisfy, analyse the model parametrization in the search space. This approach allows to deal with bi- ological systems for which information derived from experimental data are poor and which rely mainly on biological hypotheses or assumptions. In goal program- ming approach for multiobjective optimization [29], the relations among targets are analysed in order to describe the model behaviours. Thus the designer is able to assess incrementally, goal by goal, the consistency of the model to experimental data, required constraints, and quantitative assumptions.
The proposed methodology is applied to model a recently discovered ammonium transporter [19] which acquires minerals for plants in a plant-fungus symbiosis. In this kind of systems, flux measurements capturing all metabolic processes are very poor due to the difficulty of in vivo experiments. The information obtained from the model parameter identification provides an indirect measure of the chemical energy (provided by H+-ATPases pumps) necessary for plants and fungi to sustain the symbiotic exchange of nutrients. This measure enables a biologist to do an assessment of the difference between the two LjAMT in their efficiency in ammonium traslocation in terms of the source of energy that they use, and the consequent operation of other transporters involved in nutrients exchange.
The underlying biological system was represented in the Calculus of Wrapped Compartments (CWC) [10,8,9] which allows a natural description of a large class of biological systems by providing a direct representation of the notions of membrane and compartment. The CWC, moreover, is provided with an efficient stochastic



Fig. 1. A graphical representation of (a b c ♩ (d e ♩ •)Æ' f g)Æ

simulator which exploits in an efficient way multi-core architectures [3,11] and with a tools supporting on-line parallel statistical analysis of results to extract the be- havioural features of biological systems [2].
The paper is organized as follow. Section 2 recalls the CWC framework. Section 3 describes the goal programming methodology. Section 4 illustrates the nutrient transport model in AM symbiosis. Section 5 presents the results of this analysis expounding the methodology. Section 6 briefly discusses related work and Section 7 concludes the paper.
The Calculus of Wrapped Compartments Framework
The Calculus of Wrapped Compartments (CWC) [10,8,9] has been designed to de- scribe biological entities by means of a nested structure of ambients delimited by membranes.
The terms of the calculus are built on a set of atoms (representing species e.g. molecules, proteins or DNA strands) , ranged over by a, b, .. ., and on a set of labels (representing compartment types e.g. cells or tissues), ranged over by l,.. .. A term is a multiset t of simple terms where a simple term is either an atom a or a compartment (a ♩ tj)l consisting of a wrap (a multiset of atoms a), a content (a term tj) and a type (represented as a label l). For uniformity we assume that the term representing the whole system is always a single compartment labelled by the distinguished label T with an empty wrap. Multisets are denoted by listing the elements separated by a space. The empty multiset is denoted by •. As usual, the notation n∗t to denotes n occurrences of the simple term t. For instance, the term 2 ∗a (b c ♩a b)l represents a multiset containing two occurrences of the atom a and an l-type compartment (b c ♩a b)l which, in turn, consists of a wrap with two atoms b and c on its surface, and containing the atoms a and b. See Figure 1 for a pictorial representation of a term.
Interaction between biological entities are described by rewriting rules written as l : p¯ → o¯ where p¯ (the pattern) and o¯ are terms built on an extended set of atomic elements which includes term variables (ranged over by X, Y ,...) and wrap variables (ranged over by x, y,...). The label l represents the compartment type to which the rule can be applied. An example of rewrite rule is l : a b X → c X that is often written as l : a b → c giving X for understood to simplify notations. 3 The application of a rule l : p¯ → o¯ to a term t consists in finding (if it exists) a subterm u in a compartment of type l such that u = σ(p¯) for a ground substitution σ and

3 We force exactly one variable to occur in each compartment content and wrap of patterns. This prevents ambiguities in the instantiations needed to match a given compartment.



Fig. 2. Parameter Identification Flow incorporating the CWC Simulator

replacing it with σ(o¯) in t obtaining a new term tj. We write t → tj to mean that
tj can be obtained from t by applying a rewrite rule.
The leading algorithm in the stochastic simulation of well-mixed systems is that presented by Gillespie [14]. In Gillespie’s algorithm each considered chemical re- action is associated with a rate which is used as the parameter of an exponential distribution modeling the probability that the reaction takes place. In CWC this rate is obtained by applying a function, associated to each rule (notation l : p¯ →f o¯), to the contents of the compartment in which the rule is applied. To model the stan- dard mass action law this function is evaluated by multiplying the kinetic constant of the reaction by the number of possible combinations of reactants that may oc-
cur in the compartment. In this case a stochastic rule is written as l : p¯ →k o¯
where k represents the kinetic constant of the corresponding reaction 4 . The CWC simulator [3,2,11] implements Gillespie’s algorithm on CWC terms. It can handle CWC models with different rating semantics (mass action law, Michaelis-Menten kinetics, Hill equation) and it can run independent stochastic simulations, featur- ing deep parallel optimizations for multi-core platforms exploiting the FastFlow [1] technology.

The Goal Programming Methodology
Mathematical programming techniques, such as multiobjective optimization [36,39], can help in the definition and in the parametrization of biomodels. Model-based optimization is a key methodology system design and analysis. In some cases there is a need to optimize more than one system performance in order to set up a kinetic model and no single performance dominates all the others [13]. With the multiob- jective approach, a system performance is described by a vector-valued measure in which the components are the individual performance functions. By using a perfor- mance vector, the condition characterizing a compromise solution can be expressed in an analytic form so that trade-off alternatives can be determined directly with conventional optimization techniques [34]. This condition, which follows the ordi- nary meaning of compromise, is simply that: “No improvement in any component

4 The reaction rate in this case is obtained, as usual, by multiplying the kinetic constant by the number of possible combinations of the reagents

can be achieved except at the expense of a degradation in at least one of the other components”. A vector for which this condition holds is called a non-inferior, and is a pivot point where a compromise or trade-off would be made. Furthermore, the set of all such vectors describes the complete range of compromise solutions available. Expressed analytically, this condition becomes an optimality criterion for optimization with a vector (multiobjective optimization).
The methodology developed in this study concerns the integration of the CWC simulator in a simulation flow in order to identify parameters related to the model rules. Figure 2 describes this integration where an initial guessing of parameters is processed in a loop to improve the target matching until a consistent biological behaviour is achieved. The simulator is used to compute a vector of functions f of the parameter set under consideration (e.g. the rate of some rules). Each function fi of the vector computes a statistical quantity of the biological system (for instance the mean value of a population) on a set of simulations. A vector of numerical values g∗, representing the goals to be satisfied, is assigned to the statistics f . The goals model the biological behaviours under investigation.
In the goal attainment method, non inferior index vector are found by solving the following parametrised problem:


min
λ∈R+,x∈X
(λ)	such that	f1(x) − w1λ ≤ g∗
··· fn(x) − wnλ ≤ g∗


where x ∈ X is the vector of parameters under consideration and fi(x) are the statistical values computed by the simulator, λ ∈ R+ is a slack variable and the wi represents the weights assigned to the various goals. The minimization of the scalar λ leads to the finding of a nondominated solution which under or overattains the specified goals to a degree represented by the quantities wiλ. The terms wiλ intro- duce an element of (relative) slackness into the problem, which otherwise imposes that the goals g∗ be rigidly met. The values assigned to each goal g∗ can be inter- preted as the desired level of the corresponding i-th performance. It is assumed that the decision maker has a sufficient intuitive understanding of the problem at hand to know what values he/she would like to attain for each of the performances. In many cases, goal values already exist in the form of specifications (such as biochem- ical ratios and concentrations). Suppose, for example, that the goal vector selected, g∗, is not attainable. If wi is small in relation to the other weighting coefficients, the under-attainment fi(x) − g∗ will also be small. That is, the relative magnitude of wi will determine how near fi(x) will be to g∗. By using different wi weighting coefficient values, alternative non-inferior solutions with varying degrees of under- attainment can be found. Using this approach in the goal attainment method, a trade-off is made by sacrificing the attainment of one goal for that of another.
The goal programming is represented geometrically in Figure 3 in the case of a vector of two goals, g∗ = (g∗, g∗), that we consider equally important (i.e. w1 = w2),
1	2
where m(λ) = wλ denotes a point of the search line with the direction given by
w into a feaseble region F , and gs = (gs, gs) is the convergence point to the best
1	2
solution.




Fig. 3. Geometrical Representation of the Goal Programming

Fig. 4. The scheme illustrates nitrogen, phosphorus and sucrose exchanges at the mycorrhizal interface according to [19].
Nutrient Transport Model in AM Symbiosis
Arbuscular Mycorrhizal (AM) fungi are particularly important in organic farming systems which rely on biological processes, rather than agrochemicals, to supply nutrients and to control weeds, pests and diseases. The mutualistic nature of their interactions with plants is based on nutritional exchanges: AM fungi depend on a carbon flux from plants, in return, they supply plants with nutrients, such as nitrogen and phosphate. The scheme in Figure 4 illustrates nitrogen and phosphorus exchanges at the mycorrhizal interface according to previous works and the results of [19,18] on Lotus japonicus roots colonized with the fungus Gigaspora margarita.
Our study focuses on a balance of acidity of the periarbuscular space (PAS) that supports the exchange of nutrients between the plant and the fungus.
Nitrogen Uptake. Nitrogen (N ) is one of the nutrient for which mycorrhizal fungi play a crucial role: plants are in fact completely dependent on N availability in the

soil for their growth and productivity [15]. The way in which N is transferred from the AM fungi to their host is still under debate. N H3/NH4+ is thought to be the preferential form of N released by the fungus [7]. Five high affinity ammonium transporters (AMT) have been described so far in Lotus japonicus, three of which belong to the AMT1 and two to the AMT2 family. Gene expression anlysis on Lotus japonicus roots colonized by Gigaspora Margarita have revealed that LjAMT2;2 was the highest up-regulated gene [19] in the arbusculated cells which are the root cells containing the mychorrizal interface (Periarbuscular Space) between plants and AM fungi. According to [19] the LjAMT2;2 is a functional transporter that recruits from the PAS the NH4+ ion that is deprotonated prior to its transport across the membrane and then releases it in its uncharged NH3 form into the plant cytoplasm in a pH dependent manner. The structural features of the transporter and the transport experiments suggested that the transporter LjAMT2;2 makes up to 99.998% of the total NH3/NH4+ in the periarbuscular space, which has been demonstrated to have an acid pH of approximately 4.5. Together with the protons, which are actively transported into the PAS by the plant H+-ATPases, the protons coming from the NH4+ deprotonation process remain in the interface space and maintain or even reinforce the gradient for H+-dependent transport processes. This indirect coupling of proton-dependent and proton-independent transport processes reduces the transport costs that are paid by the plant.
Phosphate Uptake. Phosphorous is one of the mineral nutrients essential for plant growth and development. In symbiotic association with AM fungi, plants profit from phosphate acquired by the extensive network of extra radical hyphae. The primary source of phosphorus for plants is inorganic phosphate (P i) [32,23]. Pi exists in several different forms in solution and the concentration of each form varies as a function of pH. The pK values for the dissociation of H3PO4 into H2PO− is
2.1. Therefore, below pH 6.0 most Pi will be present as the monovalent H2PO−
species, while the other two species, HPO−− and PO−−−, will be only present in
4	4
minor proportions and are neglected from the model. Several studies on the pH
dependency of Pi uptake into plant cells have demonstrated that uptake rates are highest between pH 4.5 and 6.0, where the H2PO− species is predominant. Thus, it has been suggested that Pi is taken up as H2PO− across the plasma membrane into the plant cell. Root cells absorb Pi not only against the steep concentration gradient between the soil solution and the cytosol, as the monovalent Pi anion additionally has to overcome the negative membrane potential that is characteristic for plant cells. The combination of both factors emphasises the requirement for energised transport of Pi across the plasma membrane making use of H+-ATPase pumps. In Lotus japonicus the uptake of phosphate is mediated by a mycorrhiza-specific Pi transporter (LjPT4) which transport H2PO− [18]. Members of this family are H2PO−/H+ symporters. H2PO− ions and protons move from the outside of the
4	4
plant membrane to the inside through the inner pore of the transporter protein
structure. Analogously to the process of nitrogen uptake, plant H+-ATPase must pump protons to the outer surface of the membrane inside the PAS in order to maintain an electrochemical potential gradient and to energize the process.

Sucrose Uptake. Plant-derived carbon is released into the periarbuscular space probably as Sucrose and then cleaved into hexoses which are acquired by AM fungi [37,38]. Hexoses are transported over their membrane by so far unknown hexose transporters. It is likely that these transporters are proton cotransporters as the GpMST1 described for the glomeromycotan fungus Geosiphon pyriformis [35].
Reactions in the Model. Kinetic models for various metabolic pathways and regulatory circuits have been developed. However, only a few modelling analyses have been reported for the ammonia/ammonium assimilation pathways. A recent work [28] presented a detailed kinetic model for the complex ammonium assim- ilation regulation system of Escherichia coli but no relevant works are found in AM symbiosis systems. According to [19] N H3/NH4+ is released from the fungus in the periarbuscular space from arginine, which is transported from the extra- to the intra-radical fungal structures. It is hypothesized that NH4+ is released from the fungus into the periarbuscular space by so far unknown mechanisms (transporter, diffusion, or vesicle mediated), where, due to the acidic environment, its ratio shifts toward N H4+ (99.99%). The N H4+ ion is deprotonated prior to its transport across the plant membrane via the LjAMT2;2 protein and released in its uncharged NH3 form into the plant cytoplasm. The NH3/NH4+ acquired by the plant is then incorporated into amino acids. AM fungi might control the net Pi release by their own Pi transporters, which may reacquire phosphate from the periarbuscular space [4]. Phosphate is then released from the fungus to the PAS by so far unknown mechanisms into the interfacial apoplast while LjPT4 is the responsible for the plant uptake of H2PO—/H+. The biochemical reactions
occurring in the symbiosis are the following.
P : NH+ →ni •
P : H2PO− →pi •
P : • →ss C12H22O11
F : • →ns NH+
F : • →ps H2PO−
F : C6H12O6 →si •
F, P : NH3 H+ →kN1 NH+
F, P : NH+ →kN2 NH3 H+
F, P : H2PO− H+ →kP1 H3P O4
F, P : H3P O4 →kP2 H2PO−H+
T : (x ♩ X NH+)F →ntF NH+(x ♩ X)F
4	4
T : (x ♩ X H2PO−)F →ptF H2PO−(x ♩ X)F
4	4
T : (x ♩ X C12H22O11 H+)P →st C12H22O11 H+(x ♩ X)P
T : C6H12O6 H+ (x ♩ X)F →mst (x ♩ X C6H12O6 H+)F
T : C12H22O11 →Inv 2 ∗ C6H12O6
T : NH+ (x LjAMT 2; 2 ♩ X)P →kLjAMT 2;2 H+ (x LjAMT 2; 2 ♩ X NH3)P
T : H+ H2PO− (x LjP T 4 ♩ X)P →kLjP T 4 (x LjP T 4 ♩ X H+ H2PO−)P

4
+ P	kAT P
4
·{H+ −˙ occ(H+)}	+	P


T : (x AT P ase ♩ X H ) →
P	ph
H (x AT P ase ♩ X)


T : (x AT P ase ♩ X H+)F

→kAT PF
·{H+ −˙ occ(H+)}

H+(x AT P ase ♩ X)F

where occ(H+) denotes the number of H+ atoms occurring in the P or F compart- ment. To avoid the modeling of the process of water molecules dissociation only hydrogen ions H+ is considered in the model. The set of kinetic reactions adopted for the model is shown in CWC rules (1-19). Labels: F , T and P specify the biolog- ical compartments where reactions take place, respectively: fungus, periarbuscular space, and plant roots.
Reactions (1-6) describe the flux of nutrients furnished and internalized by the plant and the fungus. Reactions (7-10) represent the chemical conversion of nitro- gen (7-8) and phosphate (9-10) in the different compartments. Reactions (11-12) describe nutrient transport from the fungus to the PAS. Reactions (13-14) models the transport of sucrose from the plant to the PAS and then from the PAS to the fungus, respectively. In the PAS, sucrose is cleaved into hexose by means of reaction
(15). The reaction (16) models the transport of ammonia through LjAMT2;2, while reaction (17) model the transport of phosphate through LjPT4.
The acidity of the periarbuscular space is established by the plant/fungal H+- ATPases and other mechanisms [21,4] which provide the energy for H+-dependent transport processes. In order to model correctly chemical reactions at different pH it was important to add a formulation for H+ that was capable of reaching and keeping the right concentration in the PAS. The plant and fungus H+-ATPase pumps, transporting the protons into the interfacial apoplast, are modelled by reactions (18) and (19) which are the only rules where a special function is used to determine the rates. Simply, they increase the ions into the PAS when their concentrations is under

the equilibrium level H+ . The parameters kAT P
and kAT PF
can be interpreted as

the power provided by plant and fungus to sustain the nutrient exchanges.

Results
The CWC simulation of the biological model was linked to the goal programming technique coded in Octave [12] in a processing flow (see Figure 2). The goal pro- gramming approach is based on a general nonlinear minimization using a sequen- tial quadratic programming (SQP) algorithm of the Octave’s optimization package. Since SQP is a local optimization algorithm, an initial random search points was generated to globally explore the parameter domain. To evaluate a set of rates for the target transport equilibrium, a mean of 30 simulation at the end of time interval was computed.
Model Analysis. The model (cf. end of Sect. 4) was tested in a equilibrium trans- port state represented by the CWC term showed in Figure 5. The value of the quantities ni, given in Table 1, hold the equilibrium of the different pH of each compartment during the exchanges modelled by the value of rates in rules (1-6), given in Table 2. The total amount of ammonium and phosphate is inspired by bio- logical hypothesis based on previous experiments ([27,41] for ammonium transport and [23,32,20] for phosphate transport). Let x be the vector of simulation kinetics in the rules (7)-(19), the two parameters under investigation kAT PP  and kAT PF  are





	

Fig. 5.	Graphical representation of the CWC term encoding the biological system un-

der investigation:	n1 ∗ NH+
n2 ∗ H+	n3 ∗ H2PO+
n4 ∗ C12H22O11	n5 ∗ C6H12O6

(AT P ase LjAMT 2; 2 LjP T 4 ♩ n6 ∗ NH4 n7 ∗ NH3 n8 ∗ H n9 ∗ H2PO+n10 ∗ H3P O4 n11 ∗ C12H22O11)P
(AT P ase ♩ n12 ∗ NH4 n13 ∗ NH3 n14 ∗ H n15 ∗ H2PO+ n16 ∗ H3P O4 n17 ∗ C6H12O6)F

Table 1
Values ni at the equilibrium

the kinetics of the rules (18) and (19), respectively. The vector of functions f has 17 elements fi(x)= |nj −ni|, where the values ni are the initial quantities listed above and the value nj are the average final quantities computed over 30 parallel runs of the simulator. Each goal gi is set to 0 (reflecting the fact that we are looking for the values of x that keep the equilibrium). As described in Section 3, the weights w can be changed in subsequent iterations of the parameter identification in order to emphasize the search for specific targets. The strategy used in this case has been to increase the weights proportionally to the distance of the objective with respect to the initial guessing.
LjAMT2;2 and LjAMT1;1 Models Comparison. The biological question an- swered by this study concerns the efficiency of two ammonium transporters in terms of energy spent by plant/fugus system to maintain acceptable transfer rates for the transporters that exploits the acidity of the periarbuscolar space. The plant/fungus ATPase pumps balance the H+ ions involved in nutrients exchanges using metabolic energy. The aim of this comparison was to investigate whether the over-expression of LjAMT2;2 in the arbusculated cells is functional and related to its peculiar trans- port process that does not “consume” the periarbuscular H+ and therefore does not compete with other transporters, such as those for phosphates. The level of the work done by the plant ATPase pumps to maintain the periarbuscular acidity was taken


Table 2
Fixed fluxes of nutrient furnished and internalized by the plant and the fungus

Table 3
Comparison of the estimated values for the fungus H+-ATPase pumps flux for the two different transporters LjAMT2;2 and LjAMT1;1

as a measure of the LjAMT2;2 contribution to the symbiotic equilibrium.
The comparison was performed with respect to a well known ammonium trans- porter in Lotus japonicus: LjAMT1;1. This transporter recruits from the periarbus- cular space the NH4+ ion that is deprotonated after its transport across the plant membrane and is released in its uncharged NH3 form into the plant cytoplasm. This biological model is the same as the one described in Section 4 except that the reaction (16) has been replaced by the following one.
T : NH+ (x LjAMT 1; 1 ♩ X)P →kLjAMT 1;1 (x LjAMT 1; 1 ♩ X NH3 H+)P
The simulation of the biological model with LjAMT2;2 transporter was coupled with the biological model with LjAMT1;1 transporter considering equal values of model parameters except the one modelling the plant ATPase pumps. 30 runs of the optimization process were performed in order to find different equilibrium states comparing the different obtained values for the ATPase pumps for the model includ- ing the two different transporters. The last two rows of Table 3 show the estimated mean value for the plant and fungus H+ flux given by the ATPase pumps to bal- ance the H+ inside the PAS. The results confirm the efficiency of the LjAMT2;2 transporter compared to LjAMT1;1 from the plant side. In this model the fungal partner gives the main contribution to the symbiosis in terms of spent of energy through ATPase pumps activity.
Related Work
Optimization methods have been widely applied in both metabolic control analysis and biochemical systems theory [6]. In particular, the problem of parameter identi- fication in biochemical pathways, formulated as a nonlinear programming problem subject to the pathway model acting as constraints, has received great attention.

Since these problems are frequently multimodal, global optimization methods are needed in order to avoid local solutions. A local solution can be very misleading when calibrating models: it would indicate a bad fit even for a model which could potentially match perfectly a set of experimental data. In this context, evolutionary computation methods are a class of stochastic methods which have shown good per- formance in systems biology applications [30]. Hybrid methods, combining global and local techniques, have also shown great potential with difficult problems like parameter estimation [5]. Much more work is needed to further enhance the effi- ciency and robustness of these approaches in order to make them applicable to large scale models.
Most previous studies of parameter identification in regulatory networks have dealt only with deterministic models. For the simulation of stochastic biochemical systems, parameter values are set to biologically plausible levels or estimated from in vitro experiments on the macroscopic level. For the inverse problem of obtain- ing parameters, rate constants are normally estimated by fitting mass law action dynamics to experimentally measured concentration curves. Some recent studies have attempted to estimate stochastic rate constants from exact molecule count data, assuming that the counts follow a Markov chain (as in the Gillespie algo- rithm) employing hidden Markov models [33], or a stochastic differential equation approximation [16].


Conclusions
A methodology to analyse biological models has been presented. The general schema illustrated relies on the goal programming approach which allows to search parame- ters through the definition of goals. The flexibility of goals to phrase biological issues related to biological interactions was tested. The mycorrhizal symbiosis between Lo- tus japonicus and Gigaspora Margarita fungus was studied and its exchange was modelled to get an indirect measure of ATPase energy involved in the processes. This analysis supported interesting insights on the transport efficiency of two differ- ent AMT proteins of the plant root cell. Our study suggested that LjAMT2;2 high level of expression in the arbusculated cells could be synergistic with the transporter for other substances: LjAMT2;2 could rely on the NH+ gradient created by the fungi as its energy source and does not need to use the H+ gradient, thus leaving more energy for other transporters; while LjAMT1;1 is not highly expressed here as long as it would represent a “waste” of energy for the plant.
Many other questions about the plant nutrient uptake and competitive fun- gal reimport process might be answered. Based on the transport properties of transporters from different fungal and/or plant species, theories could be developed which explain different mycorrhiza responsiveness of host plants; meaning why cer- tain plant-AM fungus combinations have a rather disadvantageous than beneficial effect for the plant.

Acknowledgement
We are grateful to the anonymous CS2Bio 2012 referees for comments and sugges- tions for improving the presentation.

References
“FastFlow website,” (2009), http://mc-fastflow.sourceforge.net/.
Aldinucci, M., M. Coppo, F. Damiani, M. Drocco, E. Sciacca, S. Spinella, M. Torquati and A. Troina, On parallelizing on-line statistics for stochastic biological simulations, in: 2nd International Workshop on High Performance Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (HiBB’11), LNCS 7156 (2012), pp. 2–13.
Aldinucci, M., M. Coppo, F. Damiani, M. Drocco, M. Torquati and A. Troina, On designing multicore- aware simulators for biological systems, in: Proc. of Intl. Euromicro PDP 2011: Parallel Distributed and network-based Processing (2011), pp. 318–325.
Balestrini, R., J. G´omez-Ariza, L. Lanfranco and P. Bonfante, Laser microdissection reveals that transcripts for five plant and one fungal phosphate transporter genes are contemporaneously present in arbusculated cells, Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions 20 (2007), pp. 1055–1062.
Balsa-Canto, E., M. Peifer, J. Banga, J. Timmer and C. Fleck, Hybrid optimization method with general switching strategy for parameter estimation, BMC Systems Biology 2 (2008), p. 26.
Banga, J., Optimization in computational systems biology, BMC systems biology 2 (2008), p. 47.
Chalot, M., D. Blaudez and A. Brun, Ammonia: a candidate for nitrogen transfer at the mycorrhizal interface, Trends in plant science 11 (2006), pp. 263–266.
Coppo, M., F. Damiani, M. Drocco, E. Grassi, M. Guether and A. Troina, Modelling ammonium transporters in arbuscular mycorrhiza symbiosis, Transactions on Computational Systems Biology XIII (2011), pp. 85–109.
Coppo, M., F. Damiani, M. Drocco, E. Grassi, E. Sciacca, S. Spinella and A. Troina, Simulation techniques for the calculus of wrapped compartments, Theoretical Computer Science 431 (2012), pp. 75– 95.
Coppo, M., F. Damiani, M. Drocco, E. Grassi and A. Troina, Stochastic Calculus of Wrapped Compatnents, in: Eighth Workshop on Quantitative Aspects of Programming Languages (QAPL’11), EPTCS 28, 2010, pp. 82–98.
“CWC Simulator website,” (2010), http://cwcsimulator.sourceforge.net/.
Eaton, J. W., “GNU Octave Manual,” Network Theory Limited, 2002.
Gembicki, F. and Y. Haimes, Approach to performance and sensitivity multiobjective optimization: The goal attainment method, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 20 (1975), pp. 769–771.
Gillespie, D., Exact stochastic simulation of coupled chemical reactions, J. Phys. Chem. 81 (1977),
pp. 2340–2361.
Gobert, A. and C. Plassard, The beneficial effect of mycorrhizae on N utilization by the host-plant: myth or reality, Mycorrhiza. Springer-Verlag, Berlin (2008), pp. 209–240.
Golightly, A. and D. Wilkinson, Bayesian inference for stochastic kinetic models using a diffusion approximation, Biometrics 61 (2005), pp. 781–788.
Grosfils, A., A. Vande Wouwer and P. Bogaerts, On a general model structure for macroscopic biological reaction rates, Journal of biotechnology 130 (2007), pp. 253–264.
Guether, M., R. Balestrini, M. Hannah, J. He, M. Udvardi and P. Bonfante, Genome-wide reprogramming of regulatory networks, transport, cell wall and membrane biogenesis during arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis in Lotus japonicus, New Phytol 182 (2009), pp. 200–212.
Guether, M., B. Neuhauser, R. Balestrini, M. Dynowski, U. Ludewig and P. Bonfante, A Mycorrhizal- Specific Ammonium Transporter from Lotus japonicus Acquires Nitrogen Released by Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi, Plant Physiology 150 (2009), p. 73.

Harrison, M., G. Dewbre and J. Liu, A phosphate transporter from Medicago truncatula involved in the acquisition of phosphate released by arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi, The Plant Cell Online 14 (2002),
p. 2413.
Hause, B. and T. Fester, Molecular and cell biology of arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis, Planta 221
(2005), pp. 184–196.
Ignizio, J., A review of goal programming: A tool for multiobjective analysis, Journal of the Operational Research Society (1978), pp. 1109–1119.
Javot, H., N. Pumplin and M. Harrison, Phosphate in the arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis: transport properties and regulatory roles, Plant, Cell & Environment 30 (2006), pp. 310–322.
Lee, F., G. Rangaiah and A. Ray, Multi-objective optimization of an industrial penicillin V bioreactor train using non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm, Biotechnology and bioengineering 98 (2007),
pp. 586–598.
Lei, F. and S. Jørgensen, Estimation of kinetic parameters in a structured yeast model using regularisation, Journal of biotechnology 88 (2001), pp. 223–237.
Liu, C. and X. Wu, Optimization of operation parameters in ultrafiltration process, Journal of Biotechnology 66 (1998), pp. 195–202.
Ludewig, U., B. Neuh¨auser and M. Dynowski, Molecular mechanisms of ammonium transport and accumulation in plants, FEBS letters 581 (2007), pp. 2301–2308.
Ma, H., F. Boogerd and I. Goryanin, Modelling nitrogen assimilation of Escherichia coli at low ammonium concentration, Journal of biotechnology 144 (2009), pp. 175–183.
Miettinen, K., “Nonlinear multiobjective optimization,” International Series in Operations Research and Management Science 12, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1999.
Moles, C., P. Mendes and J. Banga, Parameter estimation in biochemical pathways: a comparison of global optimization methods, Genome research 13 (2003), pp. 2467–2474.
Nicosia, G. and E. Sciacca, Robust parameter identification for biological circuit calibration, in: 8th IEEE International Conference on BioInformatics and BioEngineering, 2008. BIBE 2008, 2008, pp. 1–6.
Rausch, C. and M. Bucher, Molecular mechanisms of phosphate transport in plants, Planta 216 (2002),
pp. 23–37.
Reinker, S., R. Altman, J. Timmer et al., Parameter estimation in stochastic biochemical reactions, Systems biology 153 (2006), p. 168.
Schniederjans, M., “Goal programming: methodology and applications,” Springer, 1995.
Schu¨ßler, A., H. Martin, D. Cohen, M. Fitz and D. Wipf, Characterization of a carbohydrate transporter from symbiotic glomeromycotan fungi, Nature 444 (2006), pp. 933–936.
Sciacca, E. and S. Spinella, Reliable Biological Circuit Design Including Uncertain Kinetic Parameters, in: Fuzzy Optimization Recent Advances and Applications, Studies in Fuzziness and Soft Computing 254, Springer, 2010 pp. 457–477.
Shachar-Hill, Y., P. Pfeffer, D. Douds, S. Osman, L. Doner and R. Ratcliffe, Partitioning of intermediary carbon metabolism in vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhizal leek, Plant Physiology 108 (1995), pp. 7–15.
Solaiman, M. and M. Saito, Use of sugars by intraradical hyphae of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi revealed by radiorespirometry, New Phytologist (1997), pp. 533–538.
Stracquadanio, G., R. Umeton, A. Papini, P. Li`o and G. Nicosia, Analysis and optimization of c3 photosynthetic carbon metabolism, in: I. Rigoutsos and C. A. Floudas, editors, Proceedings of BIBE 2010, 10th IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Bioengineering (2010), pp. 44–51.
Vera, J., P. De Atauri, M. Cascante and N. Torres, Multicriteria optimization of biochemical systems by linear programming: application to production of ethanol by Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Biotechnology and bioengineering 83 (2003), pp. 335–343.
Wang, M., M. Siddiqi, T. Ruth and A. Glass, Ammonium uptake by rice roots (II. Kinetics of 13NH4+ influx across the plasmalemma), Plant Physiology 103 (1993), p. 1259.
Yang, H., C. Roth and M. Ierapetritou, A rational design approach for amino acid supplementation in hepatocyte culture, Biotechnology and bioengineering 103 (2009), pp. 1176–1191.
Yeow, Y., Y. Leong, M. Cheah, H. Dang and C. Law, Cleaving of S-mandelonitrile catalyzed by S- hydroxynitrile lyase from Hevea brasiliensis–a kinetic investigation based on the rate curve method, Journal of biotechnology 111 (2004), pp. 31–39.
