

Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 221 (2008) 3–15
www.elsevier.com/locate/entcs
Stability for Effective Algebras
Jens Blanck
Department of Computer Science Swansea University
Swansea, Wales
Viggo Stoltenberg-Hansen
Department of Mathematics Uppsala University Uppsala, Sweden
John V. Tucker
Department of Computer Science Swansea University
Swansea, Wales

Abstract
We give a general method for showing that all numberings of certain effective algebras are recursively equiv- alent. The method is based on computable approximation-limit pairs. The approximations are elements of a finitely generated subalgebra, and obtained by computable (non-deterministic) selection. The results are a continuation of the work by Mal’cev, who, for example, showed that finitely generated semicomputable al- gebras are computably stable. In particular, we generalise the result that the recursive reals are computably stable, if the limit operator is assumed to be computable, to spaces constructed by inverse limits.
Keywords: Recursively equivalent, computably stable, effective partial algebras.

Introduction
It is known, [4,1] and others, that the recursive reals have exactly one numbering, up to recursive equivalence, in the presence of a limit algorithm. Given the setting of effective partial algebras in [7] this result is reinvestigated. Many algebras have partial operations, in particular, this is the case for the reals, where the inverse is a partial operation.
The process of obtaining a sequence of approximations of elements is identi- fied as an important step in the existing proofs. We introduce the concept of approximation-limit pairs, where the approximation and the limit processes are linked.  For the reals, an approximation is a rational number that is sufficiently

1571-0661 Crown Copyright © 2008 Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.entcs.2008.12.002

close to the real, such a rational number can be found up to any desired accuracy by use of the ordering to search for approximations. In general, approximation is a relation between elements of the algebra, a natural number specifying the level of the approximation, and a finitely generated subalgebra. We would like to computably select approximations from a code of an element, but this is not a well-defined func- tion on the level of the algebra, as the selection often depends on the code. We use a weaker notion of computable (non-deterministic) selection.
The main result is that an algebra with an approximation-limit pair which has computable non-deterministic selection and a computable limit process has exactly one numbering, up to recursive equivalence. This result is exemplified by general spaces constructed from inverse limits. Inverse limits are common in computer science as they are often used to lift algebras from finite data to infinite data, for example, from finite sequences to streams, and from finite processes to non- terminating processes.
Background on recursion theory
We assume very basic knowledge of recursion theory as can be found in any basic text. Our terminology and notation is standard. In particular, we let (ϕe)e∈N be a standard numbering of the recursive functions, and (We)e∈N the corresponding numbering of the recursively enumerable (r.e.) sets. We use ↓ and ↑ to denote convergence and divergence of a computation respectively. The strong (Kleene) equality is denoted by .
Let A be a set. A numbering of A is a surjective function α : Ωα → A, where Ωα ⊆ N. It should be thought of as a coding of A by natural numbers. A numbered set is a pair (A, α) such that α is a numbering of A. For convenience, we repeat the
definitions of computability for partial functions from [7].
Definition 1.1 Let (A, α) and (B, β) be numbered sets and let f : A → B be a partial function.
f is (α, β)-computable if there exists a partial recursive function f¯ : N → N
such that for each n ∈ Ωα,
f¯(n)↓ =⇒ f¯(n) ∈ Ωβ; and
f (α(n))  β(f¯(n)).
f is weakly (α, β)-computable if there exists a partial recursive function f¯ :
N → N such that
f (α(n))↓ =⇒ f (α(n))  β(f¯(n)) .
In either case, we say that f¯ tracks f .
Definition 1.2 Let α and β be numberings of a set A.
α recursively reduces to β, denoted α ≤ β, if there is a partial recursive function f such that for each n ∈ Ωα, α(n) β(f (n)). That is, the identity function on A is (α, β)-computable.
α is recursively equivalent to β, denoted α ∼ β, if α ≤ β and β ≤ α.

Computable non-deterministic selection
We say that a relation R ⊆ A×B is left-total if each x ∈ A is related to some y ∈ B, or equivalently, if the projection to the first coordinate is surjective. For a left-total relation we would like a function s : A → B, called a selection function, such that for each x ∈ A, x R s(x). When formalising effectivity of such a function there are situation where the selection by necessity is dependent on the representation of x. These considerations lead to the following weaker definition of computable selection.
Definition 2.1 Let (A, α) and (B, β) be numbered sets, and let R ⊆ A×B bea left- total relation. The relation R has (α, β)-computable (non-deterministic) selection if there exists a partial recursive function f s.t. f (Ωα) ⊆ Ωβ, and for all n ∈ Ωα
f (n)↓, and
(α(n), β(f (n))) ∈ R.
We say that f tracks the selection for R.
Note that there is no requirement that m ≡α n implies f (m) ≡β f (n), hence f need not induce a well-defined function from A to B. On the level of the sets A and B the selection is non-deterministic. Other authors have chosen to model this behaviour as multi-valued functions [8].
Also note that f may not give codes for all possible second coordinates for a given first coordinate x, even if f is applied to all possible codes of x, i.e., we only have
β(f (α−1(x))) ⊆ {y : (x, y) ∈ R} .
Definition 2.2 Let (Ai, αi) be a numbered sets for i = 1,..., n.  Let α be the
product numbering α1 × ··· × αn of  n	Ai. An n-ary relation R ⊆  n	Ai is
α-semicomputable if there is a recursively enumerable n-ary relation W such that
(α)−1(R) = Ωα ∩ W . 
Proposition 2.3 Let (A, α) and (B, β) be numbered sets, where Ωβ is r.e. An
(α, β)-semicomputable left-total relation R ⊆ A × B has computable selection.
Effective partial Σ-algebras
In this section we review some of the results in [7]. By an effective partial Σ-algebra we mean a Σ-algebra where the partial operations are effective.
Definition 3.1 Let A be a partial Σ-algebra and let α be a numbering of A.
(A, α) is an effective partial Σ-algebra if each k-ary partial operation σ of A is (αk, α)-computable, where αk is the product numbering of Ak obtained from α.
(A, α) is a weakly effective partial Σ-algebra if each k-ary partial operation σ
of A is weakly (αk, α)-computable.

In the sequel we assume that there is a computable enumeration of the operation symbols in Σ along with their arities. In particular this is true when Σ is finite. Then the total term algebra T (Σ,V ), where V = {v0, v1, v2,.. .} is a countable set of variables, has a standard numbering which we denote by γ (see [6]).
Let A be a partial Σ-algebra and let e: N → A be a partial sequence in A. Then we let TEe: T (Σ,V ) → A be the corresponding partial term evaluation map (sending vi to e(i)). Define the partial function γe: N → A by
γe(n)  TEe(γ(n)).
We denote dom(γe) by Ωe.
Let ⟨e⟩ be the partial Σ-subalgebra generated by the partial sequence e, i.e.,
⟨e⟩ is the image of γe. It is shown in [7] that (⟨e⟩, γe) is a weakly effective partial Σ-algebra.
We say that a partial sequence e: N → A, where A is a set numbered by α, is (weakly) α-computable if it is (weakly) (id, α)-computable. Note that every partial sequence e is weakly γe-computable, tracked by the partial function vi’ '→ e(i) (where vi’ is a γ-code for vi), and e is γe-computable if, and only if, dom(e) is r.e. Normally, but not always, our sequences e will be total and hence γe-computable.
Theorem 3.2 ([7]) Let (A, α) be a weakly effective partial Σ-algebra and let e: N →
A be a partial sequence that is weakly α-computable.
Then TEe: T (Σ,V ) → A is weakly (γ, α)-computable and the inclusion ι: ⟨e⟩→ 
A is (γe, α)-computable.
If (A, α) is effective and e is α-computable then Ωe is r.e. and (⟨e⟩, γe) is effective.
We say that an effective partial Σ-algebra (A, α) is (semi-)computable if the equality relation is α-(semi-)computable.
Proposition 3.3 Let (A, α) be a semicomputable partial Σ-algebra. If e is an α- computable sequence such that ⟨e⟩ = A then γe ∼ α.
Corollary 3.4 If A is a ﬁnitely generated partial Σ-algebra then A has at most one semicomputable numbering up to equivalence.
Approximation-limit pair
We denote the set of all sequences on a set A by AN. For a numbered set (A, α) we denote the set of all α-computable sequences in A by AN. A natural numbering α∗
of AN obtained from α is defined by
α∗(n) = λk.α(ϕn(k)) ,
for all n such that α ◦ ϕn is total.
We now define what we mean by an approximation-limit pair and by effectivity of such a pair.

Definition 4.1 Let A be a partial Σ-algebra and let e: N → A be a partial sequence. Assume that aprx ⊆ (A × N) × ⟨e⟩ is a left-total relation, i.e., for each x ∈ A and n ∈ N there exists y ∈ B satisfying the relation; and that lim: ⟨e⟩N → A is a partial function.
An approximation sequence for x is a sequence (yn)n satisfying (x, n, yn) ∈ aprx for all n ∈ N.
The pair (aprx, lim) is an approximation-limit pair for A and e if for each approximation sequence (an)n for x,
lim((an)n)  x. 
Consider a partial Σ-algebra A and a partial sequence e: N → A. Recall that (⟨e⟩, γe) is a weakly effective partial Σ-algebra (effective if the operations are total) and e is weakly γe-computable. We consider the numbered set (⟨e⟩N, γ∗).
k	e
Definition 4.2 Let A be a partial Σ-algebra, e: N → A a partial sequence, and let α and β be numberings of A (as a set). An approximation-limit pair (aprx, lim) for A and e is computable with respect to α and β if
aprx has (α, γe)-computable non-deterministic selection, and
lim: ⟨e⟩N → A is weakly (γ∗, β)-computable.
k	e
When α = β in the definition we say that (aprx, lim) is computable with respect to α.
We now define a new numbering γ¯e depending on (aprx, lim) and e. Let Ωγ¯e = {n ∈ Ωγ∗ : λk.γeϕn(k) is an approximation sequence},
and define γ¯e: Ωγ¯e → A by

γ¯e(n) = lim(λk.γeϕn(k)).
Definition 4.3 The partial Σ-algebra A is recursively constructible with respect to (aprx, lim) and e if for each x ∈ A there is n ∈ Ωγ¯e such that γ¯e(n)  x.
Thus A is recursively constructible if every element of A is the limit of a γe- computable approximation sequence in ⟨e⟩, i.e., if (A, γ¯e) is a numbered set.
Proposition 4.4 If there is a numbering α of A such that aprx has (α × id, γe)- computable non-deterministic selection then A is recursively constructible.
Theorem 4.5 Let A be a partial Σ-algebra with numberings α and β and let e be a partial sequence in A. Let (aprx, lim) be an approximation-limit pair for A and e.
If aprx has (α × id, γe)-computable non-deterministic selection then γ¯e is a numbering of A and α ≤ γ¯e.
If A is recursively constructible and lim is weakly (γ∗, β)-computable then γ¯e ≤
β.

If (aprx, lim) is computable with respect to α and β then α ≤ γ¯e ≤ β.
It is often the case in applications that every effective numbering α of a partial Σ-algebra A makes it possible to define aprx with (α× id, γe)-computable selection. Put differently, Σ includes operations sufficient for computably tracking selection for aprx for all effective numberings of A.
Corollary 4.6 If (aprx, lim) is computable with respect to α then γ¯e ∼ α.
Thus if there is one numbering making (aprx, lim) computable then it is (up to recursive equivalence) γ¯e.
The numbering γ¯e has some further nice properties.  First note that if A is
recursively constructible then aprx has (γ¯e × id, γe)-computable non-deterministic selection. For if n ∈ Ωγ¯e then the sequence λk.γeϕn(k) is an approximation sequence so the selection for aprx is tracked by aprx(n, k)  ϕn(k).
We now consider sufficient conditions for γ¯e being an effective numbering of A. In case there is an effective numbering α making (aprx, lim) computable then γ¯e ∼ α and hence γ¯e is effective. Without a priori access to such a numbering we need a notion of effective continuity with respect to an approximation-limit pair.
Definition 4.7 Let σ be a partial n-ary operation of A. Then σ is effectively continuous with respect to (aprx, lim) if there is an (n + 1)-ary partial recursive function t such that whenever σ(γ¯e(m1),..., γ¯e(mn))↓ then
t(m1,..., mn, k)↓ for each k, and
if (γ¯e(mi), t(m1,..., mn, k), aik) ∈ aprx for i = 1,...,n then
(σ(γ¯e(m1),..., γ¯e(mn)), k, σ(a1k,..., ank)) ∈ aprx .
Theorem 4.8 Let A be a partial Σ-algebra and let e: N → A be a partial sequence. Assume that there is an approximation-limit pair (aprx, lim) for A and e such that A is recursively constructible and every operation of A is effectively continuous with respect to (aprx, lim). Then (A, γ¯e) is a weakly effective partial Σ-algebra.
In case each operation of A is total then the conclusion of the theorem states that (A, γ¯e) is effective.
The use of γe is not restrictive. Each weakly effective numbering α is equivalent to γe for some e.
Proposition 4.9 Let (A, α) be a weakly effective partial Σ-algebra. Then α ∼ γe
for some partial sequence e.
In closing we show how it is often possible to construct an effective recursive completion within a partial Σ-algebra for natural approximation-limit pairs.
Let A be a partial Σ-algebra, possibly uncountable, e: N → A a partial sequence, and (aprx, lim) an approximation-limit pair for A and e. We say that x ∈ A is computable with respect to (aprx, lim) and e if x is the limit of a γe-computable
approximation sequence, i.e.,
x = lim(λk.γeϕn(k))

for some n such that λk.γeϕn(k) is an approximation sequence with respect to aprx. We define γ¯e as before.
Definition 4.10	(i) The set Ak = γ¯e(Ωγ¯e ) of computable elements is the recur- sive completion of ⟨e⟩ in A with respect to (aprx, lim).
(ii) The recursive completion Ak is proper if ⟨e⟩⊆ Ak and the inclusion ι: ⟨e⟩→ Ak
is (γe, γ¯e)-computable.
Note that the recursive completion is proper if (a, n, a) ∈ aprx for each a ∈ ⟨e⟩ and n ∈ N, since then each constant sequence in ⟨e⟩ is an approximation sequence. Furthermore, (aprx, lim) restricted to Ak is γ¯e-computable and Ak is recursively constructible in the sense of Definition 4.3.
Theorem 4.11 Let A be a partial Σ-algebra, e: N → A a partial sequence, and (aprx, lim) an approximation-limit pair for A and e. Let Ak be the recursive com- pletion of ⟨e⟩ in A with respect to (aprx, lim) and assume it is proper.
(Ak, γ¯e) is a numbered set and if α is a numbering of Ak making (aprx, lim)
computable then α ∼ γ¯e.
If each operation of A restricted to Ak is effectively continuous with respect to (aprx, lim) then (Ak, γ¯e) is a weakly effective partial Σ-algebra and ι: ⟨e⟩→ Ak is a (γe, γ¯e)-computable embedding.

Applications
Real numbers
In this section we briefly indicate how the notion of approximation-limit pair fits in with the construction of the ordered field of recursive real numbers. The result by Moschovakis [4], Hertling [1] and others that there is exactly one effective numbering of the recursive reals (up to recursive equivalence) having a limit algorithm then easily follows.
Let R be the partial algebra R = (R; 0, 1, +, −, ×, (·)−1, χ<), let Σ be its signa-
ture, and let e: N → R be the constant function with value 0. Thus ⟨e⟩ = Q. It is well-known how to construct an effective numbering α of Q such that = and < are α-decidable. Of course, e is α-computable for any numbering of Q and hence α ∼ γe by Proposition 3.3 and γe is the only such numbering up to recursive equivalence making equality decidable.
We now define a natural approximation-limit pair (aprx, lim) for R and e. Define aprx ⊆ R × N × ⟨e⟩ by

(x, k, a) ∈ aprx ⇐⇒ |x − a| < 2−k .

An approximation sequence for aprx in the sense of Section 4 is what is known in the literature as a fast Cauchy sequence. The limit of a fast Cauchy sequence exists in R and every element in R is the limit of a fast Cauchy sequence in Q. It follows

that (aprx, lim) is an approximation-limit pair for R and e, where lim is the limit operator for fast Cauchy sequences.
Let Rk be the recursive completion of ⟨e⟩ in R with respect to (aprx, lim). The completion is proper since (a, k, a) ∈ aprx for all a ∈ ⟨e⟩ and k ∈ N. It is routine to verify that each operation of R restricted to Rk is effectively continuous with respect to (aprx, lim) and hence (Rk, γ¯e) is a weakly effective partial Σ-algebra by Theorem 4.11.
Proposition 5.1 The ordered ﬁeld (Rk, γ¯e) is an effective partial Σ-algebra.
Now suppose α is an effective numbering of the Σ-algebra Rk.
Proposition 5.2 If (Rk, α) is effective then aprx has (α× id, γe)-computable selec- tion.
Let LIM be the function taking an α-computable fast Cauchy sequence in Rk to its limit. We say that (Rk, α) has a limit algorithm if LIM is weakly (α∗, α)- computable.
Proposition 5.3 (Rk, γ¯e) has a limit algorithm.
Thus we see that (Rk, γ¯e) is recursively constructible in the sense that Rk is closed under taking limits of γ¯e-computable fast Cauchy sequences.
Theorem 5.4 Let Rk = (Rk; 0, 1, +, −, ×, (·)−1, χ<) be the recursive completion with respect to (aprx, lim) and e and let α be an effective numbering of Rk. Then the following hold.
α ≤ γ¯e.
If (aprx, lim) is computable with respect to α then α ∼ γ¯e.
(Rk, α) has a limit algorithm if, and only if, α ∼ γ¯e.
We see that in the class of effective numberings of Rk there is a largest numbering (up to recursive equivalence) and it is characterised by having a limit algorithm. Such a numbering is said to be a standard numbering of the recursive reals. Thus a standard numbering is determined from the indexing of fast Cauchy sequences in Q.
If Corollary 4.6 is applied directly to the unordered recursive reals, then the numbering is still unique. This is not really a strengthening of the above result since the ordering can be recovered from our chosen approximation relation aprx.
The algebraic formulation of Theorem 4.5 makes it easy to translate results to slightly different algebras. An easy exercise is to modify Theorem 5.4 to Rk built from fast Cauchy sequences over the dyadic numbers D. As above, it is easy to give
a computable numbering of D for the (total) algebra R' = (R; 0, 1 , 1, +, −, ×, χ<).
Note that the algebra does not use the partial operation (·)−1 but add a new con- stant, 1 . Thus, the results in Theorem 5.4 for Rk also hold for R' .
2	k

Inverse limits
Taking the inverse limit of an inverse system of algebras is an important ”comple- tion” process in mathematics and in modelling computations. A natural approxi- mation-limit pair for this construction is obtained using the projection functions, providing a tool for analysing its effective content
We consider inverse limits obtained from an algebra via a family of separating congruences. The more general situation of the inverse limit of an inverse system can be handled similarly only with a little more notational complexity.
Let A be a Σ-algebra. In this section we assume the operations of A to be total. Then {≡n}n is a family of separating congruences on A if each ≡n is a congruence on A and the following hold:
x ≡n+1 y =⇒ x ≡n y, and
n∈N ≡n= {(x, x) : x ∈ A}.
We set An = A/≡n and let vn: A → An be the factoring epimorphism, i.e., vn(a) = [a]n = {b ∈ A : a ≡n b}. For n ≥ m we let φn : An → Am be the epimorphism given by [a]n '→ [a]m. Then (An, φn )n≥m is an inverse system. Its inverse limit is denoted by lim←(An, φn ), or simply lim← An or A¯, along with the
epimorphisms φ¯n: A¯ → An satisfying φn ◦ φ¯n = φ¯m for each n ≥ m.
Recall that A¯ is, up to isomorphism, the Σ-algebra

A¯ = {(an)n ∈   An : ∀n.φn+1(an+1) = an}


along with φ¯n: A¯
n=0
→ An given by φ¯n((ak)k) = an, and the operations on A¯ act

pointwise. By the universal property of inverse limits there is a unique embedding
θ: A → A¯. It is given by θ(a) = ([a]n)n.
Throughout we now let (A, α) be an effective Σ-algebra with a family {≡n}n of separating congruences on A. Note that no assumptions are made on the effectivity of ≡n. We define a numbering αn: Ωα → An by αn(k) = [α(k)]n. Then (An, αn) is an effective Σ-algebra since ≡n is a congruence, and vn is (α, αn)-computable, tracked by the identity.
By Proposition 4.9 there is a weakly α-computable partial sequence e in A such that α is recursively equivalent to γe. Thus we may use the results from Section 4 with α playing the role of γe and α¯ of γ¯e. Furthermore, for notational simplicity, we will consider an approximation function taking values in A rather than in its isomorphic image θ(A).
Define a relation aprx ⊆ A¯ × N × A by
(x, n, a) ∈ aprx ⇐⇒ φ¯n(x) = vn(a).

Then define the partial function lim: AN →
A¯ as follows.  Suppose (an)n is an

approximation sequence in A with respect to aprx and induced by x. Then
lim((an)n)  ([an]n)n  x.

It follows that (aprx, lim) is an approximation-limit pair for A and α.
Let A¯k,α be the recursive completion of A and α with respect to (aprx, lim). Then (A¯k,α, α¯) is a numbered set (where α¯ plays the role of γ¯e, i.e., α¯(n) λk.vkαϕn(k) when λk.αϕn(k) is an approximation sequence). Let φn be the restriction of φ¯n to A¯k,α.
Proposition 5.5  (i) θ: A → A¯k,α is (α, α¯)-computable.
φn: A¯k,α → An is (α¯, αn)-computable, uniformly in n.
(A¯k,α, α¯) is an effective Σ-algebra.
A sequence (an)n in A is said to be a Cauchy sequence if an+1 ≡n an for each
n. Note that this corresponds to being an approximation sequence with respect to aprx. Similarly, a sequence (xn)n in A¯ is said to be a Cauchy sequence if φ¯n(xn+1) = φ¯n(xn) for each n. Thus if xn = ([ank]k)k, where ank ∈ A, then it is required that an+1,n ≡n ann for each n. Using the above notation let the partial function LIM: A¯N → A¯ be defined on each Cauchy sequence (xn)n by
LIM((xn)n)  lim((ann)n).
Note that (ann)n is a Cauchy sequence in A since
an+1,n+1 ≡n an+1,n ≡n ann,

and therefore LIM((xn)n) is defined. LIM is the limit operator with respect to the natural ultrametric on A¯ induced by {≡n}n. This will be further discussed in Section 5.3.
Let β be a numbering of A¯k,α. We say that (A¯k,α, β) has a limit algorithm if LIM is weakly (β∗, β)-computable.
Proposition 5.6 (A¯k,α, α¯) has a limit algorithm.
Theorem 5.7 Let (A, α) be an effective Σ-algebra and let {≡n}n be a family of separating congruences on A. Let β be a numbering of A¯k,α such that φn: A¯k,α → An is (β, αn)-computable, uniformly in n. Then
β ≤ α¯.
If the embedding θ: A → A¯k,α is (α, β)-computable then β ∼ α¯ if, and only if,
(A¯k,α, β) has a limit algorithm.
We conclude with some remarks on the complexity of ≡n on A. The congruence relation ≡n on A is extended to A¯ by, for x, y ∈ A,
x ≡n y ⇐⇒ φ¯n(x) = φ¯n(y).
Proposition 5.8 Let (A, α) be an effective Σ-algebra with a family {≡n}n of sep- arating congruences, assume Ωα is r.e., and let β be a numbering of A¯k,α.
Assume θ: A → A¯k,α is (α, β)-computable. If {≡n}n on A¯k,α is β-semicomputable, uniformly in n, then φn is (β, αn)-computable, uniformly in n.

If φn is (β, αn)-computable and {≡n}n on A is α-semicomputable, uniformly in n, then {≡n}n on A¯k,α is β-semicomputable, uniformly in n.
Thus, in the event that {≡n}n on A is α-computable, uniformly in n, and Ωα is r.e., then φn is (β, αn)-computable, uniformly in n, if, and only if, {≡n}n is β-semicomputable, uniformly in n.

Effective metric partial Σ-algebras
A metric space M with metric d is effective with respect to a numbering α of M if d is (α × α, ρ)-computable, where ρ is a standard numbering of the computable reals Rk as in Section 5.1.
A metric partial Σ-algebra is a partial Σ-algebra A equipped with a metric d: A × A → R such that each partial operation of A is continuous. We say that A is (weakly ) effective with respect to a numbering α if (A, α) is an effective metric space and each operation of A is (weakly) effective.
Now let (A, α) be an effective metric partial Σ-algebra and suppose e is an α- computable sequence such that ⟨e⟩ is dense in A. Then, by Theorem 3.2, ⟨e⟩ is a dense partial Σ-subalgebra effective under the numbering γe, the inclusion ι: ⟨e⟩→ A is (γe, α)-computable, and Ωe is r.e.
Define a relation aprx ⊆ A × N × ⟨e⟩ by
(x, n, a) ∈ aprx ⇐⇒ d(x, a) < 2−n.

An approximation sequence with respect to aprx is thus a fast Cauchy sequence with a limit in A. Let lim: ⟨e⟩N → A be the corresponding limit function defined by lim((an)n x whenever (an)n is an approximation sequence with respect to aprx and generated by x ∈ A. Thus lim is well-defined.
The relation aprx is (α × id ×γe)-semicomputable since < is ρ-semicomputable, using the computability of d and ι, and it is left-total since ⟨e⟩ is dense in A. Hence aprx has computable selection by Proposition 2.3.
It now follows from Theorem 4.5 that γ¯e is a numbering of A and that α ≤ γ¯e.
Furthermore, if lim is weakly (γ¯e, α)-computable then α ∼ γ¯e.
We say that (A, α) has a limit algorithm if the function LIM taking fast α- computable Cauchy sequences in A to its limit in A, if it exists, is weakly (α∗, α)- computable. Using the (γe, α)-computable inclusion ι: ⟨e⟩ → A it follows that lim is (γ¯e, α)-computable if (A, α) has a limit algorithm.
Using the above observations we obtain the following theorem with a proof completely analogous to that of Theorem 5.4.
Theorem 5.9 Let (A, α) be an effective metric partial Σ-algebra and let e be an
α-computable sequence such that ⟨e⟩ is dense in A.
γ¯e is a numbering of A and α ≤ γ¯e.
If lim is weakly (γ¯e, α)-computable then α ∼ γ¯e.
(A, α) has a limit algorithm if, and only if, α ∼ γ¯e.

An important role of α in the above was to guarantee that the metric d was computable on ⟨e⟩ with respect to γe. Suppose A is a metric partial Σ-algebra and e is a sequence in A such that the metric d restricted to ⟨e⟩ is (γe, ρ)-computable.



Then we may consider the recursive closure	A
e
of ⟨e⟩ in A with respect to



aprx defined above. It is straight-forward to verify that d restricted to ⟨e⟩k,γe is
(γ¯e, ρ)-computable, using the triangle inequality of the metric. If the operations are effectively continuous with respect to (aprx, lim) then we obtain the recursive



completion	A
e
as a weakly effective metric partial Σ-algebra and its numbering

γ¯e is unique up to recursive equivalence having a limit algorithm. As an example, the ordered field Rk of recursive reals with its standard numbering was obtained in this way. For further results in this direction we refer to [7].
To conclude this section we return to the inverse limit construction of Section
5.2. Let A be a Σ-algebra with a family of separating congruences {≡n}n. There is a natural metric d on A defined by
d(x, y) = ⎧⎨ 0	if x = y
⎩ 2−n0  where n0 least such that x /≡n y.

In fact, d is an ultrametric. Furthermore, each ultrametric Σ-algebra with non- expansive operations can be construed as a Σ-algebra with a family of separating congruences {≡n}n up to topological equivalence (i.e., homeomorphic algebras).
It is natural to ask when the recursive completion for the inverse limit as in Section 5.2 corresponds to the recursive completion as a metric algebra. That is, are there reasonable conditions for when the metric d is computable?
Theorem 5.10 Let (A, α) be an effective Σ-algebra such that Ωα is r.e., and let
{≡n}n be a family of separating congruences on A such that ≡n is α-decidable uniformly in n. Let β be a numbering of A¯k,α such that φn is (β, αn)-computable, uniformly in n. Then the metric d is (β × β, ρ)-computable.
Note that α¯ is an example of such a β.
An interesting example is the completion of a local ring. Let R be a commutative local Noetherian ring in the signature for rings and let m be its unique maximal ideal. Define ≡n on R by

a ≡n b ⇐⇒ a − b ∈ mn.

Then, by a theorem of Krull, {≡n}n is a family of separating congruences on R. As- sume that (R, α) is semicomputable, i.e., it is effective, Ωα is r.e., and equality is α- semicomputable. Then it is straight forward to see that {≡n}n is α-semicomputable, uniformly in n. However, it is shown in [5] that if (R, α) is computable as a ring then {≡n}n is in fact α-decidable, uniformly in n, and hence the associated metric on R¯k,α is effective. This fact allowed us to construct an effective domain represen- tation of the inverse limit of R.

References
Hertling, P., A real number structure that is effectively categorical, Mathematical Logic Quarterly 45
(1999), 147–182.
Mal’cev, A. I., Constructive algebras I, Uspehi Mat. Nauk 16 (1961), 3–60.
Moschovakis, Y. N., Recursive metric spaces, Fundamenta Mathematicae 55 (1964), 215–238.
Moschovakis, Y. N., Notation systems and recursive ordered fields, Comp. Math. 17 (1966), 40–71.
Stoltenberg-Hansen, V., and J. V. Tucker, Complete local rings as domains, Journal of Symbolic Logic
63 (1988), 603–624.
Stoltenberg-Hansen, V., and J. V. Tucker, Effective algebra, in: Abramsky, S., et al. (eds.), “Handbook of Logic in Computer Science”, vol. IV, Oxford University Press, 1995, 357–526.
Stoltenberg-Hansen, V., and J. V. Tucker, Computable and continuous partial homomorphisms on metric partial algebras, Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 9 (2003), 299–334.
Weihrauch, K., “An Introduction to Computable Analysis”, Springer, 2000.
