Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 87 (2004) 205–224 
www.elsevier.com/locate/entcs


The Countable Character of Uncountable Graphs
Franc¸ois Laviolette1 ,2
D´epartement d’Informatique et de G´enie logiciel Universit´e Laval
Qu´ebec, Canada

Abstract
We show that a graph can always be decomposed into edge-disjoint subgraphs of countable car- dinality in which the edge-connectivities and edge-separations of the original graph are preserved up to countable cardinals. We also show that the vertex set of any graph can be endowed with a well-ordering which has a certain compactness property with respect to edge-separation.
Keywords: Graphs, decompositions, connectivity, uncountable cardinals.


Introduction
The analysis of processes modelling physical systems is of growing interest in computer science, for example in control systems theory. A physical system, such as a moving particle or the temperature of a room, involves continuous parameters and hence may require a model with uncountably many states. Hybrid systems theory (see e.g. [2]) and Labelled Markov Processes theory ([4]) are concerned with their analysis. Even if, in practice, one generally wants to discretize a system before using it, and even before reasoning about it, a theory of continuous systems allows one to argue that a discretization of a process is indeed a faithful model of the process. Many techniques for analyzing finite systems have been developed in combinatorics but very little

1 Research supported in part by NSERC
2 Email: francois.laviolette@ift.ulaval.ca



1571-0661 © 2004 Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.entcs.2004.09.019


has been done to study infinite ones. The present paper can be considered as a step in that direction.
In hybrid system theory, the analysis of physical systems is made with finite transition systems, where one state may encode an uncountable number of parameter values which are equivalent with respect to the observed behavior of the system. On the other hand, it is shown in [4] that there are some Labelled Markov processes that have uncountably many states but cannot be reduced to finite or even countable state-space processes. In the latter case, there is an essential ingredient, we believe, to prevent this reduction.
The infinite character of Markov processes is strongly linked with the way uncertainty and non determinism are represented, that is, with probability distributions; the richness of continuous probability theory ensures that we cannot get out of uncountability without a loss of information of some sort.
For non-probabilistic processes, the common intuition is that there is no substantial gain in considering transition systems with uncountably many states. This paper makes this idea more precise, by showing that the under- lying graph of an uncountable transition system can always be decomposed into countable fragments, each of which preserving the edge-connectivity of the original graph. This result is about unoriented graphs, its generalization to the oriented case seems to be more difficult and is still open.
Our convention is that a decomposition is an equivalence relation on E(G) such that every fragment (i.e., subgraph induced by the edges of an equiva- lence class) is connected. We are interested in finding decompositions whose fragments inherit as far as possible the edge-connectivity of the original graph in the sense that for a given infinite cardinal α, the fragments of the decom- position are all of order at most α and are such that no bond (i.e. cocycle) of cardinality ≤ α is split into pieces belonging to different fragments: such decompositions will be called bond-faithful α-decompositions.
The main result of the paper (Theorem 4.6) is that for any graph G one can always construct a bond-faithful ω-decomposition.
It is interesting to note that the results in this paper have no pendant in the finite case. In fact, in the finite case, the following is still a conjecture (see DeVos, Johnson and Seymour [5]) even if, in the infinite case (i.e., the case where a and b are infinite), it is a weakening of Proposition 4.8.
Let G be an (a + b + 2)-edge-connected graph. Does there exist a partition
{A, B} of E(G) so that (V,A) is a-edge-connected and (V,B) is b-edge- connected?
Theorem 4.6 is used in [9] to carry out a reduction to the countable case which is considerably easier to handle. This application was the first motiva-


tion for introducing the concepts and proving the main result of the present paper.
In the last section of the paper we show that the vertex set of any graph can be endowed with a well-ordering which has a certain compactness property with respect to edge-separation, in the sense that given any (order-)bounded subset X ⊆ V (G) and any upper bound u, if X cannot be separated from u by the removal of a finite number of edges, then the same is true for some finite subset of X. It follows from this result that infinite graphs can always be constructed, vertex after vertex, in such a way that at each step there is always a finite set of edges that separates the new added vertex from all the previous ones that are not infinitely edge-connected to it. In general, there always exists a finite set of edges that separate a vertex x from any other vertex y that is not infinitely edge-connected to it. The particular interest of that construction is that it guarantees that a single finite set of edges will do the job uniformly for all the y at the same time.
This result provides an interesting tool if one wishes to make a recursive construction on infinite graphs and does not want the first steps of the con- struction to interfere “too much” with the rest. In particular, this might open new perspectives in the theory of automatic structures.
All the results in the present paper rely on decomposition into countable fragments but, under the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis, they can be extend to any uncountable cardinal, see [8] for all the proofs in the general case, and for other related results.

Definitions and preliminaries
For the purposes of this paper, we assume all graphs to be unoriented, without loops or multiple edges unless otherwise stated. The symbol G will always denote a graph. A circuit is a 2-regular connected graph and a cycle is a finite
circuit. A block of G is a 2-vertex-connected subgraph of G which is maximal
with respect to inclusion; in particular a subgraph consisting of a bridge or a loop is a block. If L ⊆ E(G) then G\L denotes the graph obtained from G by removing all edges in L (retaining all vertices). If X ⊆ V (G) then G[X] denotes the induced subgraph of G on X. If x ∈ V (G) and A, B denote subgraphs of G, we write G − x = G[V (G)\x], G − A = G[V (G)\V (A)], G\A = G\E(A) and [A, B]G denotes the set of edges of G which join vertices of A to vertices of B. When no confusion is likely we shall write A for G − A. A cut of G is a set of edges of the form [A, A]G. Unless otherwise stated,
A will be an induced subgraph of G. An odd (resp. even) cut is a cut whose


cardinality is odd (resp. even). A bond is non-empty cut which is minimal with respect to inclusion. Observe that a cut [A, A]G of a connected graph G is a bond if and only if both A and A are connected.

Remark 2.1 A cut [A, A]G of a (connected or disconnected) graph is the union of a family of edge-disjoint bonds. It is easy to see that if A or A is connected then the family is unique. If both A and A are disconnected then the uniqueness does not hold, as illustrated by the example of Figure 1, where [A, A]G is the union of the three bonds which consist respectively of the set of edges incident with each of the vertices of A, and also the union of the bonds symmetrically defined with respect to the three vertices of A. In general, given
a cut [A, A]G of G, we can easily construct a suitable family F of bonds as follows: let (Ai)i∈I be the set of all components of the induced subgraph A; for each i ∈ I, let Fi be the unique family of bonds of G whose union is [Ai, Ai]G,
and then put F :=  i∈I Fi.

Fig. 1.

Remark 2.2 Each bond of G is contained in some block of G. To see this, suppose that x is a cut-vertex of G and [A, A]G is a bond of G. If x ∈ V (A) then the connected subgraph A of G − x must be contained in a single component of G − x and so x cannot separate edges of [A, A]G; and a similar argument applies if x ∈ V (A).

For any two distinct vertices x, y ∈ V (G), we denote by γG(x, y) the edge- connectivity between x and y. By the weak version of Menger’s Theorem, γG(x, y) can be equivalently defined as the maximal cardinality of a set of edge-disjoint xy-paths of G or as the minimal cardinality of a cut of G that separates x from y. Thus, γG(x, y) = 0 if and only if x and y belong to different connected components of G. Observe that, assuming that every vertex is κ-edge-connected to itself, κ-edge-connectivity, unlike κ-vertex-connectivity, induces an equivalence relation on V (G) since, for each cardinal κ,
γG(x, y) ≥ κ and γG(y, z) ≥ κ =⇒ γG(x, z) ≥ κ.
The equivalence classes of this relation are called the κ-edge-connectivity classes


or simply κ-classes of G. A graph that has exactly one κ-class is said to be κ-edge-connected. In this paper we only consider edge-connectivity up to the cardinal ω. Thus we will mostly use this truncated definition of edge-
connectivity:
Definition 2.3 Let x and y be two vertices of G, we define γ˜G(x, y) as follows
γ˜G(x, y) := ∞	if γG(x, y) ≥ ω;
γ˜G(x, y) = γG(x, y)	otherwise.

In the first case we will say that x and y are inﬁnitely edge-connected.

A decomposition of G is an equivalence relation on E(G) such that the subgraph induced by the edges of any equivalence class is connected. The subgraphs induced in this way are called the fragments of the decomposition.
Thus, a decomposition of G may be considered as a family of edge-disjoint connected subgraphs of G whose union is the graph G minus its isolated vertices. Among the most frequently studied decompositions are decompo- sitions whose fragments are cycles (i.e.,cycle decompositions) and decompo- sitions whose fragments are cycles, rays or double rays. For results on the existence of such decompositions for infinite graphs, see Nash-Williams [10], Sabidussi [11], Thomassen [13], or Laviolette [7] and [9]. The main theorem of the present paper relies on what we will refer to as Nash-Williams’s Theorem:
Theorem (Nash-Williams [10]) A graph has a cycle decomposition if and only if it does not contain any odd cut.
A decomposition whose fragments are all κ-edge-connected for some (finite or infinite) cardinal κ, is said to be κ-edge-connected , and a decomposition whose fragments are all of cardinality less than or equal to α for some infinite cardinal α, is called an α-decomposition.
In this paper we look for ω-decompositions, and particularly ω-decomposi- tion whose fragments inherit the edge-connectivity of the original graph. More precisely, we consider the following type of decompositions:
Definition 2.4 An ω-decomposition ∆ of G is said to be bond-faithful if
any countable bond of G is contained in some fragment of ∆;
any finite bond of a fragment of ∆ is also a bond in G.
In a bond-faithful ω-decomposition ∆ of G, any countable bond B of G
is by (i), contained in some fragment H and hence is a cut of H. Moreover,


if B is finite, then this cut is always a bond of H since otherwise there is a bond B' of H, strictly contained in B, which because of (ii), must also be a bond of G, contradicting the fact that B is a bond of G. Hence, the following
properties are always satisfied for any set of edges B ⊆ E(G):
if B is finite, then B is a bond of G if and only if it is a bond of some fragment of ∆;
if B is a countable bond of G, then B is a cut of some fragment of ∆;
if B uncountable, and B is a bond of G, then in any fragment H con- taining edges of B, B ∩ E(H) is a countable cut of H.
Note, moreover, that since a cut is an edge-disjoint union of bonds, and because of condition (i) of the definition of bond-faithfulness, we can equi- valently replace condition (ii) of that definition by:
(ii') any finite cut of cardinality of a fragment of ∆ is also a cut in G.

A fundamental property of bond-faithful ω-decompositions, relating the local edge-connectivities of G to those of the fragments of the decomposition, is expressed in the following proposition.
Proposition 2.5 If H is a fragment of a bond-faithful ω-decomposition of G
and x, y any two vertices of H then
γ˜H (x, y) = γ˜G(x, y).

Proof. Since H ⊆ G we must have γ˜H (x, y) ≤ γ˜G(x, y). Hence if γ˜H (x, y) = 
∞, there is nothing to show. On the other hand, if γ˜H (x, y) = k < ω, then
there exists a bond of H of cardinality k separating x and y. By property (ii) of a bond-faithful ω-decomposition this implies that
γ˜G(x, y) ≤ k = γ˜H (x, y) ≤ γ˜G(x, y).

Remark 2.6 It follows from Proposition 2.5 that if G is β-edge-connected, where β ≤ ω, then every fragment of a bond-faithful ω-decomposition of G is likewise β-edge-connected.
Since a decomposition of G is an equivalence relation on E(G) we have the following natural partial order on decompositions of a graph G.
Definition 2.7 A decomposition ∆2 is coarser than ∆1 (denoted by ∆2 ≥
∆1) if each fragment of ∆1 is contained in some fragment of ∆2.


With respect to this order, any (finite or infinite) family of decompositions has a supremum and an infimum. Since fragments have to be connected, the infimum does not always coincide with the infimum in the set of all equivalence
relations. However, for the supremum (denoted by i∈I ∆i), the “connected” supremum coincides with the equivalence-supremum, as stated in the next
lemma.
Lemma 2.8 Let (∆i)i∈I be a family of decompositions of a graph G. Then
i∈I ∆i is the transitive closure of the union of the equivalence relations ∆i.
Proof. Since the transitive closure ∆ of the union of the ∆i’s is already the supremum of the ∆i’s in the set of all equivalence relations on E(G), one only has to show that every ∆-equivalence class edge-induces a connected graph. This is straightforward and left to the reader.	 
The countable supremum respects ω-decompositions and even preserves bond-faithfulness in a strong way.
Lemma 2.9 Let (∆i)i∈I be a countable family of ω-decompositions of G. Then
∆ =	i∈I ∆i is an ω-decomposition; moreover, if the family contains at least one bond-faithful ω-decomposition, then ∆ will also be bond-faithful.
Proof. The first assertion follows from the fact that any fragment of ∆ is the union of at most ω fragments all of cardinality at most ω. Suppose now that the family contains a bond-faithful ω-decomposition ∆0. Then since ∆0 ≤ ∆, any countable bond of G is contained in a fragment of ∆. Moreover, if B is a finite bond of a fragment H of ∆, then for any edge e ∈ B the intersection of B with the fragment H0 of ∆0 containing e is a cut of H0. Hence B contains a bond B0 of H0. Since ∆0 is bond-faithful, B0 is a bond of G. Since B0 is a bond of G and B0 ⊆ B ⊆ E(H), it follows that B0 is a non-empty cut of H contained in the bond B of H and so B = B0, which is a bond of G.	 

ω-covers and 2-edge-connected decompositions
Given a cardinal κ, a κ-cover of a graph G is a family (Hi)i∈I of subgraphs of
G such that each edge of G belongs to exactly κ members of the family. Hence
a decomposition is a 1-cover with all members connected. The case which has received the most attention is κ = 2 with Seymour’s Double Cover Conjecture, which says that every 2-edge-connected graph admits a cycle 2-cover (i.e. a 2-cover all of whose members are cycles); see Seymour [12] or Bondy [1] for a survey. The following result is a (substantial) weakening of that conjecture.
Theorem 3.1 Every 2-edge-connected graph has a cycle ω-cover.


Proof. Let x0 ∈ V (G) and for each i > 0, let Di be the set of edges of a 2-edge-connected graph G having one endpoint at distance i − 1 from x0 and the other at distance i. Let D0 be the set of edges of G whose endpoints are at the same distance from x0. Note that the Di’s form a partition of E(G) into possibly empty sets and that for i ≥ 1,

Di = [Ai, Ai], where Ai = {y ∈ V (G) : distG(x0, y) ≤ i − 1}.
We will now construct for each i ≥ 0 a family Fi of cycles of G such that each edge of Di belongs to at least one cycle of Fi, and such that no edge of G belongs to more than ω cycles of Fi. To obtain F0 (the simplest case) we proceed as follows. Form a multigraph G0 by replacing each edge in G\D0 by ω edges having the same endpoints. Note that G0 is ω-edge-connected since for any x ∈ V (G0)(= V (G)) no edge of an x0x-geodesic will belong to D0; in other words, all edges of the geodesic will have been duplicated ω times. Hence G0 has no finite cut and therefore no odd cut, implying by Nash-Williams’s Theorem stated in Section 2 that G0 has a decomposition into cycles, say ∆0. Any cycle of ∆0 canonically induces either a cycle in G or an edge in E(G)\D0, the latter case occurring only if the cycle of ∆0 is of length 2. Let F0 be the family of all the cycles of G canonically induced by the cycles of ∆0. Then F0 will have the desired properties since any edge in D0 must belong to exactly one cycle in ∆0 and there are at most ω cycles of F0 that may contain a given edge.
Let us now construct Fi for i > 0.  Since Di is a cut of G, it is the
disjoint union of bonds (say Di =	j∈Ji Bij). Given j ∈ Ji, fix two arbitrary

distinct edges e1
and e2
of Bij (note that |Bij| ≥ 2 since by hypothesis G

is 2-edge-connected). In the same way as in the construction of G0, let us construct Gk,k = 1, 2, by replacing in G each edge of E(G)\Di and each ek
i	j
(j ∈ Ji) by ω edges having the same endpoints. Note that the Gk’s, i > 0, k = 1, 2, are all ω-edge-connected since V (Gk) = V (G) and the edges of G which are being ω-duplicated (i.e., the edges in (E(G)\Di) ∪ {ek : j ∈ Ji}) E(G)\∆i ∪ {Ek : j ∈ Ji}) form a connected spanning subgraph of G.
Hence as we have done for F0, we can construct two families of cycles F k
(k = 1, 2) of G, obtained from a cycle decomposition of Gk, such that any edge of G belongs to at most ω cycles of F k and any edge of Di\{ek : j ∈ Ji}
i	j
belongs to at least one cycle of F k.  Since {e1 : j ∈ Ji} is disjoint from
i	j
{e2 : j ∈ Ji}, Fi := F 1 ∪ F2 will have the desired two properties (a cycle is
j	i	i
allowed to appear more than once in the family).
Finally it is easy to see that the family consisting of ω copies of every cycle in	i≥0 Fi is an ω-cover of G.	 
The theorem of Nash-Williams used in this proof is based on a highly


non-trivial transfinite induction. However, as will be seen later, Theorem 3.1 implies Corollary 4.2, which allows a reduction of the proof of Nash-Williams’s Theorem to the countable case which is easy to handle (see Remark 4.3). Hence any direct proof of Theorem 3.1 will give rise to a direct proof of Nash- Williams’s Theorem. Moreover, Theorem 3.1 gives some partial answer to the Cycle 2-Cover Conjecture in the infinite case.
Corollary 3.2 Every bridgeless graph admits a 2-edge-connected ω-decompo- sition.
Proof. Let G be such a graph. We may clearly suppose that G is connected,
i.e. 2-edge-connected. Let Φ be a cycle ω-cover of G given by Theorem 3.1 and ∆ the equivalence relation defined as the transitive closure of the relation Θ on E(G), where eΘe' if and only if Φ contains a cycle containing both e
and e'.
Claim: ∆ is a 2-edge-connected ω-decomposition. Let H be a fragment of ∆.
H is connected, since for any two edges e, e' ∈ E(H) there exist
e1,... , en ∈ E(H) such that e = e1, e' = en and eiΘei+1 for any i = 1, 2,... , n−
1. Let Ci ∈ Φ be a cycle containing both ei and ei+1 and note that  n	Ci is
a connected subgraph of H containing e and e'.
H is trivially 2-edge-connected since any edge e ∈ E(H) is contained
in a cycle of Φ which belongs to H.
H is at most countable since any edge e ∈ E(H) is Θ-related to at most ω other edges, and ∆ is the transitive closure of Θ.	 

Bond-faithful ω-decompositions
The aim of this section is to show that every graph has a bond-faithful ω- decomposition.
Lemma 4.1 Let ∆0 be an ω-decomposition of G. Then there exists an ω- decomposition ∆ which is coarser than ∆0 and has the property that for any fragment H of ∆0, the only countable bonds of H which are bonds of the corresponding fragment of ∆ are those which are bonds of G.
Thus ∆ “purifies” the fragments of ∆0 of all countable bonds that are not bonds in G.


Proof. For each fragment H of ∆0, let (BH )β∈γ
be any well-ordering of the

β	H
set of all the countable bonds of H that are not bonds of G. Then for each
β ∈ γH, fix an edge eH in BH . Since |E(H)|≤ ω, H has at most ω bonds of
β	β
cardinality < ω. Thus, without loss of generality, we may suppose that, for


each H, the ordinal γH is either finite or the ordinal ω. Let

Gβ := G\  {BH\eH : H is a fragment of ∆0 and γH > β}


for any β < ω.  Given any fragment K of ∆0 and any β < γK, eK
is an

edge of Gβ because the fragments of ∆0 are pairwise edge-disjoint. We claim that eK is however not a bridge of Gβ. Otherwise, eK will still be a bridge in
β	β
G\(BK\eK) because G\(BK\eK) can be obtained from Gβ by putting back
β	β	β	β
every BH\eH except BK\eK itself, and because H\(BH\eH) is a connected
β	β	β	β	β	β
subgraph of G for every fragment H of ∆0. Hence BK will be a cut of G, and
since it is a bond of K, it will therefore be a bond of G, a contradiction.
Now, for each β < ω, apply Corollary 3.2 and choose a 2-edge-connected ω-decomposition Γβ of Gβ\{e ∈ E(Gβ) : e is a bridge of Gβ}. Then let Φβ be the ω-decomposition of G obtained from Γβ by adding every bridge of Gβ and every edge of G\Gβ as an equivalence class of one element. Moreover, for each
edge eH, fix a cycle CH that contains eH and is contained in the fragment of
β	β	β
Φβ that contains eH. Hence BH ∩ E(CH) = {eH} for any fragment H of ∆0

β
and any β < γH.
β	β	β

Let us show that ∆ := ∆0 ∨ ( β<ω Φβ), is the desired ω-decomposition. Clearly, ∆0 ≤ ∆, and it follows from Lemma 2.9 that ∆ is an ω-decomposition. Denote by LH the fragment of ∆ that contains H (and hence all the eH ’s).

Since CH is contained in LH for any H, CH\eH
is therefore a path (edge-

β	β	β
disjoint from BH ) that connects (in LH ) the two components which are sepa-
rated by BH in H. Thus no BH can be a bond of LH.	 
β	β
Applying the preceding lemma ω times we will obtain an ω-decomposition satisfying condition (ii) of the bond-faithfulness definition. This is the content of the following corollary.
Corollary 4.2 Let ∆0 be an ω-decomposition of G. Then there exists an ω- decomposition ∆ such that ∆0 ≤ ∆ and any countable bond of a fragment of
∆ is also a bond in G.
Proof. By Lemma 2.9 we can inductively construct an increasing sequence (∆β)β<ω of ω-decompositions as follows:
∆0 is the decomposition given in the hypothesis;
∆β+1 is an ω-decomposition such that ∆β ≤ ∆β+1 and has the property of Lemma 4.1 with ∆0, ∆ replaced by ∆β, ∆β+1 respectively.
We claim that ∆ = β<ω ∆β is an ω-decomposition having the desired prop- erties. First note that ∆0 ≤ ∆ and that, by Lemma 2.9, ∆ is an ω-decompo- sition. Now, by way of contradiction, let B be any finite bond of a fragment


H of ∆ which is not a bond of G.If K is the component of G that contains H, then K\B is still a connected graph, and hence no subset of B can be a bond of G. Fix an edge e ∈ B and, for any ordinal β < ω, denote by Hβ the fragment of ∆β that contains e. It is easy to see that (Hβ)β<ω is a nested sequence of subgraphs of G whose union is H, and that B ∩ E(Hβ) is a cut
of Hβ. Cuts being edge-disjoint unions of bonds, there is a bond [Aβ, Aβ]Hβ of H β  that is contained in B. Since no subset of B ∩ E(Hβ) is a bond of G, [Aβ, Aβ]Hβ is not a bond of Hβ+1. This and the fact that Hβ\[Aβ, Aβ]Hβ is composed of exactly two connected components (viz. Aβ and Aβ), implies that Hβ+1\[Aβ, Aβ]Hβ is connected. Hence there exists an AβAβ-path that is totally contained in Hβ+1\Hβ, and therefore
B ∩ (E(Hβ+1)\E(Hβ)) /= ∅ for any β < ω.
It follows that B is infinite, a contradiction.	 
Remark 4.3 Let G be a graph without any odd cut. Clearly, any decompo- sition ∆ of G given by Corollary 4.2 (with ∆0, the decomposition all of whose fragments are single edges) will only consist in countable fragments with no odd cut. Thus, as stated before, Corollary 4.2 allows a reduction of the proof of the Nash-William’s Theorem to the countable case.

Before proceeding to our main theorem we need one last result which shows that a vertex of “high” degree in an uncountable graph is either “highly” connected to some other vertex or is a cut-vertex.
Theorem 4.4 Let G be a connected graph (possibly with and multiple edges), x ∈ V (G) and µ be a regular uncountable cardinal. If degG(x) ≥ µ, then x is a cut-vertex of G or is µ-vertex-connected to some vertex y /= x.
Proof. Suppose that x is not a cut-vertex of G. Hence G−x is still connected; choose a spanning tree T of G − x and let J be the union of all cycles of T ∪ A, where A is the subgraph of G induced by all the edges incident with x. Since T is a tree any cycle of T ∪ A must contain x. Hence J is connected. Moreover, since T is connected, any two edges e1, e2 of G incident with x must be contained in some cycle of T ∪ A, implying that A ⊆ J and that J1 = J − x is a tree.
We claim that some y ∈ V (J1) has degree at least µ in J1. By way of contradiction, suppose this is not the case. Let u be any vertex of J1. By a straightforward inductive argument one can show that the sets
Di := {v ∈ V (J1) : distJ1 (u, v) = i}
are all of cardinality less than µ because µ is regular and |Di|≤ Σv∈Di−1 degJ1 (v)


for any i > 0.  This gives rise to a contradiction since V (J1) ⊆  i∈ω Di,
|J1|≥ µ and µ is a regular cardinal.
Note that J − y is connected because as already stated, every cycle of T ∪ A must contain x. However, since J1 = J − x is a tree, J − {x, y} will break into at least µ components, and from each of these components together with x and y one can construct an xy-path. In this way we obtain at least µ internally vertex-disjoint xy-paths.	 
Corollary 4.5 If a connected graph G (possibly with loops and multiple edges) contains no two distinct ω1-edge-connected vertices, then every block of G are countable.
Proof. By way of contradiction, suppose B is an uncountable block of G. Since ω1 is a regular uncountable cardinal, some vertex must have degree at least ω1 in B and so, by Theorem 4.4 either B has a cut-vertex (contradicting the definition of a block) or two distinct vertices are ω1-vertex-connected in B and therefore ω1-edge-connected in G (contradicting the hypothesis). 

The following is our main theorem.
Theorem 4.6 Every graph has a bond-faithful ω-decomposition.
Proof. Let G be a graph, by Corollary 4.2, we only have to show that G has an ω-decomposition that satisfies the property (i) of the definition of bond-faithfulness. Clearly we may consider a connected graph G, and we may moreover assume that G is uncountable since otherwise we can take the decomposition having G as its only fragment.
Let σ be the equivalence relation on V (G) induced by ω1-edge-connectivity, i.e.,
xσ y	if and only if	x = y or γG(x, y) > ω.
Let G/σ be the quotient graph modulo σ, in other words, the graph obtained from G by identifying the vertices of each σ-class without identifying any edge. Thus G/σ may have loops and multiple edges. Since there is a canonical bijection between E(G) and E(G/σ), we will suppose for convenience that E(G) = E(G/σ). We shall also use the following notation: given a subgraph H of G/σ, we denote by H the lifted subgraph of G corresponding to H (i.e., the subgraph formed by the edges of H, considered as edges of G, together with their incident vertices).
By Corollary 4.5, the blocks of G/σ are countable. Hence by Remark 2.2 so are the bonds of G/σ. Since these bonds are also bonds of G and since a countable bond of G of cannot separate two ω1-edge-connected vertices, it


follows that the bonds of G/σ are exactly the countable bonds of G.
Let ∆1 be the decomposition of G/σ whose fragments are its blocks. Clearly ∆1 is a bond-faithful ω-decomposition of G/σ but unfortunately not necessarily a decomposition of G, because the subgraph of G induced by the edges of a block of G/σ is not necessarily connected.
The existence of such a decomposition of G is a consequence of the follow- ing:
Claim: From the set (Hi)i∈I of all blocks of G/σ, one can construct a family
(Ki)i∈I of connected subgraphs of G such that
H^i ⊆ Ki for any i ∈ I;
Ki is countable for any i ∈ I;
each edge e ∈ E(G) belongs to at most ﬁnitely many different Ki’s.
Indeed, assuming the claim to be true, it is easy to see that a suitable ω- decomposition of G is the equivalence relation defined as the transitive closure of the relation Θ given by:
e Θ e' ⇐⇒ e, e' ∈ E(Ki) for some i ∈ I.
Proof of the claim: Suppose 0 ∈ I and consider the partial order ≤ on the index set I arising from the block-cutpoint tree of G/σ, i.e.,

i < j	⇐⇒	i /= j and some (and hence any) path of G/σ joining a vertex of H0
to a vertex of Hj contains an edge of Hi. (See Figure 2 for an example.)

Fig. 2. In this example, i < j.
We have chosen to define strict inequality on I because in the case where Hi is a loop, no path of G/σ joining a vertex of H0 to a vertex of Hi contains an edge of Hi, and even if Hi is not a loop, then some but not all of those paths

contain such an edge. For each i ∈ I let
Li :=  Hj.
j≥i
Since any i ∈ I has only finitely many predecessors in the order ≤ defined above, it follows that any edge e ∈ E(G/σ) belongs to at most finitely many Lj’s, namely those for which j ≤ ie, where ie is the subscript of the unique Hi that contains e.
Clearly Li is connected; let us prove that so is Li. If i = 0, then Li = G which is connected by assumption. If Hi is a loop, then i is ≤-maximal which implies that Hi = Li and hence that Li is connected (indeed, a single edge). If i /= 0 and Hi is not a loop, then let qi be the unique cut-vertex of G/σ belonging to Hi that separates the edges of Li from those of H0. Observe that any two σ-equivalent vertices x, y ∈ V (Li) ⊆ V (G), which do not belong to the σ-class Qi of G corresponding to qi are connected in G by ω1 edge-disjoint paths. At most ω of these paths can meet Qi because otherwise x and y would belong to Qi. Thus, x and y are connected (in fact ω1-edge-connected)
in Li. This, together with the fact that Li − qi is connected, implies that Li − Qi (the lifted graph corresponding to Li − qi) is connected. Hence if Li is not connected, all but one of its components (namely the one that contains Li − Qi) have all their vertices in Qi. Any such component corresponds in Li to a union of loops at qi. Being blocks contained in Li, these loops are among the Hj’s with j ≥ i. But by the definition of the order, any loop at qi is either Hi itself (which is excluded by assumption) or has a subscript which is incomparable with i. Thus we have reach a contradiction, i.e., Li is connected. It is not hard to see (but not needed for the rest of the proof) that the Li’s satisfy conditions (1) and (3). Their cardinality, however, may be uncountable. To overcome this difficulty, choose a spanning tree Ti of Li (i ∈ I) and define Ki to be the union Hi and all paths in Ti that connect two vertices of Hi. Clearly, Ki is a connected subgraph of Li (and hence of G). To finish the proof
of the claim, let us show that the family (Ki)i∈I has the required properties
(1), (2), (3).
Hi ⊆ Ki is trivially true for any i ∈ I because Hi = K0.
|E(Ki)| ≤ ω for any i ∈ I, because so is |E(Hi)| which is equal to
|E(Hi)|, and because Ki is the union of Hi and at most ω2 paths of Ti.
This is a consequence of the fact that any edge e ∈ E(G) can belong to at most finitely many Lj’s, because as has been shown earlier e (viewed as an edge of G/σ) can belong to at most finitely many Lj’s.	 


Theorem 4.6 implies the following apparently stronger result.
Theorem 4.7 Let (Hi)i∈I be a family of edge-disjoint connected countable subgraphs of G. Then G has a bond-faithful ω-decomposition ∆ such that each Hi and each non-isolated vertex of degree ≤ ω in G is contained in one and only one fragment of ∆.

Proof. Let ∆1 be any bond-faithful ω-decomposition of G, ∆2 the ω-decom- position of G whose fragments are the Hi’s and each of the edges of G which do not belong to any Hi, and ∆3 the ω-decomposition which is the transitive and reflexive closure of the following binary relation Θ:
eΘe'  ⇐⇒  both e, e' are incident to x for
some vertex x of degree ≤ ω in G.
By Lemma 2.9, ∆ := ∆1 ∨ ∆2 ∨ ∆3 is the desired decomposition.	 

Bond-faithful ω-decompositions provide a way of splitting a graph into edge-disjoint subgraphs, each of which preserves the “small” edge-connectivi- ties of the original graph. In this section, we will show that a graph can also be split into edge-disjoint subgraphs which preserve the “high” edge- connectivities of the original graph.
Proposition 4.8 Every graph G is the edge-disjoint union of two (not nec- essarily connected) spanning subgraphs, say K and L, such that
γK (x, y) = γL(x, y) = γG(x, y)
for each pair x,y of inﬁnitely edge-connected vertices of G.
Proof. We leave it to the reader to show that this is true for countable graphs. So suppose G is uncountable. By Theorem 4.6, there exists a bond-faithful
ω-decomposition ∆ = (Hi)i∈I of G. Since we assume the proposition to be proved in the countable case, and each Hi is countable, Hi is the union of two
edge-disjoint subgraphs Ki and Li such that any pair of vertices x, y ∈ V (Hi) which are infinitely edge-connected in Hi are also infinitely edge-connected in
both Ki and Li. Let K :=  i∈I Ki and L :=  i∈I Li, and let us prove that they both preserve α-edge-connectivity for any α ≥ ω or, in other words, that for any x, y ∈ V (G) with γG(x, y) = α, we have γK (x, y) = α and γL(x, y) = α. Note that by symmetry, we only have to show that γK (x, y) = α.
Take a set P = (Pβ)β<α of edge-disjoint xy-paths of G and subdivide each
P into edge-disjoint consecutive subpaths P 1, P 2,... ,Pjβ such that
β	β	β	β
x is an end-vertex of P 1 and y of Pjβ ;
β	β


the end-edges of each P j belong to the same fragment of ∆;
no edge of Pj+1 ∪ Pj+2 ∪ ... ∪ Pjβ belongs to the fragment of ∆ that contains
β	β	β
the end-edges of Pj, for any j.
To finish the proof we will show that there exists a set Q = (Qβ)β<α of edge-disjoint xy-paths of K such that for each β < α, Qβ can be subdivided
into Q1 ∪ Q2 ∪ ... ∪ Qjβ such that
β	β	β
Pj and Qj have the same end-vertices ;
β	β
j is contained in Kl where Hl is the fragment of ∆ that contains the two
end-edges of Pj.
Such a family Q exists if for each fragment Hi of ∆ the set Pi of all the Pj’s whose end-edges belong to Hi is in one-to-one correspondence with some set of edge-disjoint paths of Ki such that each Pj corresponds to a path having the same end-vertices. Since Hi, and hence Pi, is countable, we only have to show that the two end-vertices of each subpath in Pi are infinitely edge-connected in Ki. By way of contradiction suppose there exists some P j in Pi whose end-
vertices u, v satisfy γK (u, v) < ω and suppose that j is the least integer for

which there exists such a P j. By the choice of Ki we have γ
(u, v) < ω, and

so some finite bond B of Hi separates u from v in Hi. Since ∆ is bond-faithful,
B is also a bond of G. Moreover, since P j+1 ∪ ... ∪ Pjβ is edge-disjoint from
β	β
Hi, it is edge-disjoint from B, implying that B not only separates u from v in G, but also u from y. Thus, γG(u, y) < ω. On the other hand, γG(x, u) ≥ ω by the minimality of j; therefore x and y cannot be infinitely edge-connected
in G, a contradiction.	 

A special well-ordering on vertices of graphs
Theorem 4.4 has the following consequence:
Theorem 5.1 Let G be a graph (possibly with loops and multiple edges) and α an uncountable regular cardinal. Then for any α-class X of G, [X, X]G is a union of bonds of cardinality less than α.
Proof. Consider G/X, the graph obtained from G by identifying the vertices of X and denote by x the new vertex so obtained. If [X, X]G contains a bond of G of cardinality ≥ α then G/X contains a block in which x has degree ≥ α, contradicting Theorem 4.4 applied to that block.	 
This result, interesting in its own right, also has the striking consequence that it is always possible to well-order the ω-classes of a graph in such a way


that the union of all the ω-classes that precede any given one is separable from it by a finite cut. Since it is always possible to separate a finite set of ω-classes from any other one, it is easy to construct such a well-ordering when there are at most countably many ω-classes. The real problem occurs when there are uncountably many. The existence of such a well-ordering can be a very useful tool for constructions on infinite graphs.
The next theorem establishes this result and generalizes it to any infinite regular cardinal.
Theorem 5.2 Let W the set of all ω-classes of G. Then there exists a well- ordering on W (say W = ([xδ])δ<β) such that each [xµ] ∈W can be separated from δ<µ[xδ] by a ﬁnite cut of G.
Proof. Case 1. G is countable. We claim that in this case any well-ordering ([xδ])δ<β) of W with β ≤ ω has the desired property.
Let [xµ] ∈ W and for each δ < µ let [Aδ, Aδ]G be a finite cut such that [xδ] ⊆ V (Aδ) and [xµ] ⊆ V (Aδ). Now observe that

B :=   Aδ,  Aδ 
δ<µ	δ<µ
is a cut separating [xµ] from all the [xδ]’s, δ < µ, and moreover that B is finite, because so is µ and all the [Aδ, Aδ]G’s, and because
|B|≤ Σ [Aδ, Aδ]G .
δ<µ
Case 2.	G is an uncountable connected graph. Let G˜ be the quotient
graph of G modulo its ω-classes. G˜ may have loops and multiple edges. It
is clear that any well-ordering ≤Θ on V (G) such that each x ∈ V (G) can be separated from {y ∈ V (G) : y <Θ x} by a finite cut of G, when interpreted in G, is a well-ordering with the required properties.
Since no two vertices of G are infinitely edge-connected, and since ω1 is regular and uncountable, it follows by Theorem 5.1 that no block of G contains vertices of uncountable degree. Therefore all blocks are countable. Let ∆ be the set of all blocks of G. Note that ∆ is a decomposition of G. Fix H0 ∈ ∆ and define a partial order ≤1 on ∆ by:

H ≤1 K	⇐⇒	H = K or H = H0 or every path of G˜ joining a vertex of H0
to a vertex of K contains an edge of H.
In other words, as in the proof of the Claim of Theorem 4.6, ≤1 is the partial order induced by the block-cutpoint tree of G˜ rooted at H0. We leave it to


the reader to show that, because of this tree structure, ≤1 can be refined to a well-ordering, say ≤∆.
For x ∈ V (G), denote by δ(x) the ≤∆-smallest element of ∆ that contains x, and let φ : ∆ → λ be any injective function whose codomain is an ordinal and which satisfies H ≤∆ K ⇔ φ(H) ≤ φ(K) for any H, K ∈ ∆. For any H ∈ ∆\{H0}, there exists a unique vertex xH ∈ V (H) such that δ(xH ) /= H. Let xH0 be any vertex of V (H0).
For each H ∈ ∆ define an enumeration ψH : V (H) → ω of V (H) such that
xH is the first element (i.e.: ψH (xH ) = 0). Finally define
θ : V (G) → λ × ω
x '→ (φ(δ(x)), ψδ(x)(x)),
where λ × ω is the well-ordered set obtained by the lexicographic order on the cartesian product.
Clearly θ is injective, and a well-ordering ≤Θ on V (G˜) is defined by

x ≤Θ y ⇔ θ(x) ≤ θ(y).

We will show that ≤Θ has the required separation property.
Because of the lexicographic structure which induces ≤Θ and because of the choice of the xH ’s, ≤Θ restricted to any V (H) coincides with ≤H . Since every H is countable, by the claim of Case 1, ≤H must have the property stated in the proposition.
Let x ∈ V (G) and S := {y ∈ V (G) : y <Θ x}, and suppose by way of contradiction that all cuts separating x from S are infinite. The remark in the preceding paragraph implies that x /∈ V (H0) since otherwise S = {y ∈ V (H0); y <H0 x}.
Put K := δ(x) and SK := S ∩ V (K). Observe that H0 <∆ K, and that
y <K x for any y ∈ SK. Moreover, xK ∈ SK, since otherwise x = xK, which contradicts the fact that δ(xK) <∆ K = δ(x). Thus, ≤K having the required separation property, there exists a finite cut C = [A, A]K of K such that x ∈ V (A) and SK ⊆ V (A). If Ax is the component of A containing x, then [Ax, Ax]K ⊆ [A, A]K; hence without loss of generality we may assume A to be connected. C must be non-empty because K is connected and SK /= ∅ and, moreover, since K is a block of G, C is also a cut of G. Since G is connected,
there is a unique induced subgraph B of G˜ such that A ⊆ B, A ⊆ B and
[B, B]G˜ = C. Moreover, since A is connected, so also is B.

To finish the proof, let us show that S ⊆ V (B). By way of contradiction,
suppose there exists z ∈ S ∩ V (B).  Being connected, B must contain an
xz-path P . Since SK ⊆ V (A) ⊆ V (B), z cannot belong to SK, and hence


z /∈ V (K), i.e., δ(z) /= K. Moreover, δ(z) <∆ K because of the lexicographic structure of ≤Θ. This implies that P contains xK, contradicting the fact that P ⊆ B and xK ∈ SK ⊆ V (A) ⊆ V (B).
Case 3. G is uncountable and not connected. Left to the reader.	 

Any well-ordering of the set of ω-classes of G can be extended to a well- ordering on V (G), and it is easy to see that, if the well-ordering on the ω-classes has the property of Theorem 5.2, then any such extension has the compactness property stated in the following corollary. We shall extend the notion of infinite edge-connectivity between two vertices introduced in Section 2, by
saying that a set X ⊆ V (G) is inﬁnitely edge-connected to a vertex x ∈ V (G) if
there exist ω edge-disjoint xX-paths, or equivalently if X cannot be separated from u by a cut of G of cardinality< ω.
Corollary 5.3 The set of vertices of any graph G can be well-ordered in such a way that for each pair X ⊆ V (G), u ∈ V (G) such that u is an upper bound of X, the set X is inﬁnitely edge-connected to u if and only if some ﬁnite subset of X is inﬁnitely edge-connected to u. (The ﬁnite subset can be chosen to be a singleton.)

Acknowledgement
This paper is part of a Ph.D. thesis written under the supervision of Gert Sabidussi. The author wishes to thank him for his support and comments throughout this work.


References
J. A. Bondy, Small Cycle Double Covers of Graphs, Cycles and Rays (G.Hahn, G.Sabidussi and R.E.Woodrow, eds.), Kluwer, Dordrecht 1990, 21-40.
R. Alur, C. Courcoubetis, N. Halbwachs, T.A. Henzinger, P.-H. Ho, X. Nicollin, A. Olivero, J. Sifakis and S. Yovine, The algorithmic analysis of hybrid systems, 138, 1995, 3–34.
J. A. Bondy, U. S. R. Murty, Graph theory with applications, American Elsevier Publishing Co., Inc., 1976, x + 264 pp.
J. Desharnais and A. Edalat and P. Panangaden, Bisimulation for Labelled Markov Processes,
Information and Computation 179 no2 (2002), 163–193.
M. DeVos, T. Johnson, and P.D. Seymour, Cut-Coloring and Circuit-Covering, preprint 2003.
T. Jech, Set theory, Springer Monographs in Mathematics, The third millennium edition, revised and expanded , Springer-Verlag, Berlin (2003), xiv+769 pp, ISBN 3-540-44085-2.


F. Laviolette, Decomposition of infinite eulerian graphs with a small number of vertices of infinite degree, Discrete Math. 130 (1994), 83-87.
F. Laviolette, Decompositions of infinite graphs: Part I, Bond-faithful decompostions, preprint, Universit´e Laval, 2003, , submited to JCT Ser.B.
F. Laviolette, Decompositions of infinite graphs: Part II, circuit-decomposition, preprint, Universit´e Laval, 2003, submited to JCT Ser.B.
C. St. J. A. Nash-Williams, Decomposition of graphs into closed and endless chains, Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 10 (1960), 221-238.
G. Sabidussi, Infinite Euler graphs, Canad. J. Math. 16 (1964), 821-838.
P. D. Seymour, Sums of circuits, in : Graph Theory and Related Topics (J.A. Bondy and U.S.R. Murty, eds.), Academic Press, New York, 1979, 341-355.
C. Thomassen, Infinite graphs, in: Selected Topics in Graph Theory 2, (L.W. Beineke and R.J. Wilson, eds.), Academic Press, London, 1983, 129-160.
