Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 73 (2004) 213–215 
www.elsevier.com/locate/entcs


Uniform Domains and Uniform Spaces (Abstract)
Hideki Tsuiki1
Division of Mathematics
Faculty of Integrated Human Studies, Kyoto University Kyoto, Japan

Abstract
In a previous work, the current author showed that every compact metric space X can be represented in an omega-algebraic domain D so that X is the retract of the set L(D) of limit (i.e. non-finite) elements of D. This means that every infinite strictly increasing sequence in the set K(D) of finite elements of D can be considered as identifying one point of X, and thus this domain structure can be used to define computation over the space X. In this article, we show a condition on an omega-algebraic domain D which ensures that L(D) has a (separable complete) metric space as its retract. We introduce the notion of a uniform domain, and explain that it corresponds to a uniform space with countable weight. Here, we use the word domain for an omega-algebraic dcpo.
Keywords: Uniform space, domain representation, stratified domain

In [3], the current author showed that every compact metric space X can be represented in an ω-algebraic domain D so that X is the retract of the set L(D) of limit (i.e. non-finite) elements of D. This means that every infinite strictly increasing sequence in the set K(D) of finite elements of D can be considered as identifying one point of X, and thus this domain structure can be used to define computation over the space X. In this article, we show a condition on an ω-algebraic domain D which ensures that L(D) has a (separable complete) metric space as its retract. Following [2], we introduce the notion of a uniform domain, and explain that it corresponds to a uniform space with countable weight [1]. Here, we use the word domain for an ω-algebraic dcpo.

1 Email: tsuiki@i.h.kyoto-u.ac.jp



1571-0661 © 2004 Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.entcs.2004.08.011

214	H. Tsuiki / Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 73 (2004) 213–215

Definition 0.1 When P is a poset, we define the level of d ∈ P as the max- imal length of a chain ⊥P = a0 Ç a1 Ç ... Ç an = d, when it exists, and we write Kn(P ) for the set of level-n elements of P . A poset P is stratiﬁed if each e ∈ P has a level, that is, if we have P = K0(P ) ∪ K1(P ) ∪   A domain D
is stratiﬁed if K(D) is a stratified poset, and D is evenly stratiﬁed if all the paths to d have the same length for every d ∈ K(D). We call Kn(D) ∩ Kx the set of level-n approximations of x.
Definition 0.2 Let D be a stratified domain and d ∈ Km(D). We denote by d∗ ⊂ Km(D) the set of elements of Km(D) which are compatible with d. If, for each d ∈ Km(D), there exists a lower bound of d∗ in Kn(D), we define that n <∗ m. When D be a stratified domain and for each n ∈ N, there is a m ∈ N such that n <∗ m, we say that D is a uniform domain.
Here, a is compatible with b means that a and b have an upper bound in
D (which also implies that a and b have an upper bound in K(D)).
Definition 0.3 Let P be a poset.
x ∈ P is a minimal element if y ≤ x implies y = x for all y ∈ P . We write MP for the set of all minimal elements of P .
We say that P has enough minimal elements if, for all y ∈ P , there exists
x ∈ MP such that x ≤ y.

Theorem 0.4 Let D be a uniform domain.
L(D) has enough minimal elements.
ML(D) is a retract of L(D).
ML(D) is a Hausdorff space.
Note that many of the domains studied in computer science, for example,
Pω = {a | a ⊆ N } and Plotkin’s T ω do not have enough minimal elements. The proof for this theorem is analogous to that of the existence of a minimal Cauchy filter in a uniform space. When d ∈ K(D), we define dˆ as the subset
↑d ∩ ML(D) of ML(D).
Theorem 0.5 When D is a uniform domain, D induces a complete unifor- mity µ of countable weight on ML(D), deﬁned through the base consisting of the coverings B = {V0, V1,. } deﬁned as Vi = {dˆ | d ∈ Ki(D)}.
Since the weight of the uniformity constructed in Theorem 0.5 is countable, we have the following.
Corollary 0.6 When D is a uniform domain, ML(D) is metrizable.
On the other hand, we have the following.

H. Tsuiki / Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 73 (2004) 213–215	215

Theorem 0.7 Let (X, µ) be a complete uniform space with a countable weight, and U0 > U1 > ... be a sequence of open coverings which forms a base of µ. From this sequence, we can form a evenly-stratiﬁed uniform domain D such that X is homeomorphic to ML(D).
Thus, a uniform domain can be considered as a uniform space with a selection of a base.

References
J. R. Isbell. Dimension Theory. American Mathematical Society, Rhode Island, 1964.
Hideki Tsuiki. Representations of complete uniform spaces via uniform domains. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, 66, 2002.
Hideki Tsuiki. Compact metric spaces as minimal-limit sets in domains of bottomed sequences.
Mathematical Structures in Computer Science, 2003. to appear.
