Different approaches to handling partiality have been developed by various researchers, such as the work on partial cartesian closed categories by Curien and Obtulowicz, as well as the work on p-categories by E. Robinson and G. Rosolini. Later, Cockett and Lack further advanced this field with their work on restriction categories.

A more refined syntax is essential for syntactically sensitive aspects, such as rewriting. We introduce some relevant theories and briefly describe the construction of the classifying category of a theory. Emphasis is placed on the fact that different notions of natural transformation correspond to different notions of homomorphism of partial algebras under the functorial semantics.

In this section, we provide a review of standard material about categories of partial maps. Subsequently, we delve into the fundamental theory of unitary categories, establish some basic results about the unitary quotient of a category, and investigate its impact on the global sections functor. This will be crucial in the subsequent section where we study completions of partial algebras.

The finite limits we consider are limits in the enriched sense. However, we will refer simply to terminal objects and products, as there will be no room for confusion. If a restriction category has a terminal object and binary (and hence all finite) products, we say that the category is cartesian. Similarly, a restriction functor that preserves all of this structure is called a cartesian functor. Each of the above 2-categories of restriction categories has a cartesian variant; for example, we denote by cartrcatl the 2-category of cartesian restriction categories, cartesian functors, and lax total transformations.

The logic we present is a typed logic, where atomic types are denoted a0, a1, and so forth, and general types are formed by taking finite products of atomic types, including the empty product type denoted 1.

In the universal algebra approach to partial algebras, different terminology is used. What we have referred to as a strict, total homomorphism is called closed, while our lax total homomorphisms are considered the standard notion and are simply called homomorphisms.

One way to turn a theory into a total one is to add axioms of the form ()|t=() for every term t in the language or, more concisely, adding axioms ()|f(x1,...,xn)=() for each function symbol. This process results in a theory tot(t).

A unitary theory is defined as a partial theory t for which t|t= s|t implies t|s= s|t for all terms t, s. A model a of a theory t in a category d is unitary if, for every pair of terms t, s in t and every term r, [t|r]a=[[s|r]a implies that [t|s]a=[[s|t]a.

To illustrate the usefulness of knowing that a theory is unitary, we consider the problem of completing a partial model. The following definition, or variations of it, can be found in texts on partial algebras.

In this section, we present further results concerning partial combinatory logic and its classifying category. Specifically, we investigate the global sections of the generic model. Some of the results rely on the fact that partial combinatory logic has a confluent rewriting presentation. The precise notion of rewriting system on partial terms, as well as an analysis of confluence and normalization in such systems, is the subject of a forthcoming paper. However, because some of the applications are closely related to the material presented here, we have chosen to present them here.