These systems can be represented as hidden-variable systems, where unobservable variables capture the history of past interactions. The interactive process may be of finite duration, after which the history of interactions is discarded, or it may be of infinite duration, with the history never being discarded.

In general, the system is assumed to be maximal, meaning that any state with no incoming constraint is considered to have a "permitted" modality by default, unless forbidden. Only states with incoming "permitted" constraints are minimal and are forbidden unless their incoming "permitted" constraints are active.

In practical applications, the interaction schema is extended to incorporate richer constraint semantics. However, for the purpose of developing a theory for HAS, we initially focus on simple formulations of the interaction schema model and acknowledge limitations in the expressiveness of the current model. For example, constraint disjunctions are not defined, and constraints do not propagate in the system. Despite these simplifications, we aim to develop a theory of HAS in this paper.

In an interaction schema I, a given path s = s0... h from one of the start states to one of the end states is said to have an altruistic collaboration number am,n(s) if there exists a set of k processes and k states such that:

We assume that all collaborators take their positions before any adversaries take their first step. The only way state si can be unclean is through an incoming "permitted" constraint (Lemma 4.1). Adding a "permitted" constraint to state si from another state sj increases the length of the chain by 1. It follows from the previous argument that state si, and hence state s, can be made clean only if state sj is clean.

If there is a chain of one or more "permitted" constraints leading to s, from Lemma 4.2, s can be made clean by collaborators entering the chain. It does not matter if the chain has incoming "forbidden" or "obligatory" constraints from anywhere, as we assume that there are no adversaries in the system until all collaborators have taken their positions (Lemma 4.1).

Dependencies are part of the service logic of the system, whereas interaction schema seeks to model interference among disparate mutually autonomous processes pursuing their own goals without any larger shared objective to be collectively achieved. Collaboration features only as an emergent property of convenience used by processes to reduce uncertainties in the system and is not part of the service logic. In an interaction schema, the actual steps of coordinated activity that a set of agents may eventually execute might be unforeseen by the system designer.

The paper addresses the validation problem in a simplified HAS model for altruistic collaboration. A significant limitation of the current approach is the assumption that no adversaries enter the system until the collaborators take their positions. However, even in the context of altruistic collaboration, it is necessary to address situations where collaboration occurs despite adversarial influence. Since the adversaries and their plans are hidden, collaboration in such situations would need to take the form of game-theoretic strategies with probabilistic plans. As an extension to this work, we plan to explore the integration of system design that addresses a system-wide teleological objective with game-theoretic strategies that address individual process objectives.