cloud database management system is a new emerging concept recently introduced in the world. in cloud the concept of standard architecture of cloud database management system is not yet been implemented. in this paper we are proposing a framework for 5-layered architecture in cloud database management system. first layer introduced is the external layer, this layer is closest to the user, in which manageability, providing transparency and security are the important issue that should be considered. second layer is the conceptual middleware layer, as there are heterogeneous databases and clouds are available in the market, so here interoperability is the major issue. third layer is the conceptual layer in which programming techniques, transaction management, query processing and optimization are the issues that should be considered. forth layer is the physical middleware layer, as there are various platforms available so here also, interoperability between various platforms are the biggest issue and the last layer is the physical layer in which how data can be stored so that it can be easily accessible without so much overhead so here data security, storage, backup, load balancing, partitioning, scaling, elasticity, fault tolerance and replication are the important issues that should be considered.



to combine the fault tolerance, heterogeneous cluster and ease of use out of the box capability of mapreduce with the efficiency, performance and tool plug ability of shared nothing parallel database systems, hybrid solution is needed. this solution will have a significant impact on the cloud database market [2]. cloud database system architecture organises cloud architecture into a hierarchy of three level cloud data centre, cloud service provider level, and client level [9].



manageability: this layer deals with managing the various users. this also keeps record of the time a particular user uses the cdmbs (cloud data base management system). user payment is decided based on this time. this layer also keeps status of payment due to a user. this layer should also generate report like



transparency: main function of this layer is to provide transparencies to the users. transparency is one of the advantages of cloud databases where it means that the physical placement of data is not known to the users. transparency makes development of various types of real time applications easier. its support flexibility mobility etc.



and finds the cheapest execution plan among the many possible execution plans that give the same answer. security: at this layer the main concern is that data should not be destroyed, altered disclosed or copied by any unauthorized user. the conceptual layer provides authorization control methods, which prevents sensitive data being accessed by any unauthorized users. it includes multilevel security policies.



partitioning: partitioning is a technique that is used by cloud providers to balance and share the load. this balancing and sharing improves the performance, scalability and availability of cdbms in multitenant environment [8]. where to use horizontal partitioning and where to use vertical partitioning for cloud data, these decisions are to be taken at this layer.



the five layered architecture of cloud database management system have been introduced in this work. functions of the five layers namely external layer, conceptual middleware layer, conceptual layer, physical middleware layer, physical layer have been described. we have also explained various issues and challenges involved with each layer.



