synthesize biologically active compounds against cancer[6,7], we became interested in the evaluation of a series of thiazolo[3,2-a] pyrimidin-5-one derivatives with various substituents at the 3-, 6and 7-positions, aiming at identifying potent anticancer agents. the phosphoinositide 3-kinase(pi3k) pathway is an intracellular signaling pathway that has regulatory roles in cell survival, proliferation, and differentiation, and a critical role in tumorigenesis[8,9]. in cancer, multiple studies have investigated the therapeutic targeting of the pi3k pathway, and multiple inhibitors targeting pi3k and its isoforms, protein kinase b/akt, and mammalian target of rapamycin(mtor), have been developed. a us patent reported thiazolopyrimidine compounds, substituted with a morpholine ring, of formulae i and ii, with anticancer activity, and more specifically with pi3 kinase inhibitory activity. the compounds may inhibit tumor growth in mammals and may be useful



taking the above mentioned compounds as lead, a part of the research undertaken here involved the combination of a morpholinoalkyl moiety with the thiazolo[3,2-a]pyrimidin-5-one series in a single molecular frame of the general structure(a) with the hope of finding interesting antitumor activity through inhibiting pi3k. a morpholine ring is often introduced to enhance water solubility. the group is attached through alkyl chain in order to protrude from the binding site and be exposed to the surrounding aqueous environment.



dmf(10 ml) was stirred at room temperature until completion of the reaction 2 and 3 min). the progress of the reaction was monitored by thin-layer chromatography. on completion of the reaction, the reaction mixture was poured onto crushed ice, treated with an excess of aqueous na2co3 solution. the precipitate was separated by filtration and washed with water. the product was pure enough(single spot on tlc) for all practical purposes.



tion 5070 in dmso. compounds were tested in 10-dose ic50 mode with 3-fold serial dilution starting at 100 lm using pi-103 as positive control(20 lm as starting concentration). the reaction was carried out at 10 lm atp concentration. the nonlinear regression



ogy(echo550; nanoliter range) and incubated for 20 min at room temperature. 33p-atp(specific activity 10 lci/ll) was delivered into the reaction mixture to initiate the reaction. after that, compounds were incubated for 2 h at room temperature. kinase activ-



