computer-supported cooperative work(cscw) is a research field where the role played by individuals as members of groups is fundamental. the human being is not considered as an individual entity, but it is considered as a being embedded into the society, where he works and interacts. from the beginning, many cscw systems have arisen. some taxonomies appeared in order to find a way to classify all these tools, but they have become more and more complicated, therefore nowadays such classifications cannot sort them correctly. in this paper we present a taxonomy according to these changes, so that cscw systems can be classified in a more flexible way.



paul cashman and irene greif organized a multidisciplinary workshop in the mid1980s. many people from different fields but with the same aim: knowing how computer science could help people who work together, computer science as a way to solve their own necessities. in this workshop, computer-supported cooperative work was coined.



as systems in general tend to be collaborative, to ease human communication and to be a useful tool in the processes and human coordination, it is expected that the number of applications, ideas, forms, etc. will grow in the years to come. until now, the possibilities to classify tools, functions, etc. related with cscw are based on a time-space array, always looking for an adaptation to the innovations that arise, to new possibilities for communication, collaboration and coordination.



taxonomies provide a way to classify different groupware tools. however, it is not always easy to do it, and sometimes we do not know where to place a simple tool, and even less where to place a complex system. nowadays systems are so complicated that they need a new different method to classify them.



if we consider a simple tool which has a concrete functionality to solve a specific problem, such as a chat, the complexity to classify the tool in one of the previous taxonomies is easy. but considering a complex system that implements several functions, such as a document management system that offers tools, functions for the version control, sharing, check-in and check-out, publication, approval, etc. the problem of the system classification becomes more difficult.



how do we classify a document management system? the control version function is not considered to be only used by dispersed users. it could even include a collaboration system to create the documents in real time. or even, it could have a shared agenda for a group of users, would it imply that they are not working side by side? therefore, are the classical taxonomies appropriate to classify all the groupware applications? existing classification methods that have been considered so far are correct, but the complexity of the new tools and the big systems have made the idea obsolete in some way.



in this paper we present a new classification for cscw systems based on logical principles of this philosophy so as to classify them in a flexible and appropriate way. in the next section, we present some existing proposals that allow us to classify cscw systems. we describe the proposed solution in section 3. section 4 offers



in this first classification, tools are categorized according to time and space. the human-computer interaction can take place on same physical space, as a meeting room, a conference room or a common workspace; but it also can take place in the distance. some examples of the latter one are videoconference rooms, the use of collaborative editors or shared whiteboards.



by its spatial characteristic, the groupware applications can be applications that take place in the same physical site, oriented to be used by all users in the same workplace. it is also possible that they take place in different but known places or even they could take place in different and unknown places. the same occurs with its temporal particularities.



if we want to show the possibilities of e-mail, the result would be that of type g-7. a tool that can promote collaboration among users and that can help to coordinate different persons. they are not synchronous programmes in themselves, because the sent message can arrive some time later, and even as they are oriented to send messages from different spaces, they can be used from within an office, as reminders, to inform, coordinate, etcetera.



to carry out the test, we have elaborated a polled list composed by 26 cscw experts and postdoctoral students. all polled are from different spanish universities. the test was carried out during august of 2005. next, we show the analysis results.



in conclusion, we want to emphasize that the main reason to propose a new classification is corroborated. this test concludes that new cscw classifications are needed to fit the current cscw systems. furthermore, the proposed solution has a very good acceptance in the field of cscw.



another consideration we could take into account is that a tool implemented to do a concrete function can be used to do other ones. originally, e-mail was used for the communication in dispersed spaces, but we have seen in the previous section, that it could be used in the same space. so, the non-exclusive classification array is flexible according to the needs that arise from time to time, so it can be suited to other possible classification needs maintaining the same structure. hence, we can state that an e-mail tool is of type b-5 but, in any case, we could consider a flexible approach if we wanted to show the additional possibilities of this tool, so it could correspond to a tool of type g-7.



johnson-lenz, p. and t. johnson-lenz, consider the groupware: design and group process impacts on communication in the electronic medium, in: s. hiltz and e. kerr, editors, studies of computermediated communications systems: a synthesis of the findings, computerized conferencing and communications center, new jersey institute of technology, newark, new jersey, 1981.



