dhanvijay et al. [20] the authors of this review article provided a review of several iot smart healthcare systems for wban that allow data transmission and receiving. second, the author comprehensively examined privacy protection, power efficiency, strategic planning, and resource management in iot smart healthcare.



mahmoud et al. [21] the authors of this review paper explored the concept of the cloud of things (cot) and how it may be used in the development of smart medical applications. second, the author extensively analyzed various topics, including using cot for smart healthcare applications, including energy efficiency.



qi et al. [23] the author of this review article investigates numerous iot applications for smart health care from a variety of perspectives (i.e., monitoring of blood pressure, heartbeat, oxygen saturation etc.). second, the author reviewed the various enabling iot technologies available for smart healthcare applications, including network connectivity, processing of data, and sensing technologies.



algarni et al. [24] the authors of this review article demonstrate the distribution of recent work on the security and privacy for smart healthcare classified by publishing venue and year. it comprises classifications of the articles included in this article, arranged according to their aim, approaches, security method, and applications. second, the authors highlighted the most often stated security attacks in smart healthcare systems and the recommended solutions against such attacks. third, the authors explain how current research addresses security and privacy issues in smart healthcare systems, highlight research issues in privacy and security in smart healthcare systems, and provide recommendations for future research.



baker et al. [25] the authors of this review article presented a smart healthcare model for health monitoring in this study, which may be utilized for worldwide tracking and monitoring of unique human conditions. second, the authors provided an overview of the state-of-the-art for each part of the suggested model (i.e., blood pressure monitoring sensors and smart wearables which monitor various conditions of the body and vital signs).



wireless networks can provide low latency with a high data rate and a wide coverage area, enhancing global communication. its deployment can be accelerated over the next few years to meet the growing use of mobile and internet-connected devices [15]. cyber-physical systems (cps) and the iot are examples of internet-oriented infrastructure that may be employed in smart healthcare [16,17], and 5g will provide them with ultra-reliable, low-cost broadband access. the 5g network is not a novel idea; it is an evolution of the 4g network. 5g technology is defined as the deployment of the novel, innovative techniques to meet the increasing demands of network congestion and future services via iot devices for different applications such as smart healthcare [18]. with these needs in mind, 5g enables a variety of communication modes, including device-to-device (d2d), machine-to-machine (m2m) and human-to-machine (h2m). security is the primary objective of 5g-based smart healthcare.



this paper is organized as follows: in section 2, a brief overview of 5g smart healthcare architecture and key enabling technologies are presented. section 3 presented a taxonomy for 5g smart health- care security, covering security threats, attacks, and existing secu- rity approaches. section 4 presents security solutions for 5g-based smart healthcare networks, including blockchain, artificial intelligence, cyber-physical system (cps) and quantum cryptography. section 5 presents open issues and future research direction for 5g smart health- care. finally, the conclusion is presented in section 6.



5g networks will make use of a large number of small cells to build an ultra-dense network. these small cells are radio access nodes that operate on a low power level and have a diameter ranging from a few meters to one mile. applications for 5g smart healthcare can benefit significantly from utilizing a wide variety of small cells. since smart healthcare applications demand high data rates (for instance, remote



the spectral efficiency and data rate may be increased by us- ing modern massive mimo. mimo is an acronym for multiple-input, multiple-output. 5g-based smart healthcare network capacity may be increased by increasing the number of sending and receiving anten- nas [35]. multiple transmitting and receiving antennas may be utilized concurrently to manage massive amounts of data traffic generated by healthcare devices in the network. in a 4g network, a base station has twelve ports for processing cellular communications (mimo). eight of the twelve are for broadcast, while four are for receiving. in 5g, this number increases to around 100 ports per base station, resulting in massive mimo communication [36].



edge computing is a distributed technology architecture in which data is handled at the edge of the network near the point of origin. devices are anticipated to make decisions and react accordingly to tasks in the future smart healthcare application to reduce latency enabling real-time applications. edge computing has the potential to completely change the way healthcare is provided by enabling remote monitoring, personalized treatment, and faster and more accurate diagnosis. in these circumstances, where a quick decision is more crucial, edge computing is essential, especially in 5g networks [44]. furthermore, by keeping sensitive patient data inside the hospital or on the device itself, edge computing can offer improved data security while lowering the risk of data breaches and cyberattacks.



authentication is a critical concept in 5g-based smart healthcare network security because it allows the verification of user identities within the network. numerous mechanisms are employed in the 5g- based smart healthcare network for data authentication. it is divided into two sections: primary and secondary authentication. primary au- thentication enables mutual authentication of medical devices and networks in both networks 5g and 4g [48]. however, primary authen- tication in a 5g-based network has several issues, including knowledge control, and the call of device authentication is insufficiently sup- ported. these difficulties are addressed via the usage of authentication protocol privacy (5g-aka) and flexible authentication schemes. pri- mary authentication is compatible with technologies other than third generation partnership project (3gpp). secondary authentication is used beyond the domain of the mobile operator and is based on the 3gpp standard. secondary authentication is possible via extensible authentication protocol (eap) based linked techniques [49].



authenticity and privacy of user plane (up) data and rrc messages. although 5g networks allow integrity protection for up data, they cannot be implemented in the eutra-nr dual connectivity (en-dc) scenario. both up and rrc allow for the usage of confidentiality.



the capacity to demonstrate the validity and reliability of a message or transaction and prohibit the sender from denying their involvement in the communication is known as non-repudiation. the deniability of users cannot be stopped by authentication alone. however, as it is vital to distinguish between different users or ues to generate safe data transfer, authentication is necessary to ensure non-repudiation [52]. 5g networks can make use of digital signatures to ensure non-repudiation. digital signatures use a cryptographic technique to create a unique code that is added to the message, which can be used to prove the authenticity and integrity of the message. this makes it difficult for the sender to deny their involvement in the communication.



5g-based smart healthcare network architecture must include protocols that ensure network integrity. for example, 5g networks may use cryptographic algorithms such as advanced encryption standard (aes) and secure hash algorithm (sha) to create a unique code that is added to the data, which can be used to verify the integrity of the data. this ensures that the data has not been modified or tampered with during transmission.



spoofing is a vulnerability that allows an attacker to intercept genuine interactions on a 5g network. spoofing attacks include in- jecting false signals using a fake identity to get unlawful advantages and launch additional malicious attacks such as man-in-the-middle and denial of service attacks [54]. spoofing attacks are a risk in wireless communications used for 5g-based smart healthcare because of the vulnerability of wireless communication to physical layer attacks.



in this strategy, the adversary stops transmitting received packets but continues actively participating in the network. in this strategy, the adversary may selectively drop packets, modify selected packets, trans- mit most of the data in its encoded form, and alter selected packets. it resembles a byzantine general problem. to ensure that all obedient lieutenants obey the same order in this scenario, the commanding general must rely on his (n-1) lieutenant generals to provide commands. if the commanding general is trustworthy, the obedient lieutenant will follow his orders [59].



since it creates and transmits a legitimate sip invite message to the destination component sip, it is also related to the dos attack. it may generate spoofed ip addresses in three ways: manually, randomly, or by picking the faked ip address from the subnet. ip addresses may be explicitly defined or created randomly [60].



ender is an abbreviation for a pre-decision, advance decision, and learning system. two decision theory approaches are used in the cps strategy to identify attack traffic on the cloud for mitigating hx-dos and sipdas traffic attacks. this is followed by a process like that of a standard intrusion detection system. it, therefore, has the capability of identifying and marking an attack message [65]. when a sipdas or hx-dos attack message is detected, the message is marked with a single bit. the reconstruct and drop rad algorithms delete these messages from the system.



implementing a machine learning-based authentication system may reduce spoofing threats in 5g networks. in [66], the authors developed an authentication system at the physical layer to increase the authen- tication rate. the authentication model is reinforced by adopting a two-dimensional characteristic for the one-dimensional approach since the two-dimensional method is more effective at identifying attackers. the presented classifier is capable of rapid authentication because it is trained offline.



sdn is a ground-breaking architecture for centralized network man- agement that divides the network. this enables the advancements in networking programmability to accommodate an increasing va- riety of applications [74]. sdn-guard is proposed as a method for resolving security-related issues and providing answers for protecting tactile internet applications utilizing fog systems against mitm and dos attacks [72].



cryptography-based strategies may be used to protect against rbs- based attacks. in [71], the authors presented a lightweight authentica- tion technique based on elliptic-elgamal. elliptic curve cryptography is used to choose a key pair, and the elgamal method is the technique that makes it possible for the station and the user to exchange the secret key. the primary key with less number of messages decreases the risk of guess-based attacks. for devices with limited computational capabilities, the suggested solution is effective.



this section will cover numerous innovative technologies employed in 5g for smart healthcare. these technologies have been categorized into several groups. as a result, we will present a discussion on several subcategories of technical issues and emerging technologies associated with 5g security for smart healthcare.



this article discussed vulnerabilities and security methods that may be used to avoid and overcome difficulties in 5g-based smart healthcare networks. ai and blockchain are used to defend radio access and virtualization technologies such as sdn and nfv. nonetheless, several security vulnerabilities remain in 5g-based networks. the following security flaws are following:



maintaining the confidentiality of health information remains chal- lenging due to the weak points in wireless networks and the specialized technology used by sensors [97]. there is no uniform solution that works for all sorts of sensors, and even comprehensive systems, such as those featured in 5g networks, have drawbacks. ensuring the pri- vacy of healthcare providers and patients is critical, and when that confidentiality is violated, their safety may be affected.



patients and examiners should always have access to previous and current data. additionally, servers and sensors must never fail, and data must always be in the right format. these operational standards are likely unachievable with present technology and scientific knowledge. however, advancements in other domains, such as quantum computers or superconductors, can change the nature of this challenge.



smart healthcare components should be capable of operating if a system component is down or fail. backup sensors are one option, but they are not always feasible, and building fault tolerance into life-critical systems may save lives. although this challenge is more concerned with how sensors work outside than within, a robust internal structure is still crucial.



because sensors have a limited amount of processing power, there is also a temporal limit placed on how long they can remain powerful to process and compute. consumption of energy and production in smart healthcare is far from optimized. therefore, developing algorithms and hardware that are both lightweight and efficient is a very essential and challenging task.



smart gateways provide a secure data entry point, hence improving verification and authorization. these gateways are resistant to routing attacks as well as other kinds of cyberattacks, such as denial-of-service attacks, that rely on data being supplied by users which is not al- lowed. smart gateways may be able to aggregate data from several devices while also managing different elements of network routing and enhancing security [99].



