one way to avoid asf outbreak for a country is to investigate the asf transmission pathways. asf transmission has many pathways, involv- ing feral pigs, domestic pigs and pig products, and soft ticks of the genus ornithodoros (chenais et al., 2019). humans are recognised as being responsible for long distance virus transmission (chenais et al., 2019; rocque et al., 2011). for instance, in march 2017, an asf outbreak was recorded in irkutsk, russia, and soon, the virus spread thousands of kilometers into europe.another recent example is the timor-leste the degree of truth for elements belonging to the fuzzy set (zadeh et al., 1996). according to the previous research, triangular membership function was often used in other type risk assessment models (issa et al., 2021). in this paper, we have also adopted the triangular membership



in order to assess the validity of the model, other assessment results can be used to validate the functionality of the established fuzzy risk as- sessment model. according to the department for enviorment food and rural affairs of united kingdom government (2018), a qualitative method was used to assess the risk of asf introduction to the united kingdom which was also divided into five risk levels (i.e. very low, low, medium, high and very high). defra referred to a variety of data from other european countries and their own country, such as trade amount, pig import amount. based on the survival time of asfv in dif- ferent biological environments, the asf epidemiology and the outbreak situation in europe, it calculated the risk level of the asf impact for the uk through different pathways. one parameter of their method, which is transport is similar to the iit variable of the established fuzzy risk as- sessment model. thus, the number of united kingdom import and the percentage of import value are used in our model (internatinal trade central [itc], 2020). after that, the risk levels generated by the two methods are compared.



if ip is vl and iit is l, then the risk of asf introduction (rai) is vl. however, both of the ip values belong to vl, and iit values belong to l but both of the final results belong to the l. although the value (19.9) of ip (2019) belongs to vl but it is very close to the next degree (l). in other words, the attribution degree is closer to the l level than most vl level values, this affected the final output. ip (2020) decrease causes the final result decrease but the final result is also located to l. it may be due to that the intersection and the boundary between fuzzy sets is have adopted lockdown, widely restricted international travel (sam et al., 2020). world tourism barometer [unwto] (2020) reported that the international tourism had reduced by 74% or 1 billion. it means that, the risk factors brought by passengers have decreased, and the major risk will be due to the international trade in the next few years. however, international tourism will eventually recover. behsudi (2020) suggests that international travel may return to the level of 2019 by 2023. the risk will increase again and our model will



in this study, we have built a quantitative fuzzy risk assessment model to assess the asf introduction risk into australia. the contribu- tion of this paper is two folds. firstly, the asf introduction risk assess- ment model has been established using fuzzy modelling technique. secondly, the established model is used to provide insights of the risk level for the asf introduction into australia. our analysis is based on the number of international tourists, import amount and the percentage of those from high asf risk countries. from the analysis of the data col- lected for australia and by using our fuzzy risk assessment model, the following can be concluded. australia is a low risk country to asf intro- duction. the risk from international tourists has shown a downward trend between 2019 and 2020. according to the analysis for import and flight amount, the highest introduction risk will be from asia coun- tries. this study will help customs and other relevant departments de- velop more effective inspection and monitoring methods to protect australia's biosecurity.



