abstract crowdsourcing has been widely accepted across a broad range of application areas. in crowdsourcing environments, the possibility of performing human computation is characterized with risks due to the openness of their web-based platforms where each crowd worker joins and participates in the pro- cess at any time, causing serious effect on the quality of its computation. in this paper, a combination of trust-based access control (tbac) strategy and fuzzy-expert systems was used to enhance the quality of human computation in crowdsourcing environment. a tbac-fuzzy algorithm was developed and imple- mented using matlab 7.6.0 to compute trust value (tvalue), priority value as evaluated by fuzzy inference system (fis) and finally generate access decision to each crowd-worker. in conclusion, the use of tbac is feasible in improving quality of human computation in crowdsourcing environments.



qa factors of online transactions as aggregated from qa models is usually expressed by performance characteristics such as response time, throughput, pre- dictability, availability, scalability, stability, usability, reliability, efficiency, func- tionality, speed of download (bit rate), ease of finding information, timeliness, confidentiality and transaction integrity. in this case, we looked into confidential- ity and transaction integrity by focusing on trust-based access control (tbac). trust exists in our daily life and thus can be used as a mechanism to make access decisions in networks [27]. trust models have also been proposed to control anonymity and uncertainty [9,10]. several novel access control models based on trust have been proposed in recent years. trustbac extends the conventional role based access control (rbac) with the notion of trust level [25] in which users are assigned to trust levels instead of the roles based on user identities, behavior history, recommendation, etc. the role that is assigned to a user changes



however, trust management models cannot address security issues at fullest [18]. there is also need of explicit trust model which address trust access control for crowdsourcing environment. access control mechanism based on trust cal- culations using fuzzy approach is presented in [24] where access feedback is used for access control.



let consider an internet encyclopedia as a crowd-sourcing environment that allows everyone that has access to the internet to make contributions or edit arti- cles online. in such environment, workers are classified based on their compe- tences and experiences. the crowd workers can freely access the encyclopedia network but are allowed to make contributions or edit some certain articles based on its trust value acquired during the interaction with the host network. the trust value of each crowd worker is greatly affected by the number of activities per- formed. the priority level of workers is determined by the rules generated.



postprocessing module: in this module, access right is defined on the workers based on the output result of the fuzzy expert system. the output of the system shows the priority level of the worker. the environment filters the worker based on the output and decides access right to workers that falls within a priority level and thereby improves the quality of the computation. a crowdtbac fuzzy algorithm is described in (algorithm available in supplementary material).



the initial values (t0) of the workers are considered in the computation to determine their actual trust value. in this case, we defined t0 to be 0.00, 0.01, 0.025, and 0.05 for a new worker (unskilled), semiskilled, skilled and highly skilled workers respectively. the last three workers are the existing workers and are clas- sified based on their past achievements and experiences.



the designed fuzzy rules are simulated using the trust values of crowd-workers with a fuzzy tool box in matlab. the simulation graph above revealed that a task with a priority value of 0.37 can only be performed by workers that gain such a value or more. the threshold value of 0.37 is been defined by the crowd-sourcer generated using the two inputs (classes of worker and trust value) to determine the output (priority value). the graph also clearly shows that not all two semiskilled workers can be given access to a task of 0.45 priority value that could be defined by the crowd-sourcer.



this paper addressed the issues of trust in crowd-sourcing alongside its incentive and how the quality of response from the crowd-workers would be improved. the paper identified answer ranking as a problem in crowd-sourcing leading to cheat- ing by workers. to look for more efficient and reliable way to solve this problem, a fuzzy expert system and trust based access control were employed as a single framework to enforce access control. a trust based access control fuzzy algorithm was used to compute and assigned trust value to workers. the trust value assigned to crowd-worker serves as one of the inputs to the fuzzy system and access is granted to workers whose priority value is above threshold level based on the fuzzy output. in this case, the crowdsourcing could be assured that only workers with little or more experience could perform certain tasks. this however helps to enhance the quality of response from the crowd. experiment was conducted on trust-based access control fuzzy algorithm using systematic generated values on matlab. the results indicated that high quality response and service could be obtained from crowdworkers.



