tuberculosis (tb) is a social, re-emerging infectious disease that has medical implications throughout the globe [1]. the largest single cause of adult illness and death from the commu- nicable disease is caused by mycobacterium tuberculosis [2]. nigeria has made great strides in increasing access to directly observed therapy short-course (dots) for tb yet, coverage, which was 45% in 1999, had reached 75% by 2005 while treat- ment success for 2005 cohort was 75% [3]. although tb inci- dence in nigeria is below the normal level for sub-saharan africa, but it remains high at a rate of 311 cases per 100 grand



orthodox methods of diagnosing tb are primarily through physical examination and laboratory tests. the former involves asking patients certain questions for prognosis pur- poses while tests are carried out to affirm physical examina- tion. diagnosis can be stopped if medical practitioner is totally convinced after physical examination however, this is not advised. this orthodox method is currently faced with a number of challenges such as lack of medical facilities in most medical centers and as a result, inhibiting the management of tb in developing countries.



the strength of it in providing an effective and efficient solution to real life problems has been explored to aid scientific discoveries and advancement of different fields of medicine [8]. hence, to reduce the morbidity and mortality rates in human as a result of tb, there is need to incorporate it into its diag- nostic approach. this study, therefore, proposes a decision support model for intelligent diagnosis of tb using genetic- neuro-fuzzy inferential technique. the model is aimed at pro- viding a decision support platform that can aid medical prac- titioners in administering accurate, timely, and cost effective diagnosis of tb in developing countries.



the basic steps in es development have been reported in [15]. many ai systems have been developed for the purpose of enhancing healthcare delivery, providing better healthcare facilities, and reducing the cost associated with quality health- care services. early studies in intelligent systems have been shown to outperform manual practices of medical diagnosis. examples of such systems are as follows: internist, a rule-based expert system for the diagnosis of complex prob- lems in general internal medicine; mycin, a rule-based expert system to diagnose and recommend treatment for certain blood infections; casnet, an expert system for the diagnosis and treatment of glaucoma, expert, an extension general- ization of the casnet formalism which was used in creating consultation systems in rheumatology and endocrinology [16].



neural network (nn) is a group of interconnected artificial neurons that mimic the properties of biological neurons. it fol- lows analog and parallel computing system made up of simple processing elements that communicate through a rich set of interconnections with varying contributory weights. artificial neural network (ann), is synthetic nervous systems loosely inspired to simulate functions of human brain [26]. ann attempts to abstract the complexity of biological nervous sys- tem so as to focus on what may hypothetically matter most from an information processing point of view.



medicine has always benefited from forefront of technology as it has boosted medicine to extraordinary levels of achieve- ment. ann has been successfully used in various areas of med- icine such as biomedical analysis, imaging systems, and drug development but extensively used in diagnosis to detect ail- ments such as cancer and heart problems in human [27]. the term network in ann arises because of the function f(x) defined as a composition of other function gi(x) which are fur- ther used as composition of more functions.



[38] but over the years, it has migrated to an interactive system that assists users in taking quick appropriate decisions in any given context [31]. in a related study, ref. [32] developed a fuzzy expert system as a platform for diagnostic support for hypertension management. the system is composed of four major components for fuzzy processes while root sum square and center of gravity were employed as fuzzy inference and defuzzification methods respectively. a case study of 30 patients with tuberculosis was used to validate the es. [33] combined nn, fl and case based reasoning to model dss for diagnosis of depression disorders. the nns were con- structed to imitate intelligent human biological processes of learning while fl provides a means for dealing with impreci- sion, vagueness and uncertainties in the medical data and cbr entails the use of past situations to solve new occur- rences. finally, this study proposes a genetic-neuro-fuzzy inferential technique for diagnosis of tuberculosis.



structured database presents quantitative data about facts and the established rules in the field of medicine focusing on diag- nosis of tb. the facts comprise of signs and symptoms of tb, while rules are patterns to draw deductions based on available information [18]. unstructured database is heuristic in nature and hence gathered by experience, good practices, guesses, and judgments [34]. the database comprises of patient-bio- data, disease-physical-signs, disease-symptoms, medical- history, physical examination, results of diagnostic tests and patient diagnosis.



gene represents the connection weight of a diagnosis variable in a length of 1 bit. one feasible solution is to generate an ini- tial population holding a set of possible solutions from ran- dom chromosomes. a chromosome is represented as a vector c = (ca, ... , cx) of binary decision variables ci=0,2,3; encoded in binary representation as string consisting {0, 1} genes. a gene ci = 1 if the ith variable is included in a solution set of a diagnostic process otherwise 0. fitness function is used to optimize each chromosome by evaluating the genes that constitute the chromosome using their fitness value.



which denote inputs to the system. the inputs are numeric val- ues representing how severe a patient feels the diagnosis vari- ables. the output of this layer is the linguistic labels corresponding to each input value. the second layer is made up of adaptive nodes that receive the output of preceding layer as input, and produce their corresponding membership grade determined as:



simulation of the proposed model was done with a case study of 10 patients from saint francis catholic hospital okpara- in-land, delta state, nigeria. the procedure was observed in matrix laboratory (matlab) version 7.9 environment, the result and evaluation of the simulations are reported in this section.



so well so good, this study demonstrates how triangular membership functions of fuzzy logic system can be employed to define linguistic labels and neural networks were introduced for self-tuning and adaptation in case of new situations. also, for effective selection of optimal input parameters, genetic algorithm has been incorporated. yet, the effectiveness of the model has only been validated using casual tb records because the rule base of the knowledge base was formulated. to further validate the results of this model, sufficient real- life records of tb patients can be obtained from medical clinics in order to generate rules and training data sets.



we thank the management of st. francis catholic hospital okpara-in-land, delta state, nigeria, for their utmost coop- eration in the area of data collection. we also appreciate the efforts dr. ahmed of obafemi awolowo university teaching hospital complex, wesley guild unit, ilesa, osun state, nigeria, for his assistance on rule-base formulation and pro- posed model performance evaluation.



n. mehdi, y. mehdi, designing a fuzzy expert system for diagnosing the hepatitis b intensity rate and comparing it with adaptive neural network fuzzy expert system, in: proceedings of the world congress on engineering and computer science (wcecs), vol. 11, san francisco, usa, 2009.



