abstract in this paper, we propose a general framework for an intelligent recommender system that extends the concept of a knowledge-based recommender system. the intelligent recommender system exploits knowledge, learns, discovers new information, infers preferences and criticisms, among other things. for that, the framework of an intelligent recommender system is defined by the following components: knowledge representation paradigm, learning methods, and reasoning mechanisms. additionally, it has five knowledge models about the different aspects that we can consider during a recommendation: users, items, domain, context and criticisms. the mix of the components exploits the knowledge, updates it and infers, among other things. in this work, we implement one intelligent recommender system based on this framework, using fuzzy cognitive maps(fcms). next, we test the performance of the intelligent recommender system with specialized criteria linked to the utilization of the knowledge in order to test the versatility and performance of the framework.



which provides suggestions of items for users. various techniques for recommendation have been proposed. from the domains such as artificial intelligence, data and semantic mining, information retrieval, approaches of rs have emerged. the rs traditionally have been classified as content-based, collaborative, knowledge-based, and hybrid.



a knowledge-based recommender system only exploits the knowledge naively. we argue that a recommender system has an intelligent behavior if it has the next set of capabilities: knowledge representation, learning capabilities, and reasoning mechanisms. the mix of these capabilities can exploit largely knowledge, update them, and infer them, among other things. based on these ideas, in this paper we propose a new type of recommender system, called intelligent recommender system(irs), which is an extension of the knowledge-based rs. the irs considers learning algorithms, knowledge representation mechanisms, and reasoning motors, among other aspects. in this paper, we define an irs, and describe its components, and the relationships among them, among other things.



in the following section we present some backgrounds about the rs. section 3 presents the theoretical bases of our approach and then section 4 presents the irs framework. section 5 presents details of the description of the knowledge models of the irs. section 6 presents the implementation of irs using fcms. lastly, the next sections present a case study, the utilization of irs based on fcms, the experiments, and the analysis of the results.



neural network has the ability to act as a regularizer of the item representations to be recommended. in a personalized recommendation system is introduced based on accurate models which capture the user preferences. they propose a picturebased approach: they use a set of travel related pictures selected by a user, and an individual travel profile is deduced. this is accomplished by mapping those pictures onto seven basic factors, which reflect different travel aspects. this model constitutes the basis of their recommendation algorithm. in



a semantic recommendation approach of pedagogical resources is proposed within a learning ecosystem. this approach is based on a voting system, where each member of the ecosystem evaluates the pedagogical resources found in his/her sharing space. in this way, they define a coherent learning ecosystem that promotes collaborative learning, which allows exchanging and sharing knowledge and/or skills. finally, is a book which present trends, concepts, methodologies, challenges and applications on rs. this book describes the classical methods, as well as novel approaches such as context-aware rs and rs in the social web.



human-rs interaction. the types of information used for the recommendation generation techniques are very different, for example, the item selected by the user, the description of the context of the query. also, the transaction can include an explicit feedback of the user. normally it is called criticity such as its rating of an item.



item reviewing. in this step the user reviews the recommended item, in order to accept the recommendation or select a critique, which restart a new critiquing cycle. if a critique has been chosen, only the items that fulfill the criteria defined in the critique are further taken into account(it reduces the candidate item set).



knowledge acquisition: this phase is defined to learn about the current situations, etc. there are a lot of approaches(supervised, unsupervised, etc.), but the main point is to define an approach that allows all the knowledge available to be discovered in a given moment. in general, the different machine-learning techniques can be potentially used, according to the context, for example: information online available and real time information. the sources of knowledge are very varied and they can be structured(for example, the transactional database, or data-warehouse, of an organization), semi-structured(for example, xml files) or unstructured(for example, gps tracking information, audio streams, etc.) data, which represent information about the users, context, etc. the knowledge is acquired through learning mechanisms based on data mining, semantic meaning(web mining, text mining, ontological mining), among other techniques[6,9]. the learning mechanisms to be used depend on the knowledge model and the source of data. for example, if the knowledge model is ontology and the source of data is the web, we can use semantic mining techniques to extract knowledge. additionally, in this case, data science tasks are very important, in order to explore, clean, transform and reduce the data, before applying the learning techniques to extract the knowledge.



the main component of our irs is knowledge. an irs must exploit all the knowledge available, and to do that, all the advances must be used in different domains(such as information retrieval, data mining), in order to extract this knowledge. classically, a rs estimates the similarity among the item properties and the user preferences, or estimates the ratings for the items that have not been seen by a user. irs exploits knowledge to infer the rating of the items, to infer the preferences of the users, and to match the item properties with the user preferences. for that, it defines different types of knowledge:



an extended user profile(including its opinions, critiques, etc.): normally, the information that is modeled is about his/her preferences, his/her personal information(age, gender, profession, and education), etc.[8,17,22]. here, we propose to extend with new information about his/her opinions, critiques; his/her relationship with other users(his/her friend groups, etc.). the user model profiles, with the rest of semantic model of irs must infer the preferences and needs of the users.



an extended item profile: it represents a full description of an item based on four dimensions:(i) the general description of the product(name, branches that produce the items, etc.);(ii) the functional information about the item(its functions, etc.),(iii) the structural information about the item(its components, the relationships among them, dependence, etc.) and finally,(iv) the operational information about the item(how can be used, etc.). some of this information can be learned, or inferred from the information stored.



context and domain knowledge: it is very important to know the domain where the items will be used, the context where the individual is going to make the decision, etc. the contextual knowledge is all the knowledge that explains a given situation[15,20]. the domain knowledge is the knowledge of an area of a discipline, a human activity, etc.[15,23]. this type of knowledge is not currently considered, or the rs must be customized to be used in a specific context, changing part of its structure. here, we propose to model explicitly these aspects.



a critical knowledge: this is a knowledge that must be discovered, based on the transactions over the rs(relations between users and items). a transaction may describe the context of the recommendation, may refer the item chosen, and may include the feedback the user has provided, among other things[9,15]. normally, this knowledge describes the behavior-based knowledge, and must be discovered using machine-learning technique in order to obtain interesting patterns. this knowledge normally represents the interests of the users. in our irs, this knowledge must be learned or discovered.



domain knowledge: it is the valid knowledge used in a given area of human activity, in a specialized discipline, etc. normally, the experts use and develop their own domain knowledge. in irs, it refers to the specific area/domain where it will be used.



one of the advantages of our system is that its implementation can be carried out using any intelligent techniques. the intelligent paradigm(ontologies, based on the evolutionary process, etc.) can be chosen according to the source of information, tools available, etc. in this section, we give one example of implementation based on the fcm.



cms have been extended by kosko, considering fuzzy logic and neural network theories. this approach has been called fcm, and often is defined by concepts that can be defined as fuzzy sets, and causal relationships between the concepts that can be defined by fuzzy implications. also, the threshold function of the weighted sums can be fuzzy. there are different learning algorithms for a fcm in the literature. there are two examples of learning algorithms. one is based on the opinion of the experts and another is based on the historical data. in[1,3] an exhaustive presentation of different learning algorithms is given.



we propose a fcm based on two levels, the first level contains the concepts inferred, which represent the knowledge about the critiques of the products, the preferences of the users, the recommendations, among other concepts. the second level represents the description of the current situation: the information about the items and users, the context, etc. they are defined according to our models presented in section 5. in this way, the first level is the knowledge generated by our system, which can be used in different ways: to recommend, to discover infor-



in this level, the concepts represent the different attributes of the user and item profiles, extended by the knowledge about the context and domain(see section 5). they are grouped according to the knowledge that is represented(users, products, etc.).



we use the ims standard, which describes the general information to be collected about a student or a producer of learning content, to customize the user profile. the ims learner information package(ims lip) specification defines the interoperability of internet-based learner information systems, with other internet systems used by learning processes. our irs must consider this information. the main aspects to consider from the ims standard are affiliations, competencies, goals, identifications, interests, qualifications, certifications, accessibilities, activities, and relationships.



in the sections 7.1 and 7.2 we show two examples of implementation of the user and item profiles of our irs model. in this study case, we have used two standards of the domain of learning to define these profiles: the lom standard for the item profiles, and the ims standards for the user profile. we confirm that the general user and item profiles defined in section 5 are part of these standards. in this way, the fcm implementation of the irs defined in section 6 is correct.



in the section 8.1, we have evaluated the learning and reasoning capabilities of the fcm-based irs. particularly, the reasoning capabilities allow different types of inferences not only to recommend but also to infer other types of information such as the quality of the learning resource. with the models and results obtained in sections 6,7 and 8.1, we have evaluated the entire fcm-based rs as an irs.



now, we compare the fcm-based irs approach with other knowledge-based rs. in order to determine the comparison criteria, we define some questions about how the knowledge is managed by the different approaches in the context of learning resources. these questions are as follows: how can our irs be evaluated? how can we measure the quality of the irs? in general, we are going to use metrics that try to determine how the knowledge in our irs is exploited. for this reason, we propose the next criteria[9,15]:



the works[14,16] do not give explanations about their recommendations because their recommendations are not based on a knowledge model. the work presented in has the same problem of efficiency as our work because it is based on the same technique, but it has not a learning process and the users must update manually the cognitive map(transparency). additionally, the knowledge model of is very simple. it does not consider aspect as the context and the criticisms, and its user and item profiles are very simple. these limitations in the knowledge model or the inexistence of the knowledge model in[14,16], reduce their persuasive capabilities and for the same reasons in some cases the recommendations do not help users for making high-quality decisions. we like to highlight that uses the same technique that our example of irs, but its knowledge representation is very simple and has not a learning mechanism. our irs framework introduces some aspects such as the knowledge representation, the learning and the reasoning mechanisms, all of which improve the recommendation process.



uses the same technique that we have used to implement our example of the irs, but in it is defined as a knowledge-based rs. in the section 8.2, we have determined that our system has better behavior due to these characteristics used simultaneously.



the criteria about the management of knowledge defined in section 8.2, are well achieved by our approach. our approach obtains two types of results: qualitative(cognitive map) and quantitative(inferences). with these results it meets the criteria.[14,16] do not reach the validity and efficiency criteria because they do not explain how the results are obtained and the students/teachers must reason about why to use the learning resources recommended(the validity is not reached). also,[10,14,16] are not persuasive and effective due to the knowledge model used which only cover partial information about the students or learning resources or to the inexistence of a knowledge model. this does not allow convincing a person, because it is not possible to define arguments based on knowledge.



