abstract the mobile network providers have provided the most widely used means of communication. in an attempt to expand on this frontier, we propose and develop a gps-based mobile service locator system to help individuals in different walks of life, find addresses and locate their services of interest using their mobile devices. notably, the proposed system is able to determine the proximity distances between the user and the locations of the desired service. it is flexible and extendible to easily incorporate additional mobile service providers and new services. a main point of departure from existing similar systems is that it is the gps-based rather than the mobile-based service provider to allow for a more accurate location calculation.



location based services for network devices, and particularly for wap-enabled phones, are currently prominent in the market. research in the area of locationbased systems has been going on for over a decade. the pager system is one of the oldest applications to provide the conventional method for personnel location. in order to locate someone, a signal is sent out by a central facility that addresses a particular receiver unit(beeper) and produces an audible signal. in addition, it may display a number to which the recipient could call the sender back. some systems allow a vocal message to be transmitted back to the call-back number. the recipient could use the conventional telephone system to call back to confirm the signal and to provide appropriate response(kaasinen, 2003, bisdikian et al., 2001, chen and kotz, 2000).



earlier work such as the active location badge system(want et al., 1992) uses infra-red technology to provide products in the realms of outdoor location-tracking, using gsm and gps technologies. such location-based services are limited to mobile phones. there are some other commercially products, such as webraska, intelliwhere, openwave, and esri(dey et al., 1999), which are regarded as geo-referenced mobile phone applications.



providers for the service he is looking for. it should, however, be pointed out that the indicated distance is not a real physical one since it is gps-based. it does not also take into consideration the real traffic map of the area. nevertheless, it certainly offers valuable information to the user.



