recent advances in the field of microelectronics and wireless communications have led to the development of large scale wsns. these sensor networks have the capability to sense the environment, compute the data locally, and relay them to the control location for further processing. the major cause of the energy drain is the transmission of sensed data by the sensor nodes. by reducing redundant data transmission, and minimizing the transmission



rest of the paper is organized as follow; section ii presents the related work and section iii describes the formal definitions of association rule mining and detailed discussion on proposed hecf framework. section iv describes the implementation and simulation setup of hecf framework along with dataset details to validate the hecf framework. section v provides simulation results and a comparative analysis of hecf with other approaches. in the end section vi concludes the research study and its findings.



data mining is a well-known computing domain, employed to extract interesting patterns and useful information from the given data. this extracted information is useful in taking critical decisions for the overall system improvement. several studies have been conducted for the energy conservation of sensors by employing association rule mining from the data mining domain.



a context aware framework, based on sensor node attributes(contextual) association rule mining, which uses distributed architecture for extracting rules at node and network level to improve the energy consumption of wsn. a distributed data extraction(dde) mechanism is proposed to predict the missing and corrupted data from sensor by the application of association rule mining(temporal and data association). additionally, the proposed mechanism reduces data size, which has significance in overall efficient network performance. a genetic algorithm based solution to reduce the amount data sent to a sink efficiently by using association rule mining in a distributed mining architec-



temporal association rule mining is being employed at different tiers of sensor network(i.e. sensor node, ch and sink). at sensor node and ch, temporal association mining will help in the reduction of redundant data transmission to ch and from ch to sink. similarly, temporal associations of the sensing nodes will be used for the scheduling of the sensor nodes in the clusters.



definition 1. let dcs is a set of time windows of a sensor to sense the environment, dcs={k1, k2..., kn}. the size of dcs is defined, size(dcs)=| knk1|, where k1 is the starting time window and kn is the ending time window.



definition 2. let vi be a set of observed values by a particular sensor in the network, vi={v1, v2,... vn}. these observed values are stored in the buffer with the corresponding time windows ki in dcs.



have this time(10:00 to 10:15 pm), this rule will be triggered. if the sensing values of the sensing nodes and of the rule are same, then the rule is executed. as mentioned in the example; sensing nodes s5 and s3 will be turned to sleep mode by the local sink for this duration of time(15 min) to conserve energy and the priority of the rule will be incremented.



view point, i.e. the global sink. the global view is helpful in achieving a better global analysis, better understanding of the problem areas, and better scheduling of the sensor operations at the floors of the building and thus better energy efficiency.



in this section, implementation of the proposed model and simulation setup has been discussed. ns2 and matlab v.7 is used for the implementation, data extraction, network clustering and for result comparison in terms of network life time, message reduction and average energy consumption.



