and identifies distinct diabetes subgroups and a new subtype of breast cancer in high-dimensional clinical data sets, to name a few. in the context of shape analysis, tda techniques have been used in the recognition, classification[10,11], summarization, and clustering of 2d/3d shapes and surfaces. oftentimes, such techniques capture and highlight structures in data that conventional techniques fail to treat[11,13] or reveal properly.



the interplay between these parameters. consider another example in multivariate shape analysis, various families of functions carry information about the geometry of 3d shape objects, such as mesh density, eccentricity or heat kernel signature; and we are interested in creating multivariate signatures of shapes from such functions. unlike the univariate setting, very few topological tools exist for the study of multivariate data[29,31,32], let alone the integration of multivariate topological features with machine learning.



our contribution. we propose the first kernel construction for multi-parameter persistent homology. our kernel is generic, stable and can be approximated in polynomial time. for simplicity, we formulate all our results for the case of two parameters, although they extend to more than two parameters.



as previously mentioned, a persistence diagram for multiparameter persistence does not exist. however, bi-filtrations still admit meaningful distance measures, which lead to the notion of closeness of two bi-filtrations. the most prominent such distance is the interleaving distance, which, however, has recently been proved to be np-complete to compute and approximate. computationally attractive alternatives are(multi-parameter) bottleneck distance and the matching distance[42,43], which compares the persistence diagrams along all slices(appropriately weighted) and picks the worst discrepancy as the distance of the bi-filtrations. this distance can be approximated up to a precision puted exactly in polynomial time. our approach extends these works in the sense that not just a distance, but an inner product on bi-filtrations, is defined with our inclusion into a hilbert space. in a similar spirit, the software library rivet provides a visualization tool to explore bi-filtrations by scanning through the slices.



pair of(distinct) points in r2 that define a unique slice. along this slice, the data simplifies to a mono-filtration(i.e., a filtration that depends on a single scale parameter), and we can choose among a large class of feature maps and kernel constructions of standard, one-parameter persistence. to make the feature map well-defined, we restrict our attention to a finite rectangle r.



stability of persistent homology. bottleneck distance represents a similarity measure between persistence diagrams. let d, dr be two persistence diagrams. without loss of generality, we can assume that both contain infinitely many copies of the points on the diagonal. the bottleneck distance between d and dr is defined as



an important and desirable property for a kernel is its stability. in general, stability means that small perturbations in the input data imply small perturbations in the output data. in our setting, small changes between multi-filtrations(with respect to matching distance) should not induce large changes in their corresponding feature maps(with respect to l2 distance).



