detection of correlates of seizure activity generalised across different regions of the brain and across multiple subjects may be a solution. this paper explores this idea further and presents a supervised machine learning approach that classifies seizure and non-seizure records using an open dataset containing 342 records (171 seizures and 171 non-seizures). our approach posits a new method for generalis- ing seizure detection across different subjects without prior knowledge about the focal point of seizures. our results show an improvement on existing studies with 88% for sensitivity, 88% for specificity and 93% for the area under the curve, with a 12% global error, using the k-nn classifier.



epilepsy is a chronic condition of the brain, and causes repeated seizures, com- monly referred to as fits. epilepsy is said to affect 70 million people worldwide [19]. the risk of developing epilepsy is greatest at the extremes of life with inci- dences more common in the elderly than the young [18] and is the cause of prema- ture mortality for those suffering with the condition [19].



seizures can be focal (partial) and exist in one part of the brain only, or they can be general and affect both halves of the brain. during a focal seizure, the person may be conscious and unaware that a seizure is taking place, or they may have uncontrollable movements or unusual feelings and sensations. a diagnosis of epilepsy is made with the help of an electroencephalogram (eeg). eeg recordings are commonly visualised as charts of electrical energy produced by the brain and plotted against time [16].



a whole-brain seizure detection approach supports para-clinical evidence obtained from magnetic resonance imaging and eeg to make a diagnosis of epilepsy and instigate treatment earlier. it helps to mitigate the difficulties associ- ated with the capture and interpretation of electroencephalogram by neurologists. in this paper, a robust data processing methodology is adopted and several clas- sifiers are trained and evaluated, using 342 eeg segments extracted from the eeg records of 24 patients suffering with epilepsy.



the structure, of the remainder, of this paper is as follows. section 2 describes the underlying principles of eeg and the type of features extracted from eeg sig- nals. section 3 discusses machine learning and its use in seizure and non-seizure classification, while section 4 describes the evaluation. the results are discussed in section 5 before the paper is concluded in section 6.



in other studies, the most common classifier used to distinguish between seizure and non-seizure events has been the support vector machine (svm). using the chb-mit database and a patient-specific prediction methodology, the study in shoeb [55] used a svm classifier on eeg recordings from 24 subjects. the results show that a classification accuracy of 96% for sensitivity was produced, with a false-positive rate of 0.08 per hour. in a similar study five records from the chb-mit dataset (containing 65 seizures) were evaluated using a linear dis- criminant analysis classifier [28]. the overall accuracy reported was 91.8%, 83.6% for sensitivity, and 100% for specificity. for similar svm studies using other datasets the reader is referred to [55,28,44,62].



correlation dimension has been investigated as a correlation measure in several studies, which is a nonlinear univariate, widely used to measure fractal dimension. fractal dimension measures the complexity of the eeg signal, in other words, the regularity and divergence of the signal [33,7]. in [1] correlation dimension and five other features for seizure prediction of focal neocortical epilepsy produced reason- ably good results with 90.2% for sensitivity and 97% for specificity. however, when looking specifically at the correlation dimension they found the results dropped in 44.9% of seizures and increased in the pre-ictal phase in 44.9% of sei- zures. they also found that there were stronger dimension changes in the remote channels compared with those near the seizure onset.



skewness is a third-order statistical moment, and kurtosis is the fourth. along with the first and second order moments, mean and variance, respectively, the four statistical moments provide information on the amplitude distribution of a time series. specifically, skewness and kurtosis give an indication of the shape of the dis- tribution [4]. khan et al. use skewness and kurtosis, along with normalised coeffi- cient of variation, for seizure detection in paediatric patients. they managed to detect all 55 seizures from a subset of 10 patients, achieving 100% sensitivity, with a false detection rate of 1.1 per hour.



the aim of most studies, in eeg detection, has been to detect patient-specific focal seizures, rather than predicting general seizures across a much bigger population. as shoeb [55] explains, a seizure eeg pattern is specific to a particular patient. the main reason for this is that focal seizures can occur in any part of the brain, and therefore, can only be detected in the eeg on specific channels. a classifier trained on a patient who experiences focal seizures in the occipital lobes, for exam- ple, would no doubt be trained on features from channels, including electrodes o1, and o2 (electrodes to monitor electrical activity in the occipital lobe), as these



the approach utilises machine learning algorithms embedded in-line with exist- ing clinical systems to enhance clinical practices in epilepsy diagnostics. the pro- posed algorithms support para-clinical evidence obtained from magnetic resonance imaging and electroencephalography to alleviate the capture and inter- pretation of electroencephalogram and help reduce costs, by minimising the need for trained specialists to perform the interpretation. the approach provides auto- mated detection of correlates of seizure activity generalised across different regions of the brain and across multiple subjects.



the eeg recordings are divided among 24 cases (one patient has two sets of eeg recordings 1.5 years apart). the patients range between 1.5 and 22 years of age, and there are 5 males and 17 females. case 24 was added after the original dataset was collected and has no patient data.



most of the recordings are one hour long, although those belonging to case 10 are two hours and those belonging to cases 4, 6, 7, 9, and 23 are four hours long. records that contain at least one seizure are classed as seizure records and those that contain no seizures as non-seizure records. of the 686 records, 198 contain seizures.



the average block now contains 45 s if we consider the median, 40.52% if we consider the mean. more importantly, the majority of the data blocks (64%) of the 171 ictal blocks contain 30 s or more of icta data. in a real-world scenario, it is unlikely that, whatever window size we select, data blocks will contain only ictal data. the more realistic case is that it will contain both ictal and non-ictal data. by having 60-s blocks with different ictal and non-ictal data splits, this allows us to determine the performance of the classifiers under conditions more aligned with a real-world situation. however, future work will explore optimal window sizes. to balance the dataset, 171 data blocks randomly extracted from non-seizure files were also added to the dataset.



these features are then used to determine which classifier performs the best. the same approach is used for the q-values. the mafdr function in matlab can be used to determine the q-values and again, they can be ranked using the sort function. in the case of principle component one (pc1), the top 20 uncorrelated features that comprise the most variance in pc1 were selected and evaluated against all classi- fiers. the same approach was used for pc2. in the case of linear discriminant ana- lysis feature selection, the featseli, featself, and featselb provided by the matlab pattern recognition toolbox prtools is used to provide an ordered ranking of fea- tures. in a similar way, the gram-schmidt ranks and orders each feature by importance.



in order to determine the overall accuracy of each of the classifiers several valida- tion techniques have been considered. these include holdout cross-validation, sensitivities, specificities, receiver operating curve (roc) and area under the curve (auc). the holdout cross-validation technique uses 80 per cent of ran- domly selected observations (n = 19.2) to train the algorithms and 20 per cent of randomly selected test cases to test the algorithms (n = 3.8).



the study has focused on discriminating between seizure and non-seizure eeg records across a group of 23 subjects, rather than a single individual. the classi- fiers are trained using all 24 cases, and therefore, classification is generalised across the whole population contained in the chb-mit database. to achieve this, fea- tures from all the channels that capture the eeg in all parts of the brain were used. in the initial classification results, the top 20 uncorrelated features from the whole of the head (not region-by-region) were extracted from 805 possible fea- tures. this was determined using the linear discriminant analysis backward search technique to rank features. this approach achieved reasonably good results, using the knnc classifier, with 84% for sensitivity, 85% for specificity, 91% for the auc, with a global error of 15%.



using the top five uncorrelated features from eeg channels specific to the five main regions of the head improved the sensitivities and specificities, while produc- ing high auc values. the best classification algorithm was again the knnc clas- sifier, which achieved 88% for sensitivity, 88% for specificity, and an auc value of 93% with a 12% global error. this was followed closely by the svc classifier, which achieved 85% for sensitivity, 86% for specificity, and an auc value of 90% with a 14% global error.



this work has potential future clinical applications in the investigation of patients with suspected seizure disorders and may be useful in the assessment of patients with non-epileptic attack disorder (nead). introducing automated sei- zure detection technologies could help increase capacity within healthcare systems such as the uks national health service (nhs), which currently suffers from a chronic shortage of trained clinical neurophysiologists to interpret eegs. tele- eeg reporting has previously been suggested as a solution and more recently online systems [20,41], which are interesting approaches, but carry increased costs and concerns over data security. nonetheless, these, including automated seizure detection may be viable solutions, following further work aimed at improving accuracy further.



there are a large number of features reported in the literature, which have not been considered in this paper. in particular our future work will consider the set of features described in logesparan et al. [34], logesparan et al. [35]. furthermore, our future work will investigate the use of more advanced machine learning algo- rithms, despite the good performance of the classifiers considered in this paper. in particular, we will investigate the use of convolutional neural networks [53] and svm with different kernels [54].



window sizes will also be considered to determine whether further improve- ments on accuracies can be made. future development will also utilise regression analysis and a larger number of observations. this may help to define the charac- teristics of the pre-ictal phase. in addition, more advanced classification algo- rithms, and techniques, will be considered, including advanced artificial neural network architectures (higher order and spiking neural networks). the investiga- tion and comparison, of features, such as fractal dimension and cepstrum analysis, autocorrelation zero crossing and correlation dimension, have also not been per- formed. these techniques should be investigated in a head-to-head comparison, with linear methods.



