blood cell counting gives important information about the type and number of cells in the blood, especially red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets. the information obtained from the count can be used to identify symptoms such as weakness, fatigue, bruis- ing, anemia, infection, and many other disorders [11]. there are two means of counting blood cells, automatic and manual ([9], jan- uary). the automatic means of blood cell counting uses complete blood count machine hematology analyzer) or flow cytometry. however, in most developing countries like ethiopia, blood count of a microscopic image is done by manual way, which is tedious, time taking and error-prone ([11,9], january). these errors lead to wrong diagnosis and treatment. the existing automatic blood cell counting devices are expensive and do not show the structure of the blood cells, and are limited in the diagnosis of common blood disease like, malaria, leukemia, sickle cell disease. however, in recent times, blood cell counting is possible from microscopic blood images using image processing software either by computer or mobile phone. this image processing provides both the struc- tural and count information, but the basic challenge is image acquisition step.



image acquisition is the first step of the system. digitized images of the samples on the slides are acquired with a smart- phone camera which is mounted upon the microscope. high reso- lution images will better for detection of blood cell. the minimum image resolution accepted by laboratory professional was acquired by 4mpx mobile camera with the support of developed image pro- cessing application; therefore the application could be deployed in the low resource setting environment. the image acquisition is based on the mathematical expression:



the graphical user interface (gui) is developed using matlab r2013a software. the mobile camera is directly accessed from this part, which enables the user to record videos. previously stored images and videos can be loaded and processed for further study even it can be send email automatically from the user interface.



initially the system was designed and developed to run on com- puter to help the diagnosis of blood disease. since smart-phones are available with enough internal memory space and can be extended using external memory space, the system can be used for point-of-care implementation. to link the application to pro- vide point of cares, we converted the developed matlab gui to android application using matlab coder or matlab ja compiler. the application was tested using mobile phone with 32 gb mem- ory and the result was the same as that obtained from a computer system.



ent health sectors for consulting, diagnosing or experience sharing. the system also serves as an educational tool for laboratory tech- nicians to revisit the image from the database and learn for the future. in addition to the above advantages for medical purpose, the image acquisition system can be used by research institutes for further processing. rather than transporting the particles or molecules under investigation to other advanced centers, it is pos- sible to send the microscopic images and real videos in short per- iod of time and obtain response as soon as possible. in most low resource setting environment internet coverage is limited; how- ever the mobile coverage and accesses are widely applied in most rural area of developing countries including ethiopia. most of smart phones now days have 3g network for internet access to connect to centralized system for storage and share data.



this paper presents a smartphone telepathology system for counting the blood cells and malaria diagnosis. the proposed sys- tem of blood cell counting and malaria diagnosis is fast, cost effec- tive and produces accurate results in low resource environment. the system can easily be implemented anywhere in medical facil- ities with minimum infrastructure and it is very user friendly. this system also recognizes overlapping blood cells and counts them independently.



