device-to-device (d2d) communication underlaying a cellular network is a promising technique, and it has recently been proposed for booming local services, which will greatly improve system capacity by sharing the same resource blocks of cellular users at the same time. however, the mutual interference brought by inappropriate resource reuse will deteriorate the performance of the whole system. in this paper, a mode shifting resource allocation scheme is presented without channel state information (csi) of d2d link and d2d user to cellular user link. d2d pair traditionally shares resource block of cellular user with the best channel to reduce the relative interference to cellular link. while in the other way, for the same purpose, the d2d user can also reuse the resource block over which its transmitter has the worst channel between itself and base station (bs), in addition a simple strategy is put up to select the reusing mode that provides larger capacity. numerical results show that our proposed scheme performs significantly better than reference scheme in terms of system capacity and outage probability of cellular link, besides the scheme will not cause any extra complexity.



in this paper, no power allocation or other relevant protocols in original lte network will be changed, and we are chiefly concerned with how to exploit the difference of channel state information (csi) when d2d transmitter occupies different rbs, and then propose a resource allocation scheme that enhances the signal or reduces the interference separately. according to the csi of cellular users and the csi of d2d transmitters to bs, the system will properly select out the resource allocation mode with larger capacity. the rest of this paper is structured as follows. section 2 describes the basic model when d2d communication exists in lte networks. the detailed proposed resource allocation mechanism is given in section 3, and section 4 presents some convincing numerical results. the last section comes to the conclusion.



performance in terms of the system capacity. the proposed scheme selects out the best several resource blocks of cellular users, and then assigns to d2d pairs in a decreasing order. through careful observation of the expression of c , we can see that higher channel gain ( gcb ) from cellular user c to bs could obtain higher c . thus, any cellular user with high channel coefficient can share rbs with the d2d pairs. for each rb selected out, the d2d pair whose channel gain between its transmitter and bs is lowest will reuse it, and that is to make the maximum in expression (7):



in our proposed scheme, we not only follow the scheme that assigns the best rbs for cellular users, but also focuses on the worst resource block for d2d users in the links between d2d transmitters and bs separately to control the interference source. this would be a perfect supplement to the reference scheme without any extra complexity. the scheme can be divided into three steps.



