background: biomedical knowledge graphs (kg) have become crucial for describing biological findings in a structured manner. to keep up with the constantly changing flow of knowledge, their embedded information must be regularly updated with the latest findings. natural language processing (nlp) has created new possibilities for automating this upkeep by facilitating information extraction from free text. however, due to annotated and labeled biomedical data limitations, the development of completely autonomous information extraction systems remains a substantial scientific and technological hurdle. this study aims to explore methodologies best suited to support the automatic extraction of causal relationships from biomedical literature with the aim of regular and rapid updating of disease-specific pathophysiology mechanism kgs.



methods: our proposed approach first searches and retrieves pubmed abstracts using the desired terms and keywords. the extension corpora are then passed through the nlp pipeline for automatic information extraction. we then identify triples representing cause-and-effect relationships and encode this content using the biological expression language (bel). finally, domain experts perform an analysis of the completeness, relevance, accuracy, and novelty of the extracted triples.



lenges in biomedical information extraction and literature mining is the development of effective methods and strategies for transforming scien- tific text into structured knowledge representations such as ontologies and knowledge graphs (kgs) [2]. biomedical kgs are a powerful means of representing biomedical concepts and relations in the form of nodes and edges within networks. they have been utilized in a range of appli- cations including identifying protein functions [3], prioritizing genes as- sociated with disease [4], as well as drug discovery [5]. drug discovery is the process of finding new potential medications, and conventionally it is an extremely time-consuming and costly procedure. biomedical kgs



retrieval of essential information from text, and therefore mapping, creation, and extension of kgs are gaining more attention in biomedi- cal research. santos et al. [34], as an example, have presented a clini- cal kg that supports the harmonization of proteomics with other omics data while integrating biomedical databases and scientific publications. in another work, thomas et al. [35] have recently developed a frame- work for modeling causal activities called gene ontology causal activity modeling (go-cam) to represent more complex statements about bio- logical functions in a structured and scalable manner. gene-product in- teractions are modeled qualitatively and causally using go-cam, which can in turn help answer complex questions about how gene product ac- tivities interact to carry out biological functions [35]. their research also reveals a growing trend toward modeling cause-and-effect rela- tionships in the context of gene ontology. therefore, there are several substantial efforts being made towards the construction of ontologies and causal kgs, most of which can be broadly classified as manual or automatic/semi-automatic and are summarized below [33,36].



starting with the initial mechanism kg, we query pubmed for rele- vant medical subject headings (mesh) terms and keywords consis- tent with the context of the kg. here, we extracted pubmed abstracts dealing with tau phosphorylation and its post-translational modifi- cation. the abstracts extracted from this step constitute the extension corpus.



tors are apolipoprotein e (apoe), legumain (lgmn), phosphodiesterase 11a (pde11a), protein kinase cgmp-dependent 1v (prkg1), alpha- synuclein (snca) and tank-binding kinase 1 (tbk1). among them, only apoe, pde11a, and tbk1 were shown to be druggable. finally, we searched several sources and databases, including protein-protein inter- action networks, gene-disease databases, and pathway databases to val- idate and enrich the information about the identified potential targets against neurodegenerative diseases, including ad. we have summarized this information in the following sections.



methylxanthine (ibmx) [98]. it has also been observed that each of the four pde11a splice variations (pde11a1-4) appears to have a differ- ent tissue expression profile as well as a separate n-terminal regulatory area, implying that each isoform could be targeted independently with a small molecule or biologic [99,100]. though pde11a inhibitors and ac- tivators have been identified so far, more examinations in patient tissue must yet be performed for the establishment of a therapeutic indication [99].



for identifying the novel upstream regulators of ptau, we applied a graph-based algorithm using bikmi, an in-house software package which was designed to explore pathways and interactions within a bel network. currently, there is an ongoing demand for ml-based ap- proaches to improve not only the hypothesis generation itself, but also the speed at which it is performed. for instance, the path ranking algo- rithm (pra) is an alternative that can help with knowledge reasoning and knowledge recommendation tasks [101]. pra computes the feature matrix on a pair of graph nodes and edges and assigns a score to each triple. as the kg representations are used to predict links that may in- dicate potential relations between entities in the kg, hypothesis gener- ation approaches can be influenced by a variety of factors, such as how well the kg is constructed or how well the kge algorithm works. in this regard, zeng et al. [102] provided a review of hypothesis generation ap- proaches for drug discovery using kgs and explain that designing and validating automated workflows which can generate hypotheses, is still a massive challenge in the biomedical domain. our work aims to meet this challenge and present a viable method to overcome the hurdles of hypothesis generation.



to validate and enrich our understanding of the found interactor can- didates, we searched a variety of gene, protein, and disease databases for additional information. by comparing proteins, protein families, and protein-protein interaction networks, one can generate a wealth of in- formation about the relationship between proteins within a genome or across different species and related to different diseases. additionally, human disease databases are also an essential component of biological research that aid in understanding the importance and context of these proteins. among the identified interactors described in the results sec- this type of phosphorylation via the calpain-cdk5 signaling pathway [103]. following the fact that modulations of apoe are related to and promising in ad drug development, ymazaki et al. [95] summarized the associated therapies in three main categories: 1) regulation of apoe quantity; 2) modification of apoe properties; and 3) indirect therapeutic approaches. despite extensive research conducted regarding the role of apoe in neurodegeneration, no therapeutic interventions has been suc- cessfully found that targets the apoe gene directly [95]. this could be due to the complicacy of mechanisms underlying apoe isoform-specific differences on brain homeostasis [95]. however, though apoe is not di- rectly targeted, the apoe genotype is expected to affect the responses in several potential ad therapies [95].



yang m, tan h, zhang k, lian n, yu y, yu y. protective effects of coenzyme q10 against sevoflurane-induced cognitive impairment through regulating apolipopro- tein e and phosphorylated tau expression in young mice. int j dev neurosci off j int soc dev neurosci 2020. doi:10.1002/jdn.10041.



