modern security sciences use these differences to control the access to restricted places, which is one of the fundamental problems in security field. the increasing need of the security field has given rise to the development of recent and efficient authentication systems.old approaches of identification such as key or passwordare not satisfactory in many application areas. these conventional methods can be forgotten, stolen or cracked. for these weaknesses, the recent science is interested in automatic systems of identification which



the irs is a high accuracy verification technology,and a valid biometrics approach for personal identification. the irs has been wildly studied and used especially in the security fields. thus, many countries use irs in order to improve their security such as in airports and government buildings.although the iris identification theory was started earlier, most important recent works have been inspired by the works of john daugman.



segmentation process consists to isolate the iris ring from the iris image. the normalization process is applied to produce an invariant iris area.it transforms the circular iris region into a rectangular region with fixed dimensional.in fact, the inner and outer boundary can approximately be taken as circles.but, the two circles are not co-centric. daugman proposed to apply the integro-differential operator to detect the inner and the



in order to extract the relevant information from an iris image, we propose a novel feature extraction method. the proposed method is inspired by the local binary pattern(lbp) method. some improvements are made to capture the local information and describe better the iris texture. this paper has been organized as follows: in section 2, our proposed method for iris texture analyses is explained. section 3illustratessome experimental results.the conclusion of this paper is given in section 4.



58.75% and the nbp method is 76.25%.we can notice, from the results, that the nbp method is better than the classical lbp method.because in fact, the neighborhood of the central pixel is thresholded by its value using the lbp method.so, lbp get the relationship between each neighbor and the central pixel.however, the nbp method describes each pixel by the relationship of its neighborhoods.experimental results demonstrate that it is more interesting to capture the relative pertinent information between the neighbors.thus, the results have shown the robustness and the efficiency of the proposed nbp method.



