psychiatry is the most complex domain in medical sciences. psychiatric diseases are not directly measurable due to vague symptomatic presentations. results of investigations and treat- ment are manually correlated with the course of morbidity and such correlations could lead to biased decision-making.



the onset of depression is often unrecognizable. it may originate from several non-psychiatric illnesses, for e.g., can- cers [2] or chronic joint pains [3] and so forth. it is often noticed that different diseases present with similar types of symptoms and vice versa. also behind a set of symptoms there is a possibility of multiple diseases evident in case of depression with mania [4]. therefore, the process of depression screening (dd) to its formal diagnosis (pd) is quite lengthy and much



rest of the paper is organized as follows. section 2 dis- cusses various applications of fuzzy set, fuzzy logic and neural network approaches in mental health research. section 3 details the methodology of the study. experimental results are shown and discussed in section 4. finally, section 5 dis- cusses the key outcomes and concludes the paper.



in another study [12] a hierarchical decision-tree-based fuzzy model was proposed to screen and grade fifty cases of premenstrual syndrome (pms), which falls under the cross- domain of gynecology and psychiatry. the authors used firing strength (fs) of fuzzy rules to evaluate the respective pms grades. rules with higher fs had been considered significant and had been used in designing the diagnostic rule base of pms. the study concludes that appropriate rule base could be constructed to diagnose complex cross-domain diseases, which often lack standardized diagnostic rule sets.



ann had been used to examine the correlation of recurrent suicide attempts and the overall self-harm history of taiwanese soldiers [14]. they identified totally ten factors which might have influence on suicidal risks. network training with these factors was conducted using the radial basis function (rbf). the trained model showed about 82% sensitivity and 86% specificity.



the strength of rbf and a back propagation (bpnn) algorithm had been used to develop a decision support system (dss) in assisting rural doctors to diagnose psychiatric ill- nesses [15,16]. the heart of the said system is the application of bpnn as the feature extraction algorithm. the authors con- cluded that the proposed dss was able to diagnose psychiatric problems with 98.75% accuracy.



performance of a neuro-fuzzy model in predicting weight changes in chronic schizophrenic patients exposed to atypical or typical antipsychotics for more than a couple of years had been examined [19]. the authors used fuzzytech 5.54 soft- ware package to generate the rule base. the model was able to predict 93% of weight changes.



to differentiate between epileptic and non-epileptic events various fuzzy arithmetic operations have been investigated [20]. a total of 244 patients were studied using the nef- class (neuro fuzzy classification) architecture with the artificial neural network and back propagation algorithm (annb). finally they were able to detect the differences with a sensitivity of 85% sensitivity, while 95.65% was achieved by annb.



