one of the essential functions of information technology (it) governance is risk management, which aims at providing a safe environment for e-business and e- commerce. in support of this function, various it organizations, concerned with standards have published different risk management methods. these methods have been and are being partially or fully adopted by enterprises using it, and working in different fields, for identifying, analyzing, and minimizing risks for their it activities.



this paper is concerned with introducing a comprehensive information security risk management (isrm) framework for enterprises using it. the structural scope of the framework is based on the stope (strategy, technology, organization, peo- ple, and environment) view which is becoming of increasing importance for struc- turing information security issues over its five distinct domains (saleh et al., 2006, 2007, 2008; esteves and joseph, 2008); and the management process of the frame- work is associated with well known six sigma dmaic (define, measure, analyze, improve, and control) cyclic phases (pyzdek, 2003). in addition, the framework adds management criteria to its structural issues; and considers evaluation tools for its procedural phases. the framework also enables the integration and enhance- ment of the various available risk management methods and standards into its structural and procedural components. the paper describes the framework, and emphasizes its importance as a potential open reference for enterprise isrm.



in spite of the increasing number of standard and commercial risk management methods, various reports, surveys, and related literature indicate that the diffusion of the current risk management methods, within organizations has been very lim- ited so far due to lack of awareness, high cost, need for expertise, and long process (ncc, 2000; dti, 2002). in addition, the trust in these methods is very low due to the poor results, bulky confused reports and the narrow technological scope (labushehagne and eloff, 1998; spears, 2006). furthermore, the confused huge number of risk management methods (more than 200 now) create a problem to any organization willing to adopt one of these methods and the absent of an agreed reference benchmark or comparative framework for evaluating these meth- ods limit its practical use in assessing the enterprises information security risks (vorster and labuschagne, 2005; bornman and labuschagne, 2006; syalim et al., 2009).



the target isrm framework has two main parts: one part is concerned with its structural view; while the other is associated with its procedural view. the struc- tural view has two dimensions: scope and criteria; while the procedural view also has two other dimensions: process and tools. the framework is described in the following, in terms of these four dimensions.



