the system reliability may also be determined using minimal path sets. a path is a set of components whose functioning ensures that the system functions. a minimal path is one in which all the components within the set must function for the system to function [6].



go methodology has defined seventeen kinds of operators, denoted with the type of 1-17. in the go methodology, every operator represent a specific component, the signal-flows represent connections between the operators. the operators represent specific function and the input and output signals have to obey the operation rules.



in the set of logical operator, these three kinds of operator only represent the logical relationship among the signals. generally, each logical operator has at least two or more than two input signals. when deduce the minimal path sets, we need processing the logical operators. if go chart include the type 2 operator, according to the property of or gate, add the operator or gate and the operators after or gate to n signals before or gate. if go chart include the type 10 operator, let n signals before and gate become one signal, after it delete the same operators in these n signals. if go chart include the type 11 operator, let the operators which



the go methodology model is easy established based on water supply system functional diagram. first, according to the function of water supply system components, corresponding type of operators represent specific components. for example, water source is the input of the system, which is represented by type 5 operator. similarly, powers and drive signals are also represented by type 5 operator. the electric pump needs the control signal to operator normally, which is represented by type 6 operator. here, the primary input signal is from water source, and the secondary control signal is the output of the power. similarly, control valves must operate upon receiving the control signals, which are also represented by type 6 operator. the check valves are two states components, which we use operator 1.



