the operating temperature of a commercial pv panel strongly affects the electric power output of the devices. the prediction of the operating temperature therefore plays a central role in the economic and energy assessment of pv systems. the authors propose a new implicit correlation that takes into account the standard weather variables but also the regimen of pv panel in terms of the proximity to the maximum power points. data coming from an experimental set-up were processed by using the least squares technique. to validate the reliability of the correlation, a comparison between expected values and data from other common correlations were done. the results show that the regimen of the panel is strongly correlated with the operating temperature and the quality of the new correlation is generally very good.



the operating temperature of the cell tc is one of the most important parameter to determine the energy conversion efficiency of a pv panel; indeed, the efficiency of a pv device is a decreasing function of the tc temperature. obviously the performance of a pv module largely also depends on many other physical parameters such as the site latitude, the typical weather conditions, the panel tilt and azimuth angles, the air temperature, the wind speed, the temperature of the surrounding surfaces, the obstruction and shadow effects, the electrical load, etc.[6, 7].



to better evaluate the energy performance of a pv element it is necessary to know the thermal behaviour of the system to estimate accurately the heat flux across it; the heat transfer between the pv panel and the surrounding environment is driven by a global heat transfer coefficient, which describes the radiative and the convective exchange processes. in literature are available some empirical correlations to obtain the pv panel operating temperature. these correlations have been developed for common geometries and standard weather variables to facilitate the modelling design process of pv devices. from the mathematical point of view, the correlations for the pv operating temperature are either explicit in form, thus giving tc directly, or in implicit form, i.e. they involve variables which themselves depend on tc. in this last case, an iteration procedure is necessary for the relevant calculation. most of the correlations usually include a reference state and the corresponding values of the pertinent variables[8, 9].



in detail were installed two different panels: a 175 w poly-crystalline pv panel with a total area of 1.277 m2(panel a) and a 180 w mono-crystalline pv panel with a total area of 1.16 m2(panel b). the silicon temperature was measured using three thermocouples(type t, copper-constantan) installed into little holes made in the pet(polyethylene terephthalate) rear film of the panels, in order to improve the thermal contact with the cell silicon back face; averaged values of temperatures were used. all data were collected every 10 minutes and stored for the further calculations and comparisons. more details about the acquisition procedure is described in. at different value of rl we recorded the values of:



authors presented a novel implicit correlation to obtain the cell temperature from standard weather variables and working point of a pv panel. assuming a linear relationship between the irradiation, the temperature and the relative voltage at maximum power, has been possible to characterize the operating regimen of the panel by the ratio of v/vmpp(g, tc). following these hypotheses authors used a large database of monitored data coming from a two different pv systems to evaluate the parameters of a new implicit correlation depending of the ratio of v/vmpp(g, tc).



the value of the parameters used in the correlation were obtained by applying the technique of least squares. to assess the performance of the new procedure other correlations, widely used and available in the literature, were tested. the comparison of the results on two different panels were assessed by means of the mae evaluated on several days data, the new correlation presents a significant improvement in terms of mean absolute error respect other common correlations largely used.



