a logical method of ground formation target tracking, which includes formation initiation, formation separation, formation merging and formation updating, is proposed according to the kinetics of formation moving. the method addresses the problem of multi-targets tracking as a whole by using the centre -based tracking approach in the process of track updating. therefore, it is practicable due to reducing the computational burden and saving system resources.



a logical method of formation target tracking, which includes formation initiation, formation separation, formation merging and formation updating, is proposed according to the kinetics of formation moving. a fc- imm-upf algorithm is applied to address formation target tracking (bilik i and tabrikian j, 2010; ronghua g, etl., 2007).



formation target tracking maintenance can choose the minimum bounding rectangle and the minimum circumscribed circle of formation or the geometry centre of the smallest closures, and use the geometric centre tracking method to track and maintain formations. when formation combining, we can amend the geometric centre of the formation. because when a new target enters, the correlated area of formation target will change. if we continue to use the original centre, it is inaccurate to track new formation targets. therefore, we should amend the centre of new formation targets. then we take the minimum bounding rectangle of formation target as an example, and describe the identification and evolutionary relationships of formation spatial structure in detail. for the bounding rectangle of formation targets, length and width always remain parallel to respectively x-axis and y-axis of cartesian coordinate system.



deal with the target measurement. similar to deal with the target prediction, the measurements are processed as follows. the minimum enclosing rectangle and its centre are determined at first; then the corresponding relationship between the centre and all measurements in the formation.



if a new target is discovered, we compute the shortest distance between the new target and the centre of all the tracking formation min{fj* (dl)}.if min{fj* (dl)} fj (r) we append this target to the closest formation. otherwise, we consider the target as a new formation, and the new target will be created by the slide window algorithm or the separation of the formation.



the algorithm is used to process maintaining of tracking to formation state, the augment of new target (the combination of formation) and the loss of target (the separation of formation). the formation tracking and multiple targets tracking methods are applied to deal with a tracking instance respectively, and analyze how the number of targets can affect the two different tracking methods. a cv and a ct model is used as the target movement model (ronghua g, etl., 2007).



