this paper deals with research in the area of a novel imaging approach of web documents based on semantic inclusion of textual and non-textual informations. the main idea was to create a robust method for relevant display results into search engine based on search by keywords or images. thus, we proposed method called semantic inclusion of images and textual (siit) segments. the output siit method is short web document. it contains image and textual segments, which are semantic linked. creation of short web document to possible three steps was divided. firstly, the all images and textual segments from main content web document were extracted. secondly, extraction images were analyzed in order to obtain of semantic description objects into image. finally, linked images and textual segments using linguistic analysis.



l. p. florence [4] described an image and text mining tool named tnt. this tool is based on contextual exploration and work on different points of view. this tool offers a reorganization of the text guided by the images and annotated segments that are associated.



in practice we identifier element and simple character counter not work. the amount of web documents in question contained multiple blocks with more than 500 characters. dynamic sites is a long text strings used to create the drop-down menu or similar interactive blocks, from one point in the chain is presented as part of using javascript as moving text or list.



in this case is preferable to use a natural language description to distinguish the relevant text from the auxiliary strings. instead of a single counter of characters or a word that has the same drawbacks, we chose counter full sentences. in natural language, we assume the characteristics of structure of sentences - each sentence is followed by a terminating punctuation character of the preceding sentence (period, question mark, exclamation mark) and a space.



the proposed algorithm on selected sample of documents has been tested. the overall efficiency for text extraction was 88.99%. extraction of the images depends on the identification of the main block of the document therefore follows the success of the state of text extraction.



firstly, we loaded of extracted images and svm model. in the next phase, we defined number of segments for segmentation images using k-means [6]. the extracted images from web pages contains only three segments (e.i. water, tree, sky, ...). for each input image we set three segments using k-means. next, we used



in the third phase, features from segments using sift descriptors was extracted. these descriptors by threshold 5 or 8 pixels have been modified. this threshold was selected on the basis of previous publications [7]. in the test image, the vector length than eight pixels is not obtained. for this reason, the threshold greater than eight will not be used.



