the measurement of aromaticity in biochars is generally conducted using solid state 13c nuclear magnetic reso- nance spectroscopy, which is expensive, time-consuming, and only accessible in a small number of research- intensive universities. mathematical modelling could be a viable alternative to predict biochar aromaticity from other much easier accessible parameters (e.g. elemental composition). in this research, genetic program- ming (gp), an advanced machine learning method, is used to develop new prediction models. in order to identify and evaluate the performance of prediction models, an experimental data set with 98 biochar samples collected from the literature was utilized. due to the benefits of the intelligence iteration and learning of gp algorithm, a kind of underlying exponential relationship between the elemental compositions and the aromaticity of biochars is disclosed clearly. the exponential relationship is clearer and simpler than the polynomial mapping relation- ships implicated by maroto-valer, mazumdar, and mazumdar-wang models. in this case, a novel exponential model is proposed for the prediction of biochar aromaticity. the proposed exponential model appears better prediction accuracy and generalization ability than existing polynomial models during the statistical parameter evaluation.



(wiedemeier et al., 2015a). moreover, han et al. (2014) explored a positive relationship between the aromaticity of biochar c and their capacity for organic pollutants adsorption. singh et al. (2012) discov- ered that there is a definite link between the amount of co2 generated during a long-term incubation of biochars and their initial proportion fraction of aromatic c. obviously, quantification of the aromaticity of biochar c is highly significant for their further utilization and could be the basis for business models.



in order to develop c aromaticity prediction models, the above collected experimental data were divided into two data sets, e.g. train- ing set and testing set. the training set was employed to identify the model parameters, and the testing set was utilized for the evaluation of the model performance (cao et al., 2016). to ensure the effectiveness of the developed model, the training and testing sets were chosen ran- domly. in this research, 60 samples (about 60% of the prepared data) were randomly selected as the training set, and the rest 38 samples were taken as the testing set.



atom for the case with high c/n ratios (wang et al., 2013). considering ideal assumptions may cause some key model information to be ig- nored, which might be the reason why the prediction capacity of the modified mazumdar model is not satisfactory for practical application.



can quantitatively describe features of the prediction errors to analysis the accuracy and reliability of the models. obviously, gp-ii and gp-iii models outperform the gp-i and mazumdar-wang models. gp-ii and gp-iii have smaller median values (0.0017 and 0.0075) than gp-i and mazumdar-wang models (0.0165 and 0.0113), which means the error centres of former two models are closer to zero. moreover, there are no outliers for the predictions of gp-ii and gp-iii models when the



error distributions are addressed. regarding the structure of models, gp-ii and gp-iii models predict the c aromaticity by exponential func- tions of elemental atom ratios, but gp-i and mazumdar-wang models utilize polynomial combinations. it is obvious that exponential models have better prediction accuracy and generalization capabilities over polynomial models for the prediction of the c aromaticity. these results implicate that there exists an exponential relationship between the



models. obviously, the influence of n/c for the c aromaticity prediction is highly small, which can be ignored, because its sensitivity for the out- puts of the gp-iii model is only 2.23%. therefore, gp-ii model should be the best alternative among these models for the prediction of biochar aromaticity on account of excellent predicting capacity and simple model structure.



of h/c), which primarily is due to the formation of similar molecular structures (tiny aromatic cluster graphene-like structures) at relative high pyrolysis temperature (fang et al., 2014; maroto-valer et al., 1998b; mcbeath et al., 2011; wang et al., 2013). obviously, the predic- tion characteristics of gp-ii model is greatly consistent with the re- ported research results. therefore, the gp-ii model is an excellent prediction models for biochar aromaticity with high predicting accuracy and generalization ability.



hongliang cao conducted most of the modelling work and writing of this manuscript. yaime jefferson milan, sohrab haghighi mood, michael ayiania, shu zhang, xuzhong gong, and electo eduardo silva lora col- lected experimental data, and analyzed characterization data; qiaoxia yuan addressed the sensitivity analysis of the models. sohrab haghighi mood, shu zhang, and manuel garcia-perez contributed writing of the manuscript. all authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.



