plants and agroecosystem. therefore, it is crucial to detect the disease precisely. finding a rapid, accurate approach to take care of the issue of misdiagnosis and early disease identification will be advantageous to the farmers. this study proposed a lightweight custom convolutional neural network (cnn) model and utilized transfer learning (tl)-based models vgg-16 and vgg-19 to classify tomato leaf diseases. in this study, eleven classes, one of which is healthy, are used to simulate various tomato leaf diseases. in addition, an ablation study has been performed in order to find the optimal parameters for the proposed model. furthermore, evaluation metrics have been used to analyze and compare the performance of the proposed model with the tl-based model. the proposed model, by applying data augmentation techniques, has achieved the highest accuracy and recall of 95.00% among all the models. finally, the best-performing model has been utilized in order to construct a web- based and android-based end-to-end (e2e) system for tomato cultivators to classify tomato leaf disease.



developing yellow patches that darken into concentric black rings and may have a chlorotic region surrounding the lesion. the whole foliage is destroyed by this disease, which spreads quickly to other plants [9]. despite the fact that early blight may develop in any kind of weather, it prefers moist environments like persistent rain or even heavy dews.



late blight, caused by the fungus phytophthora infestans, is perhaps the worst disease ever seen in tomato leaves globally, accounting for large annual economic losses. late blight disseminates quickly because of its spore-based mode of transmission. this disease is more likely to develop in a cool, damp environment. typically detected on newly developed leaves in the plant canopy, irregularly formed, water-soaked lesions are the earliest signs of late blight on tomato leaves. as the dis- ease worsens, lesions become larger, and the affected leaves turn brown, shrivel, and die [9].



tetranychus urticae, often known as the two spotted spider mite, is a common polyphagous arthropod pest that has a significant negative economic impact on the tomato crop. affected leaves develop a brown or yellow coating on their undersides. the whole plant may be covered in fine webbing when the two spotted spider mite is heavily infested [12].



despite not being seed-borne, whiteflies are able to spread the virus named tomato yellow leaf curl. the affected plant has several symp- toms, such as leaf edges that roll upward and inward, yellowing leaflets, smaller leaves than usual, dropping off flowers, and elevated scabby patches [13]. furthermore, in disease-affected plants, no fruit develop- ment might happen.



the precise and timely classification of tomato leaf diseases is of the utmost importance for disease management. it is widely accepted that diseases are one of the most significant reasons for decreased produc- tivity. in addition, disease caused significant losses to the agricultural economy associated with tomato farming. for instance, the most prev- alent diseases that may severely impact crop output are early blight and late blight [16].



following is a breakdown of the remaining parts of this research work: the related work on the subject of disease classification is dis- cussed in section 2. section 3 describes the tl-based models and pro- posed custom cnn architectures for tomato leaf disease classification, as well as the training procedure and parameters. section 4 describes the tomato leaf disease dataset as well as its preprocessing for training purpose. additionally, the evaluation metrics utilized in the study are described. furthermore, the experimental results, performance analysis, comparison of results, and e2e system deployment procedure are also included in this section. in section 5, the study is concluded and the potential future research directions are highlighted.



the early identification of tomato plant disease. various studies have been performed related to tomato disease classification using diverse techniques and procedures. the use of deep learning (dl) techniques significantly increases the classification accuracy of image-related tasks. researchers adopted machine learning and deep-learning techniques for tomato leaf disease classification are reviewed here.



oped a simplified and effective cnn model with three convolutions, three max-pooling, and two fully connected layers. by applying data augmentation techniques, new sample images are generated to balance image quantity across all ten classes. with the comparison of the pro- posed model with the vgg-16, mobilenet, and inceptionv3, the pro- posed model has achieved an improved accuracy of 91.20%.



the dataset acquisition procedure has an impact on the effectiveness of the applied models. ahmad et al. [23] have used two tomato leaf disease image datasets, one laboratory-based and the other a dataset that has been self-collected from the field. with the use of feature extraction and parameter tuning on resnet, vgg-19, vgg-16, and inceptionv3 models, the performance of various metrics shows a vari-



although dl models are widely used to classify diseases of tomato leaves. some researchers have extracted features from the image dataset to perform classification using ml algorithms. basavaiah et al. [19] have used a dataset containing five classes of tomato leaf and extracted fea- tures such as hu moments, color histograms, local binary patterns, and haralick to perform classification. various ml algorithms have been used for classification, among those methods, rf has achieved a higher accuracy of 94.00%. the proposed mechanism, however, is not auto- matic, and less number of the tomato leaf disease has been covered.



various cnn-based architectures have been used not only for tomato leaf disease classification but also for other plant-related disease clas- sifications. mia et al. [24] have utilized cnn-based tl and traditional ml techniques and compared their performance for the classification of cucumber disease. in the study, a total of 525 image samples repre- senting six disease classes have been acquired and preprocessed. the sample size has been increased by applying data augmentation tech- niques, with a total sample size of 4200 images. in the next phase, various ml algorithms has been applied. furthermore, transfer-learning-based vgg-16, inceptionv3, and mobilenetv2 have been applied, and a comparison has been performed. among all the procedures, cnn-based mobilenet has achieved the highest accuracy of 93.23%.



in another study, the disease classification of tomato leaves has been conducted by chen et al. [26], utilizing the combination of b-arnet and abck-bwtr. images consisting of five classes are denoised and enhanced by the binary wavelet transform combined with retinex (bwtr). furthermore, background separation of images has been per- formed using ksw optimization by the artificial bee colony algorithm (abck) and classified using the both-channel residual attention network (b-arnet), achieving an accuracy of 89.00%.



thangaraj et al. [27] used a tl-based dnn model to recognize nine classes of tomato leaf disease and one class of healthy leaf. different optimizers such as sgd, adam, and rmsprop have been used to evaluate their effects on the performance of the tl model. among the used op- timizers, with the application of an adam optimizer, the modifed-xception model has been able to achieve a better accuracy of 99.55%.



tomato leaf disease has been classified using dcnn, which includes residual blocks and attention extraction modules performed by zhao et al. [28]. the dataset contains ten classes, including one healthy class, with a sample size of 4585, which has been further augmented with the count of 22925 images. among the resnet-50 and se-resnet-50 models, se-resnet-50 has achieved the highest accuracy of 96.81%.



in another study by kannan e et al. [29], a pre-trained resnet model has been used to classify tomato leaf disease. six classes of leaves are used in the study, with a sample size of 12,206 images. further augmentation has been applied to the dataset to increase the image count. the author achieves an accuracy of 97.00% by applying the resnet-50.



one of the contributing factors of research work is the deployment of the trained model on a web or other application-based platforms, which provides an e2e solution for farmers to identify suspected disease and take early measurements. elhassouny and smarandache [30] have built a cnn-based model, which has been deployed on a mobile application to recognize tomato leaf disease. for building a model based on cnn, the mobilenet model has been applied to the nine most common diseases, with one healthy class. a total sample size of 7176 images has been used for training the model, which has obtained the highest accuracy of 90.30%.



chen et al. [31] applied alexnet to classify tomato leaf diseases and implemented the model on the android platform. for that purpose, a dataset with 18345 training samples and 4585 testing samples from ten classes, including one healthy class, has been utilized. by using the adam optimizer, the highest accuracy of 98.00% has been achieved. furthermore, the trained model has been deployed in a mobile appli- cation that can be used to identify tomato leaf disease.



criteria, the model with the least amount of validation loss is usually saved. in the next phase, the performance of the models with and without augmentation with minimal validation loss has been evaluated and compared. finally, the best performing model has been deployed in local web-based system and an android based smartphone application to predict disease in tomato leaves.



runs more quickly, uses less memory, and needs less tuning. the adam optimizer is a combination of gradient descent with momentum and the rmsp algorithm. adam takes over the attributes of the two optimizers and builds upon them to give a more optimized gradient descent.



calculated as either 0 or x. this means that there are no flat areas where saturation can happen, unless x is negative, which makes gradient descent happen very quickly. it is the most popular choice of activation function for hidden layers since it is extremely easy to compute.



the study is performed by using the "tomato disease multiple sour- ces" named dataset, which contains images of tomato leaf disease [40]. the image in the dataset is captured from both laboratory and in-the-wild scenes. furthermore, this dataset of images has been collected from various sources.



10.00% of the training dataset. the final training dataset for this study has been created using data augmentation techniques. data augmenta- tion refers to a set of techniques for generating fictional data points from pre-existing data. data augmentation enriches and complicates data,



a learning graph is a graph that depicts time or epoch on one axis and learning on the other axis. learning curves are widely used in deep cnn (dcnn). the generalization ability of the model may be estimated by the evaluation of the validation dataset. during the training process, dual learning curves has been generated for the dl model by applying it to both the training dataset and the validation dataset. there are two types of learning curves: augmentation, a significant difference may be observed between training and validation loss and accuracy. furthermore, by applying augmentation techniques, the applied models have achieved higher (test) accuracy compared to models without augmentation techniques. among the many used models, the proposed model using augmentation techniques has achieved the highest accuracy of 95.00% with the



however, the vgg-19 with augmentation has performed better in terms of the auc score and roc curve than the vgg-19 without augmenta- tion. utilizing augmentation approaches has resulted in improved scores and more favorable roc curves than models without augmentation techniques. the proposed model with augmentation achieves the high- est auc score. moreover, the roc curves of the proposed model with augmentation have attained the most optimal curves compared to other models.



the classification task. with best of our knowledge, a number of studies have classified nine diseases and one healthy category, but none have performed so for ten diseases and one healthy category. furthermore, several studies have performed classification on a comparatively small dataset. additionally, a variety of images that are captured or collected



the user interface of an android application has been developed using extensible markup language (xml), while the backend is devel- oped using java. for image classification in the application, the best- performing proposed model has been converted to a lightweight ten- sorflow version whose format type is "tflite". then, the java program- ming language has been utilized to implement this light tensorflow model file in the android application. the developed android applica- tion is compatible with android versions 5.0 to 12. the android application allows the user to classify tomato leaf disease by capturing a live image or selecting an existing image from the device. this study has provided open access for our developed smartphone-based android application, which can be downloaded from the given github repository [42]. the proposed model is lightweight and is able to predict the outcome and show results rapidly and accurately.



has a higher accuracy of 95.00% among the employed models, making it significantly better than other research performing the same task. in addition, this study has deployed the most accurate classification model on a web- and android based application for tomato leaf disease prediction.



