social network mining can be divided into two categories, namely, the study of structural characteristics and content analysis. one of the most significant problem in the context of a social network is finding the most influential entities within the network. this task has significance in viral marketing, since the most influential entities can be targeted for endorsing new products in the market. however, the problem of discovering the most persuasive node in a social network has proved to be np-hard and also the exact algorithms cannot be designed. this creates a wide scope for developing approximation methods and algorithms that are able to produce solutions with proven approximation guarantees. greedy algorithm serves as a base for most of the existing algorithms designed for dealing with these problems. greedy algorithm can achieve a good approximation, but it is found to be computationally expensive. therefore, in this paper we propose a two level approach, designed based on suspected-infected (si) epi- demic model for maximizing the influence spread. we further propose that, multithreading approach for implementation of algorithm for the proposed si model aids to further elevate the performance of pro- posed algorithm in terms of influence spread per second.



viral marketing has been acknowledged as an effective market- ing strategy. eventually a large number of people get connected through social networks, such as facebook, flickr, and twitter. the impact of social network on their lives has increased signifi- cantly. the social influence acts as a motivating force, governing the diffusion of the information in the network. although there are millions of users on social platforms, the activities of a selected number of users are acknowledged and spread through the net- work. these dominant users generate trends and play a significant role to shape or manipulate opinions in social networks. these opinions are crucial in areas such as marketing or opinion mining. many companies have started targeting the key individuals called influencers, who are in contextual alignment with their brand and



social media influencers are the entities in the social network, who help potential customers make a buying decision by influenc- ing his opinion, through social networking. an influencer can be any person who reviews product, posts a blog about a new product, any industry expert or any person who has a potential to influence people. the problem of influencer identification can be presented as, given a group of individuals which are to be motivated to adopt a new product or information, find the optimum target subset of individuals (seed set), which can further influence the nodes. the ultimate goal is to maximize the spread the information to a large population.



recently, there are large advances in the social networks field. it has focused on the study of relationships that includes quantitative measures of social networks like influence, authority, centrality, modularity, connectedness, etc. [1]. influence maximization can be defined as the problem of forming an objective function for selecting appropriate target nodes in a social network such that it maximizes the influence spread. these target nodes in turn will propagate the influence to their connected nodes. this will be help- ful to design marketing strategies or diffuse a new idea in a net- work related work in influencer detection in social networks.



kemp et al. [2] proposed a greedy approach for finding k influ- ential nodes out of all existing nodes. they provided for the first time an approximation guaranteed solution for the greedy algo- rithm. they proposed an analysis framework for finding the seed nodes. this framework is based on submodular functions. the framework also showed that a feasible solution can be obtained using a greedy strategy. they also proposed triggering model and showed that their proposed approximation algorithm worked bet- ter as compared to other known node selection strategies in social networks.



on the other hand, the social network diffusion was also mod- elled [5] using various theories like bond percolation, resulting in the proposal of susceptible infected recovered (sir) model. mean- while, graph evolution parameters, such as densification and shrinking diameters, were analysed [6] for modelling social net- works. based on global social network metrics, such as between- ness centrality and closeness centrality, a semi-local centrality measure was proposed to design an effective ranking method. this design along with the sir epidemic model was used to evaluate the performance of the diffusion model by considering the parameters such as the rate of influence spread and the number of infected nodes i.e. influenced nodes [7,8]. later a new heuristic and scalable solution based on maximum influence path was proposed [9].



the bond percolation theory and epidemic models are studied and utilization of the si epidemic model [24] for modelling the dif- fusion in social networks is proposed. there is majority of work based on bond percolation and on sir model. the si model is pre- ferred since si model is a progressive model and hence can be bet- ter exploited in the influence maximization problem.



social network can be interpreted as a directed graph g = (v, e) where v denotes the nodes in the graph, which represent the users in the social network and e denotes the edges, that represent the relationship between the users. in this context the relationship would be that of the influencer and influenced node i.e. who influences whom. the influence maximization problem deals with optimally selecting the seed set of users such that they contribute to maximize the expected spread of influence or diffusion in the spreading the influence to the next level of influence will be ter- med as seed nodes. let s0 be the seed set, containing the seed nodes. in other words, the seed nodes in this set are called the seeds of influence diffusion. these seed nodes are the initial nodes at the root level, which are selected to propagate the influence throughout the network. for example, as a marketing strategy, the initial users selected by the promotional campaign of a new product, designed as marketing strategy.



kempe [2] proposed the triggering model, which is mainly based on two basic propagation models, already discussed above, namely, the ic and the lt models. in ic and lt propagation models, this influence maximization problem is proved to be np-hard by kempe et al. [2]. he also showed that the maximization function



submodularity can be interpreted in this context as diminishing marginal return i.e. when more nodes are added to the seed set, there is no great effect on the performance of the model. in this context, monotonicity can be interpreted as if more elements are added to a seed set, it cannot reduce the size of the final set con- taining the active nodes (influenced nodes).



this maximization problem can be expressed as a discrete opti- mization problem. it can be modelled as a graphical model for learning tree distribution. a discrete approach aims to choose the optimal set of nodes that constitute an optimal path in a spanning tree, emerging out of the seed node. in other words, finding a span- ning tree of social graph g of best fit for the triggering nodes (seed nodes), such that when the nodes are traced along the given path length (also termed as threshold), it provides a subset of the solu- tion i.e. subset of final active set.



let g be a graph, with initial population assumed as susceptible for spread. let {s} denote the set of seed nodes obtained from the greedy algorithm, {s1} denote the set of susceptible nodes and {i} denote the set of infected nodes, i.e., the nodes responsible to spread node v to any other node in the graph. it is the diameter of sub graph, used to find diffusion for one infected node e {i}. this is how we actu- ally compute the reachability of the nodes. we assume that the



the shortest path is traversed using spanning tree which makes sure that the vertex with maximum influence spread is passed to the next iteration. this leads to an incremental influence spread. the nodes returned by the above algorithm represents the set of nodes influenced by the source node. it is observed that the spread is wider than the greedy algorithm.



proof. the input for the algorithm is a set of infected nodes {i} which are derived from the population by using the greedy algo- rithm. it is clear that the target seed set obtained from the greedy algorithm is submodular as well as monotonous [2].



hence, if we are using incremental approach to find the influ- ence spread, then the monotonicity is reserved in this approach. further, experimentally, we have proved that the number of nodes influenced by a seed set at earlier step n is more than the next step, i.e., n + 1.



on the other hand, the seed nodes, i.e., infected node set {i} can contain the entire population in the best case. the greedy algo- rithm terminates when the seed node set contains all the nodes of the entire population n. in this case, the seed set becomes uni- versal set. hence, even if any infected node gets added later, it will be a subset of universal set and according to set theory, |u| = n, i.e., the total number of nodes. hence, the number of infected nodes can be a maximum of n.



the computational time can be reduced substantially. once we get the target nodes using the greedy algorithm, we can simultane- ously execute the algorithm on all the seeds. this is the reason why the computational time gets reduced. for achieving further improvement in time efficiency, we propose to use the multithreading approach.



shortest paths, the given nodes influenced (which is computed by cascaded operation) will be restricted by specified threshold (which specifies the path length). the si model is based on the incremental approach where the spread is cumulative. it exploits the graph properties. the spanning tree enables the si approach to find the best possible longest path which helps in increasing the influence spread. the greedy approach is restricted to the local search. celf++ is based on the submodularity imposed on greedy algorithm and ci is based on the adaptive bottom up approach utilizing the finite radius of sphere of social networks. the performances of influence spread with different values of



here, a novel approach is proposed based on si epidemic model for influence spread, the longest shortest path concept for reacha- bility and implementation of multithreading for improving the time efficiency which iteratively improves the greedy cascaded model exponentially. the influence spread in this model is maxi- mized as compared to the basic greedy model. the efficiency in terms of speed is an added benefit. in this study, we evaluated the algorithm for different seed sizes with different datasets against different approaches proposed earlier. we observed that our ultimate aim of maximizing the influence spread is achieved using si model, but at the cost of execution time. hence we used multithreading to improve the total number of nodes influenced per second, i.e., indirectly decreasing the computational time.



this work provided an overview of the influencer identification and the influence maximization. this study concludes that by iden- tifying the influential users in social media, different business strategies can be planned, e.g., efficient launching and marketing new products, targeting the potential consumers, etc. it is obvious that the influence maximization and social influence mining together will form the significant components to enable extensive viral marketing through online social networks.



identifying influential users may be proposed through different models, algorithms and statistical techniques. also parallel prob- lems like link prediction, social network content analysis, etc. could be considered as potential problems for social network min- ing to deal with in future.



