the detection of earthquakes is crucial for seismologists to monitor tectonic activities in a region. in order to achieve reliable earthquake monitoring, many automated methods for seismic phase identification have been developed. the most state-of-the-art conventional algorithms for earthquake detection or seismic phase picking include template matching(peng and zhao, 2009; ross et al., 2017) and short-time average/long-time average(sta/lta)(zhou et al., 2022). template matching involves measuring the similarity between earthquake waveforms and cataloged waveforms of seismic events. however, it relies heavily on the pre-defined events, which makes the detection challenging in case of unseen data(ross et al., 2018). sta/lta refers to measuring the ratio between the amplitude of the signal on a short time window and that on a long time window; an event is detected when the ratio exceeds some pre-defined threshold. sta/lta might not perform well for the signals with low signal-to-ratio(snr) and low magnitudes.



this work is organized as follows: section 2 comprehensively delineates the proposed methodology. section 3 briefly describes the used dataset, and shows the experimental setting and metrics for the performance evaluation. section 4 details the results of the performed experiments and finally, section 5 describes the conclusions of this work.



the proposed method described in this section takes a window of three-channel seismogram data, i.e., three-channel normalized waveform within the duration of 4 s, as input, and outputs the probabilities over three classes: p-wave window, s-wave window, and noise window.



in order to find an optimum architecture for seismic phase identification, we first tested several resnet blocks such as 1d-resnet18, 1d-resnet34, and 1d-resnet50. the results show that 1d-resnet34(98.70%) performs better than both 1d-resnet18(98.63%), and 1dresnet50(98.62%) even though 1d-resnet34 has fewer parameters compared with 1d-resnet50.



the result demonstrates that our proposed model achieves better performance for earthquake detection than capsnet(saad and chen, 2020)(here, the result of capsnet is stated from saad and chen(2020)). for seismic phase classification, 1d resnet demonstrates its superiority compared with capsphase(saad and chen, 2021)(here, the result of capsphase is adopted from saad and chen(2021)). the potential reason behind achieving higher performance could be that the residual blocks in resnet(he et al., 2016) contribute to improving the classification accuracy since it is capable to learn some meaningful features from the input.



the proposed method is first compared with capsphase(saad and chen, 2021). here, these two models are pre-trained on the scedc dataset, and the best-saved model of capsphase published by the authors is directly used without model retraining. in contrast to the original work, saad and chen(2021), in this comparison, no threshold is used for the model output. the overall testing accuracies of the used two methods are 94.39%(capsphase), and 95.68%(1d-resnet), respectively. thus, we see find that 1d-resnet used in this study achieves better performance, especially in the s-phase identification.



to investigate the model performance, when facing more noisy data, the same subset of the stead dataset used for model generalization evaluation in the study is masked by gaussian noise(similar to the approach used in mousavi et al.(2020)). then, the noisy data is fed to the pre-trained model to test the performance. the signal-to-noise ratio(snr) of the data before adding noise ranges from 0 to 70 db. here, the snr is the mean value of snr over three-components for each signal. to study the impact of different noise levels on model performance, methods when facing more noisy data. the proposed model can be utilized by seismologists to identify earthquake signals and phases, especially in the case of noisy low-magnitude earthquake waveforms. future work will focus on a hierarchical classifier to hierarchically complete the tasks of earthquake detection and seismic phase identification. note that this study only focuses on seismic phase identification, in follow-up work, we will investigate how to use the pre-trained phase classifier to improve the phase arrival time picking on continuous seismic waveforms.



