and it is the most practical and youngest part. currently svm develops constantly. although traditional svm can deal with high-dimensional, non-linear and small sample data set, it solves a more complex problem in the classification process of finite samples. thus it obeyed the following basic principle that when we solved a given problem, we should avoid to solve a more general problem in the middle process. based on this idea, vapnic proposed a transductive thought (gammerman et al., 1998) and present a transductive support vector machine algorithm which can improve the performance of classifier effectively.



this article is a further study on transductive learning, trying to find a more common transductive learning algorithm than the existing methods. according to the inherent characteristics of support vector machine classification, this article design a transductive support vector machine algorithm based on spectral clustering (shi and malik, 2000). the present classifier first uses spectral clustering to cluster the similar non-label samples based on the good results of spectral clustering. then it marks all the samples in the same cluster with the same label. finally the classifier uses transductive learning method to do classification. as this method uses spectral clustering to mine the effective priori distribution information of the unlabeled samples, so it can effectively improving the performance of the transductive support vector machine algorithm.



section 2 introduces the idea of transductive learning and described the transductive support vector machine classification algorithm presented by joachims (joachims, 1999). based on the characteristics of traditional support vector machine classifiers and the good result of spectral clustering, we present a transductive support vector machine learning algorithm based on spectral clustering and give the detailed processes of the algorithm. in section 4, we give the experimental results and make a detailed analysis. in section 5, we conclude the whole paper and point out that further research directions and ideas.



step 3: retrain the support vector machine over all the examples. for the newly yielded classifier, switch labels of one pair of different-labeled unlabeled examples using a certain rule to make the value of the objective function in (1) decrease as much as possible. this step is repeated until no pair of examples satisfying the switching condition is found.



the basic though of tsvmsc is as follows. first of all, cluster the similar unlabeled sample effectively according to the good clustering performance of spectral clustering. then mark all the samples in the same cluster with the same label. finally learn with transductive support vector machine on all the labeled and unlabeled samples, which is to find a solution of optimization problem (1). below we present the detailed steps of tsvmsc.



the algorithm avoids initially estimating the ratio of positive labeled samples and negative labeled samples in the unlabeled sample set. moreover, the spectral clustering algorithm can mine the priori distribution information of the unlabeled samples effectively. the experimental results show that tsvmsc algorithm can achieve a good effect on stability and accuracy.



this project is supported by the national natural science foundation of china (nos. 60873037,61073041,61073043), the natural science foundation of heilongjiang province of china (no. f200901), harbin outstanding academic leader foundation of heilongjiang province of china (no. 2011rfxxg015), and specialized research fund for the doctoral program of higher education of china (no. 20112304110011).



