for precise definitions of pseudo-monad, pseudo-algebra, etcetera, see. the concepts are a little more complicated than those associated with 2-monads, which in turn are a little more complicated than those associated with ordinary monads, but only a little. our two leading examples are as follows.



example 3.1 let tfp denote the pseudo-monad on cat for small categories with finite products. the 2-category ps-tfp-alg has objects given by small categories with finite products, maps given by functors that preserve finite products in the usual sense, i.e., up to coherent isomorphism, and 2-cells given by all natural transformations. so ps-tfp-alg is the 2-category fp and the category tfp(c) is the free



example 3.2 for size reasons, there is no interesting pseudo-monad on cat for cocomplete categories: small cocomplete categories are necessarily preorders, and the free large cocomplete category on a small category does not lie in cat. but there are well-studied techniques to deal with that concern, allowing us safely to ignore it here. assuming we do that, there is a pseudo-monad tcoc for cocomplete categories. for any small category c, the category tcoc(c) is given by the presheaf category[cop, set].



for a precise definition of a pseudo-distributive law between pseudo-monads, see. again, they are a little more complicated than ordinary distributive laws, but only a little, the only substantial complexity residing in coherence detail, i.e., a statement of exactly which two-dimensional diagrams must agree with each other. brushing that aside, our leading example is as follows[27,28,29].



the signature in example 3.11 does not seem to have computational significance. that does not unduly perturb us: our main theorem about signatures is a positive one, asserting that any signature yields initial algebra semantics, so including uninteresting examples within that result does not bother us.



account of binding being more subtle than that of fiore et al. specifically, their restriction from[inj, set] to the full subcategory of those functors that preserve pullbacks allowed them to speak sensibly of the support of a bound term. one can analyse the idea in terms of the axiomatisation of section 3.



