focus on the problem that noise is existing in the input signals and output signals of visual measurement system, if calculate via the classic least mean square algorithm or recursive least square, it would generate the larger errors; or calculate directly, the calculation work loading is too complex. so the solution of weight vector could be as the limited best optimization solution of rayleigh quotient of augmentation input vector self correlation matrix, take iteration estimation to the augmentation input vector and set up the function relationship between step factor and error; the simulation analysis experiment results indicate the standard tolerance of proposed adaptive total least squares algorithm is 0.0375mm; but the one of normal total least squares algorithm is only 0.0598mm. obviously, the proposed algorithm has more high precision than normal total least squares algorithm, and its structure is simple, the calculation speed is faster.



of squares is minimum, the least squares estimation would be close to the best optimization solution. but the error is existing in vector a and b, the least squares estimation is not the best optimization. in this case, the best way is total least squares(tls)[1-3]. but in more cases, the tls algorithm is batch mode based on



calculation is too complex and in the case of n is too large, it's very difficult to do. focus on this point, the scientific research workers in domestic and oversea make a lot of research analysis, suykens j. et al., 1999 present least squares support vector machine classifiers; sanchez a. et al., 1995 presents robustization of a learning method for rbf net-works; kruger u. et al., 2008 present robust partial least squares regression: part i algorithmic developments. summary the above research analysis results, to propose one kind of method which is to achieve step length recursion formula of tls algorithm based on the cost function gradient.



cmm, their coordinates could be measured directly by cmm. and define randomly the position of fifty determinands, use separately the normal total least-squares algorithm and adaptive total least-squares algorithm to calculate the attitude of their optical characteristics points. then compare the results calculated by every algorithm with the actual coordinate measured by cmm.



the experiment results indicate the standard tolerance calculated by normal total least-squares algorithm is 0.0598mm, and the one done by adaptive total least-squares algorithm is 0.0375mm. compared with normal total least-squares algorithm, the tolerance calculated by adaptive total least-squares algorithm is less.



