this paper is organized as follows; section 2 introduces theoretical bases including hdmr and svr. section 3 proposed the new adaptive svr-hdmr method. in section 4, the proposed svr-hdmr method was tested by two nonlinear problems. summary are given in section 5.



hdmr provides a hierarchical, correlated function expansion of a mathematical structure of the response and terms of this structure could be evaluated independently. the very essence of hdmr(rabitz and alis, 1999; li et al.,, 2001; rabitz and alis, 1999;rabitz,2003) is that, from the point of the output/response, the order of the functional correlations between the statistically independent variables will vanish rapidly (chowdhury and rao, 2009). it is because that for most well-defined physical systems, only lower order correlations of the input variables are expected to have a significant effect on the overall response (rabitz and alis, 1999). this is where hdmr can reduce computational scale of mapping relationships between input variables and output/response of high dimensional, complex systems.



apparently the highest order of the cut-hdmr expansion has an influence on the computation cost of the cut-hdmr. a lot of metamodeling methods have been developed under the frame of the cut-hdmr, but some accompanying sampling method is still not available. in this work, we use the svr to construct the component functions of hdmr.



in the metamodeling processes, characteristics and structures of the underlying function might be unknown, especially for black-box problems. traditional metamodeling methods do not present satisfactory efficiency while providing approving accuracy. the new svr-hdmr takes the advantage of the hierarchical structure of hdmr and utilizes svr to construct component functions of the hdmr.



this paper proposes a new hdmr metamodel construction method, which combined the hierarchical structure of hdmr and the explicitly of svr. the svr-hdmr metamodeling technique could automatically reveal an explicit expression of the underlying function and correlations among the input variables; it needs no prior information about the underlying function. the selection of the cut-point does not influence accuracy of the constructed model. by inheriting hdmr's hierarchical structure and reusing of sampled values, the proposed method can greatly reduce the computation cost, while ensuring the accuracy of the results. we have successfully applied adaptive svr-hdmr to the zk5540 machine tool structure optimization design for wuhan heavy machine tool group. future work would be concentrated on developing proper sampling method and more applications in engineering practice.



