in a disaster situation, air ambulance rapid response will often be the determining factor in patient survival. obstacles intensify this circumstance, with geographical remoteness and limitations in vehicle placement making it an arduous task. considering these elements, the arrangement of responders is a critical decision of the utmost importance. utilizing real mission data, this research structured an optimal coverage problem with integer linear programming. for an accurate comparison, the gurobi optimizer was programmed with the developed model and timed for performance. a solution implementing base ranking followed by both local and tabu search-based algorithms was created. the local search algorithm proved insufficient for maximizing coverage, while the tabu search achieved near-optimal results. in the latter case, the total vehicle travel distance was minimized, and the runtime significantly outperformed the one generated by gurobi. furthermore, variations utilizing parallel cuda processing further decreased the algorithmic runtime. these proved superior as the number of test missions increased, while also maintaining the same minimized distance.



multiple solutions have been proposed in previous works, with some implementing near-optimal metaheuristics [2] or concentrating specif- ically on scheduling [3]. for this research, the problem was formulated to maximize coverage, while minimizing the solution runtime. real-mission data aided in developing a more realistic scenario rather than relying on synthetic generation. each mission began at a potential base, performed a pickup, dropped off a patient, and then returned to the same base. the primary purpose was determining which bases the vehicles should be placed at to maximize the coverage. while exact methods are an option when time is not a factor, in emergencies there are instances where ve- hicles must be repositioned quickly to fill demands. in this case, algo- rithmic metaheuristics are much more necessary. furthermore, many



this work aims to fill in the gap with near-optimal, fast algorithms that can be efficiently utilized over exact methods. the paper takes a generalized approach in modelling a system which can be further enhanced or customized to other environments. additionally, there is not mentioned in the realm of parallelism, a technology that can dramatically improve the runtime of the algorithms.



the remainder of this paper is arranged as follows. section 2 describes the related work, emphasizing previous or similar techniques for resolving the topic. section 3 presents the problem domain and description, along with the constraints. section 4 describes the base ranking, local search, and tabu search-based solutions. sections 5 and 6 explain the results and conclude the paper.



the healthcare industry is only one candidate when considering the optimization of air assets. the present work explores the minimization of total distance for placement; however, others have examined cost in conjunction with distance. fernandez-cuesta et al. [5] looked at this problem from the perspective of the oil industry and suggested two heuristics for optimizing the position of a fleet of helicopters. placement of vehicles is considered an np-hard problem, making it unrealistic to achieve an optimal solution or use purely iterative techniques. dong et al.



empirical data allows a model to make use of past trends for present solutions. utilizing information like travel time, dispatch delay, and pickup time; mccormack et al. [10] developed a simulation for land-based ambulances. for actual optimization, the simulation relied on a genetic algorithm for fleet assignment. similarly, the work of zhen et al.



a mission consists of a pickup, a delivery, and a return to base. to simplify the calculation, the distances between pickup and delivery points are ignored since excluding them does not affect the final coverage determination. as this is not a scheduling problem, the formulation considers that each base can only hold a single aircraft. in general, dispersing the vehicles will be more beneficial the more spread out missions become over a large area. in essence, this process would be completed before scheduling to determine the best placement of vehicles



algorithm 2 accepted the ranked data and unused bases assigned in algorithm 1. as there would be no variation on successive runs (and the guarantee of optimal placement), two permutation matrices were generated corresponding to each mission index (lines 5 and 6). essen- tially, this meant that swaps or take-overs would occur at different points each time, offering a distinction between results and allowing the exploration of varying neighbourhoods. per line 9, the goal of the algo- rithm was to minimize the total haversine distance across all missions. the entire set would iterate multiple times completely, stopping only after no further improvement could be found.



helipads) were used for an individual assignment. datasets initially ran through an instance of base ranking to generate a strong starting point, and then adjustments were made with the local search algorithm. the latter was performed until no further improvement could be found, at which point the results were recorded. as previously mentioned, this



in a city-wide ems system, ambulance placement is simplistic, how- ever; in an air ambulance service, there are often far more bases than vehicles. additionally, the coverage regions can be massive with most of these bases being heavily dispersed. facility coordinate data suggests that demographic information is not reliable enough for the positioning of vehicles. achieving an exact solution, while not completely unrealistic, can be time-consuming in the case of a disaster. therefore, alternative algorithms were necessary for determining the placement of air ambu- lances for optimal coverage.



