in seafood processing industries, control measures are adopted to ensure the safety and quality of products. various quality assurance standards exist to guarantee the safety and quality of goods. some of them are international organization for standardization (iso), hazard analysis critical control point (haccp), quality management program (qmp), total quality management (tqm), etc. [3]. so the adoption of



the rest of the paper is organized as follows: section 2 com- prises of the materials and methods. the section describes the design of ontologies, analysis of quality test parameter values, and the proposed algorithms. section 3 includes results and discussions. it illustrates the data sets used, the performance of the algorithms on the selected data sets and the values of performance metrics. section 4 presents the conclusion which is followed by references.



ontologies define the semantics of the concepts identified in a domain. there is no single method to develop an ontology. this research follows the approach proposed by noy and mcguinness in the development of ontologies [4]. many inter- esting ontologies are available on the web in different domains, particularly in the medical domain. such ontologies enable information sharing, and other applications reuse them. but in seafood domain, no relevant ontologies exist. so the ontolo- gies used in the proposed model are developed from scratch.



test-spec-raw-allcountries and test-spec-uncooked- frozen are the two primary classes of internal-test-seafood class. for each category of raw seafood, the test specifications are independent of the country of export. so the five subclasses of test-spec-raw-allcountries represent the test specifications of five categories of seafood included in seafood ontology. but



the test specifications ontology stores the microbiological, chemical and organoleptic test standards (min_value and max_- value). so these test standards are available only during the analysis phase. also due to scalability issues of ontology, it is time-consuming to every time retrieve the test standards directly from the ontology. so a data store update algorithm is proposed to compute the permitted value for each test item. the above algorithm stores the updated min_value and max_value of each test in the data store, making it available for fast retrieval. when the laboratory technologist inputs the value, a comparison algorithm retrieves the permitted range of the concerned test from the data store. the comparison algorithm checks whether the value entered by the user is within the allowable range, by comparing the test input value with min_value and max_value available in the data store.



minimum value and a maximum value. the test specifications ontology outputs the standard test limits (min and max) of the concerned test. the algorithm compares the minimum of the past test values with the standard minimum limit retrieved from the ontology and accordingly sets the min_value. similarly, it sets the max_value. the algorithm also computes the variance of the test values. in the end, it updates the computed values min_value, max_value, and the variance in the data store. this algorithm is executed periodically as per the system settings so that the data store contains the updated values.



or can repeat the test. similarly, if the current_value is greater than the max_value, the algorithm checks further as mentioned above and generates concerned alerts. once we have a large number of test values and their reports in the data store, the comparison algorithm gets a collection of test values so that it can set the min_value and max_value. so the accuracy of the comparison algorithm is increased as more data accumu- late in the data store.



the data sets used are taken from different seafood companies in kerala, india, which exports seafood and seafood products to all around the world. the marine product export develop- ment authority of india (mpeda) validated the data sets. the data sets consist of details of seafood purchased from var- ious landing centers. it includes the purchase date, seafood type, landing center code, quantity, importer details, microbi- ological, chemical, organoleptic test details and details of sea- food exports to different countries. the experiment used three datasets of seafood families namely, bony fish, cephalopods, and molluscs. each family includes different types of seafood, and each group contains valid and invalid data.



for bony fish dataset, the algorithm identified 37 test sam- ples correctly as true positives and ten samples as true nega- tives. it wrongly lists two valid test samples as having problems in the test values. the algorithm incorrectly outputs three invalid test samples as within the allowable limit.



p.v. vinu, p.c. sherimon, k. reshmy, modeling of test specifications of raw materials in seafood ontology using semantic web rule language (swrl), in: proceedings of the 2015 international conference on advanced research in computer science engineering & technology (icarcset 2015), acm, 2015.



