electrocardiogram(ecg) is an electrical signal detected by the particular device and method. it is very important to analyze and measure ecg for diagnosis of various heart diseases. however, it is often disturbed by different types of noise. in this paper, an adaptive morphological filter is presented to remove the power line interference from ecg signals, by which the drawbacks of previous morphological method are overcome. moreover, the extraction of r peak in ecg is also feasible by this filter for further study on ecg. due to the high speed of our method, the ecg de-nosing and r peak extracting could be both realized at real time, which is an effective method to monitoring patients undergoing surgeries.



mathematical morphology(mm) is a branch of mathematics which is based on set theory, topology and random functions. structuring elements are the basic concept of mathematical morphology, which has a certain form(such as point, line, circle, etc). erosion and dilation are two basic morphological operators. open and close can be defined through the transform of them. the morphology operations are defined as follows: interference in noisy ecg signal f0. g1 is a triangular structure element which width is 0.02fs. signal f1 is obtained from the noisy ecg signal after oc_co operation, and the noise has been removed from it,as well as the peaks and pits in high amplitude qrs wave. signal p contains the important peaks and pits cut down in the operation of morphology, however, there is a lot of noise too.



to prove whether our algorithm is appropriate for the ecg signal, we use the real ecg signal getting from the process of operations of taiwan hospital. the sample rate is 300hz, and the noise signal was obtained by adding 60hz noise into the pure signal. we use the the signal-to-noise ratio(snr) and root-meansquare error(rmse) to measure the performance of our methods.



in this paper, a new ecg de-noising method which combines morphology with adaptive filter with lms algorithm is proposed. this new method overcomes the disadvantage that the morphology will cut down the r peaks in ecg signals. it not only suppress the power line interference effectively, but also minimally the losses of the useful information in ecg signal. in addition, our method applies lms algorithm to reduce the noise in r peaks obtains from morphology. at last, we applied morphology method to extract the qrs wave from the de-noised signal, which can benefit for processing r-r interval in real-time effectively. however, how to select a appropriate structuring elements to adapt to individual differences is the most difficult part in future work.



