this paper presents an abstract machine for the stochastic bioambient calculus. the abstract machine is proved sound and complete with respect to a novel stochastic semantics, and is also shown to preserve the reduction probabilities of the calculus. the machine is implemented as an extension to an existing simulator for stochastic pi-calculus.



more recently, there has been substantial work on extending the stochastic picalculus with constructs that model the complex spatial hierarchy of a biological system. in particular, the bioambient calculus was introduced to model the notion of mobile compartments, and the brane calculus was introduced to model the notion of mobile membranes. as with the stochastic pi-calculus, in order for these abstractions to be useful in practice it is essential that the corresponding models are simulated exactly, in accordance with the principles of the gillespie algorithm. a simulator of the bioambient calculus has already been developed, which continues to be a valuable tool for validating stochastic bioambient models. however, there is a significant gap between the definition of the calculus and the definition and implementation of the underlying simulation algorithm. one could argue that the accuracy of the simulation algorithm is just as important as the calculus itself, and should therefore be treated with the same rigour.



the tree t consists of a list of all the child ambients in the term. each term is also associated with a global set of names z and a global constant environment e, which contains a set of process definitions. the syntax of processes p is constrained so that each choice c is associated with a corresponding species definition in the environment. this is necessary in order to group populations of identical species.



theorem 3.14 and theorem 3.15 ensure that the reaction probabilities of the bioambient machine correspond to those of the bioambient calculus, and vice-versa. the proofs rely on the fact that each reaction in sba corresponds to a single reaction in sbam, and vice-versa.



