contender for participation in the squad based on past records and other considerations. the decision for selection of the squad considered an enormous balance of batters, bowlers, and all-rounders. the team should have included a wicketkeeper with remarkable numbers behind wickets and impressive batting statistics. although fielding seems to be a crucial part of a play, bat and ball skills are valued more than fielding[2,



the most potent team competing on that particular day. there have been instances where lower-scoring teams won by eliminating their opponents for a lower score. simultaneously one cannot rule out the possibility of the other team actively chasing a huge score. because of the way



where statistics will be comparable for two players that played against different opponents and performed similarly. still, they leave out specific crucial details: the player who scored against a stronger opponent should be given a higher rating. dismissals of batters with a better career record should be given a higher rating than dismissals of batters with lower career records. this work demonstrates building a team forecasting model using the classification and prediction approaches. cricketers may be classified into several categories based on their



considering their initial performance. any player that is not fruitful will be labelled a poor performer and may be dropped from the squad. feature optimization is critical in machine learning because highdimensional datasets include duplicated, noisy, and irrelevant characteristics. feature optimization reduces data dimensionality and chooses only the most significant features to enhance classification performance and reduce computation costs. metaheuristic algorithms are recognized as a viable approach for addressing feature optimization problems.



optimization algorithms based on natural agent behaviour. a swarm structure represents social intelligence consisting of many homogenous, self-organized, and fragmented agents disseminated throughout the ecosystem, such as schools of fish, ant colonies, and flocks of birds. in si, achieving the best solution necessitates the communication of knowledge among the members of the swarm system. si has commonly been employed in the key to large-search-space optimization problems. in this work, we studied and implemented ant colony optimization(aco) and particle swarm optimization(pso), cuckoo search(cs), grey wolf optimizer(gwo), moth-flame optimization(mfo), whale



this model would benefit the players, team, and the coaches since they would know where and how their squad should focus on getting better outcomes in the match[2,3]. these models are also helpful for sports analysis shows broadcasted on tv during the gameplay. news channels are also having reserved slots for a sports show. in that sports



the rest of the paper is organised as follows: the literature review section contains references to previously published work. the next part will go through the data selection procedure including descriptive statistics for the collected data. the methods section discusses machine learning methodologies. the findings of this study are then presented in the next section. finally, the discussion and conclusion section goes through the research summary.



i. wickramasinghe categorizes all-rounders in his study using the mean of their batting and bowling averages. the author classified all-rounders into four types: genuine all-rounders, batter all-rounders, bowling all-rounders, and ordinary all-rounders. naive bayes(nb), k-nearest neighbors(knn), and random forest(rf) was used to make the prediction. the k-fold cross-validation approach is used to test all of the analytical outcomes. as per the experiment results, rf has a significantly greater prediction accuracy.



a. khot et al. put forward the concept of co-players to identify rising stars and improve team selection. a discriminative classifier trained for classification is a support vector machine(svm). plotting hyperplane divides a point into two groups based on its coordinates:(1) rising star(2) not a rising star. the rs score is calculated by identifying which coplayer characteristics are favorably and adversely linked. the rs score is used to compile the final list of rising stars for the batting domain with an accuracy of 60%, 70% for the bowling domain, and an all-rounder assessment with 40%.



and bowling average in international t-20 cricket to measure their batting and bowling performance. after issue formulation, they employ the elite non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm(nsgaii) to perform multi-objective genetic optimization across the team. they use the feasible solution created through knee region analysis to determine their fitness scores on all such metrics to account for such issues.



a. balasundaram et al. used k-means clustering, decision trees, support vector machine, and random forest for player classification. weka is the data mining program utilized to execute operations upon that provided dataset. cross-fold validation is used to build training and testing data from class-labelled data. the prediction accuracy of the classifier is 91.87% while using the decision tree, 93.46% for svm, and 95.78% with random forest, showing that the constructed model was effective in anticipating the best player option for the team.



m. bello et al. introduced a revised approach to team formation wherein two organizations form teams by selecting persons out of a shared pool of applicants. this study proposes the ant colony optimization(aco) and the max-min ant system to team formation(mmas-ts) metaheuristics. every structure occurs throughout the solutions discovered by the best pair of ants in the iteration. the pair of ants that have obtained the most effective solution from the beginning of execution receives a pheromone deposit. each decision-maker assigns a ranking to the applicants based on his preferences for forming teams while retaining the overall quality.



h. ahmad et al. uses supervised machine learning models to predict star cricketers through the batting and bowling domains. predictions are made using bayesian rule functions and decision-tree-based frameworks with a cross-validation approach to validate the performance. the contribution of each feature to the prediction challenge was determined using state-of-the-art metrics such as information gain, gain match, win percentage, and experience. the fitness values of every chromosome are then calculated to indicate the total fitness of each player. the fitness values for each team are obtained using the mutation approach. the stopping condition for this task is to repeat the process



m. ishi and j. patil extensively survey team formation and winner prediction methods in cricket[24,25]. they studied every parameter and method used for the evaluation of players. based on the study, parameters and procedures are found for team formation. every parameter has its impact, and based on that; the parameter weightage needs to finalized.



web scraping is a method for extracting data from websites. the second alternative is to copy and paste the data manually. however, this is not technically feasible due to the time it takes. instead of copying data manually, online scraping automates the process allowing data to be accessible fast and without wasting time. a dataset including 101 batters, 101 bowlers, 101 batting all-rounders, 101 bowling all-rounders, and ten wicketkeepers withplayer-related performance variables is rounders, and wicketkeepers. the raw data is pre-processed before designing the prediction model. many essential features for cricket prediction will be extracted as subsets from this primary data using data pre-processing techniques. standard prediction methods are utilized to generate a model for these selected feature sets.



this methodology is built on the brood parasitism of some cuckoo species and the random movements of levy flights. some cuckoo species deposit their eggs in host bird nests and may destroy other eggs to enhance the likelihood of their hatching. if the host birds do not locate and kill the eggs, they will hatch into a full-grown cuckoo. cuckoo migration and environmental factors should ideally cause them to



the data for estimating the team for cricket matches are split into 7030% training and testing sizes in this investigation. this is because while attempting to anticipate match outcomes based on previous match records, it is important to preserve the chronological ordering of the sports results predictions data. the cross-validation method is inapplicable to sports prediction since it involves data shuffling which might change the order of events. as a result, manually splitting training and testing data to retain the chronological order of findings is preferable.



performance varies with the inning number. some players are showing good show during the first inning, while some absorb the pressure of the second inning very well to deliver their strength. some players are good at home conditions but cannot deliver away. likewise, opponent wise performance is classified into two types: strong and weak. the teams with good players and high icc ranking are considered strong opponents. while teams do not have a good ranking in icc and players are not much consistent in performance, consider a weak opponent. the specific



is superior to the existing work. the maximum accuracy of 93.46% is achieved for team player selection from the literature. our approach of cs-pso and svm obtained a maximum average accuracy of 97% for the selection of players from each category as compared to the previous works[4,8,10]. hence, the hybrid system of cs-pso and svm finds the well-balanced team for one day international matches with better accuracy.



