this study used data ranging from 1960-2010 in order to test the relationship between u.s. foreign trade and its economic growth. the granger causality tests show that there exists a bi-directional relationship between american exports and its gdp, while exists only a single-directional relationship between american imports and its gdp. it indicates that american imports didn't granger cause american gdp growth. that is to say, even if taking several measures to protect and reduce its imports, u.s. can not achieve the goal of promoting its economic growth.



since the financial crisis, the united states launched anti-dumping, anti-subsidy and other special safeguard clauses to limit its imports and reduce trade deficit in order to recover its economy. this kind of practice has seriously harmed its partners' legitimate interests. moreover, whether american imports have restrained its economic growth still needs a further inspection.



the study used data ranging from 1960-2010. the time series variables selected are u.s. gross domestic product (gdp), exports (ex) and imports (im). all data are collected from u.s. bureau of economic analysis (bea).the data processing software for this empirical analysis is eviews 6.0.



test results show that the maximum lag order number is 2 under the 5 information criterion. therefore, we can build vector autoregression models var (2) acco rdingly. from the perspective of the fitting effect of the model, we can see the coefficient r2 is 0.998454, which reflects the model fitting well. from the



secondly, the relationship between america's gdp (lgdp) and its imports (lim). at 5% level, lgdp is lim's granger reason, while lim is not lgdp's granger reason. it shows that the increase in gdp will expand a country's national income, which will increase the demand for goods and services including the demand from outside the country.



according to the empirical results, we can see that there exists bi-directional relationship between american exports and its gdp; while there exists only one-way relationship between america's imports and its gdp, america's imports is not its gdp's granger causality reason; there exists no granger causality relationship between america's imports and its exports. therefore, in order to promote its economy, america's foreign trade policy is not valid until now that a new trade policy is needed. a new policy should aim at expanding its export but not restricting its imports.



