designed a color fielding zone bitmap. the size of the fielding zone map is exactly the same as the ball field background image. we use the color of the ball landing location in the corresponding field zone map to assign which fielder will catch the ball without any ambiguity between fielders.



(a) the ball hit status, (b) the runner(s) on base(s), (c) the number of outs, (d) hit/out batting result. the ball hit status means the movement of the ball after it is hit. it could be a fly ball, line drive, or ground ball. the runner(s) on base(s) have eight different combinations from bases empty to bases loaded. the number of outs is from 0 to 2. there are five different options for the hit/out batting result we can simulate: single, double, triple, fly out, and bunt. once these four parameters have been selected, the ball landing location also needs to be specified. to simplify the case selection, we provide 18 commonly used training examples.



however, there are many diverse and complex scenarios in a baseball game. our decision making method only focuses on the most common cases and ensures there were no mistakes made by the fielders. our decision making method for each player is contingent upon where the ball lands and its movement. for example, on a single to left field with no one on base, the left fielder will move to field the ball and throw to the cutoff man (shortstop), the shortstop will move to align himself with the left fielder and second base to prepare for a potential cutoff throw, and the center fielder will move to back up the left fielder in case the ball eludes or deflects off his body.



once the players have taken their appropriate positions on the field, we can divide the time of the play into several intervals and use the critical time point method to evaluate and adjust, if necessary in accordance with the national team standard paradigm. in each critical time point interval, we need to determine which fielder will catch the ball and where the fielder will throw to next. we also need to decide what kind of action the other players will do in the situation. therefore, we combine and apply the standard paradigms into our internal system structure.



paradigm. sometimes, we need to select more than one cutoff man if there is more than one runner, or another complicating factor. the cutoff man needs to move into a proper position, which is most likely the midpoint between two fielders, the one fielding and throwing ball and the one covering the base.



communication efficiency. the strategy cases, after the editing processes, can be stored as digital files permanently, reviewed repetitively, shared with others and reedited easily. following our hierarchy design method, this animation platform can be easily applied to many kinds of other sports.



