clouds are environment that enable the sharing, selection, query and aggregation of geographically distributed resources for solving large-scale problems. therefore the resource schedule mechanism of resource becomes a complex undertaking problem. we had investigated several famous schedule methods proposed by nimrod-g, a famous computational economy framework for regulating the supply and demand for resources. in this paper, we propose a new scheduling algorithm based on deadline and cost optimization, which extends traditional cost optimization and time optimize algorithm, keeping the performance at optimize level.



we construct simulated experiment platform on gridsim. os is linux, in experiments, we created 100 jobs, each need 90 seconds, every experiments has 10 processing queue, access cost is 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 26, 28g$/cpu time. optimal deadline is every queue has 10 jobs. in our simulation, we select 990 seconds(the optimal deadline plus 10%), 1980 seconds(990*2), 2970 seconds(990*3). we selected three



from result, we know that contrast to cost optimal and time optimal strategy, deadline and cost optimization algorithm(stpp) make compromise between time and cost. if selected zero, then stpp is cost optimal strategy. stpp include more qos factor contrast to cost optimal and time optimal strategy.



500. the budget is varied from 5000g$ to 22000 g$ in steps of 1000. from result, we know that contrast to cost optimal and time optimal strategy, deadline and cost optimization algorithm(dcoa) make compromise between time and cost. if selected zero, then dcoa is cost optimal strategy. dcoa include more qos factor contrast to cost optimal and time optimal strategy.



in the future, we are planning to incorporate resource reservation and different economic models into resource allocation. this allows we contrast the efficiency of different economic models. in addition, we are considering credit evaluation and job preemption and job migration policy that tries to achieve the integrity of market transactions.



