may cause discomforts and musculoskeletal disorders in the back and feet (arcand et al., 2000; gregory & callaghan, 2008; roelen et al., 2008; tissot et al., 2009) that creates energy substrates, metabolic fa- tigue, tissue strain and deformation due to compression (laperriere et al., 2006).



custom grade lower limb force transducers have been developed and experimented but majorly for sports or medical purposes. a force trans- ducer with hall-effect sensor mounted between crank and pedal was de- veloped to measure actuation forces and power employed during bicycle pedaling that reported an accuracy of 97% (stapelfeldt et al., 2007). a pedal was instrumented with strain gauges to measure actuation forces and peak torque during cycling (bini et al., 2013). a piezoresistive dyna- mometer was also developed to estimate pedaling force reporting 99% of accuracy (valencia et al., 2007). these systems are majorly accompanied with complex data logging systems in addition to their utility for sports and medical purposes under controlled laboratory conditions. any such system has not been developed or experimented for agricultural ma- chinery systems in real field conditions that offer with minimum data recording complexities. a study was therefore conducted to develop a customized instrumented foot transducer (ift) system integrated to a simplified data visualization and logging system to evaluate dynamic forces exerted by lower limbs during agricultural machinery operations. included are also the preliminary evaluations under varied load imposi- tions and under real operating conditions of treadle, pedal and tractor operations.



the magnet cells along the operation stroke. as a magnet cell is detected by the hall-effect sensor, its position is registered in the single board computer and pertinent actuation forces detected by ifts at these posi- tions are also recorded. this position stamped force data is then stored on-board the memory card, displayed on the lcd screen and sent via se- rial communication to the receiving computer.



support forces were 95.2 n, 128.6 n and 175 n at the external loads of 5 n, 10 n and 15 n, respectively. it was also observed that maximum force was exerted at the topmost position whereas, the minimum force was exerted at the bottommost position of the treadle platform.



customized instrumented foot transducers were successfully devel- oped and preliminarily evaluated for measurement of the forces exerted by the lower limbs during typical small to large scale agricultural oper- ations of treadling, pedaling and tractor or any foot operated systems. custom load sensors based on strain gauges were developed and inte- grated to the single board computer for data logging, on-board storage and visualization in real time. evaluation of the developed system for pedaling operation indicated peak pedal actuation forces of 73 n, 85 n, 110.5 n and 145.4 n for left foot and 41 n, 50 n, 131.7 n and



major advantages of the system were its operator friendliness and limited dependencies for field evaluations. developed ift can be used for dynamic force assessment at different position, different joint angles during adaptation of different working postures, so that the risk assess- ment of the operation can be achieved. such system may be utilized by the agricultural machinery manufacturers for force assessments, design reconsiderations and enhancing any potential safety features to mini- mize the musculoskeletal disorders due to improper design and dimen- sions. moreover, protocols can be developed by the ergonomists for efficient work-rest schedule pertinent to any operation. this system may also be highly applicable in the developing countries where small scale growers form the major population and small-scale agricultural machinery is representative in the farms.



