research on the egyptian food security, is a crucial subject of a huge studies and debates. the gap between the egyptian domestic milk production and consumption is translated into high import costs. also, all policy analysis and evaluation methods in literature conduct for the current /short-term policies to help policy/decision makers in strategic decisions. the core idea of our research paper is to develop an intelligent recommender system (irs) to generate more justifiable estimates to evaluate of the suggested long-term policies. in addition, our irs supports policy/decision makers to reduce the future uncertainty and stimulates the domain experts to anticipate the futures impacts and evaluate their suggested policies. this support deals with providing new levels of awareness situation that may lead to more efficient and effective decision making process. final, our irs integrates trend impact analysis, rt-delphi, knowledge-based, explanation and mathematical forecasting models to generate large-scale participatory approach to help policy/decision makers for long-term strategic planning.



uncertainty and complexity, which are arising from future unprecedented events/ wildcards, represent the main characteristics for long-term strategic planning process [6]. for long-term strategic planning, policy/decision maker need for two crucial activities, which are explorative futures scenarios and policy formulation and evaluation [7]. explorative futures scenarios provide awareness situation for the wildcards future impacts. however, the policy formulation and evaluation provides justifiable recommendations for futures policies based on their expected impacts [8]. due to the future high uncertainty and complexity, long- term policy formulation and evaluation represent unstructured processes [9].



the delphi method is a powerful and a well structured tool for knowledge acquisition, because its anonymity process. in delphi method the process for knowledge acquisition from domain participators is done by controlled opinion feedback for a series of questionnaires [10]. it provides the domain participators to move toward consensus [6]. moreover, rt-delphi is a round-less delphi applied as an on-line tool [11]. also, it is widely used to improve the efficiency of knowledge acquisition process from the domain experts and to create a large participatory and anonymity on-line system with between all participants (system analysts, researcher, experts, and decision/policy makers) [12].



expert imagination and experiences are used to identify the major future wildcards, their impacts that cause a change in the base forecast. the knowledge acquisition process is based collection the experts' judge about the probability of occurrence and its expected futures impact. real-time (rt) delphi is widely used tool for knowledge acquisition process.



moreover, domain ontology is major in order to provide an easy way towards the knowledge acquisition process by minimizing the misunderstandings when debating a certain concept or a problem [17]. it plays an important role for reducing the contradiction of the experts' judgments by defining a common language between domain experts. also, it describes the domain concepts, their attributes and all relationships that hold between these concepts [18].



the core idea of our research paper is to develop an intelligent recommender system (irs) to generate more justifiable estimates to evaluate of the suggested long-term policies. in addition, our irs supports policy/decision makers to reduce the future uncertainty and stimulates the domain experts to anticipate the futures impacts and evaluate their suggested policies. the developed approach uses the enhanced tia [16] as the point of departure.



policy/decision makers, in the egyptian ministry of agriculture, need to generate and evaluate the long- term policies that can improve the quality of their long-term strategic plan from 2014 to 2035. they need to predict the future, analysis its impacts and be confidence about benefits of the suggested policies. classical futures analysis methods always provide analysis for the major drivers and their possible future impacts. these methods isn't quietly provides a suggestive guidance for evaluating the future policies and their impacts on minimizing the future threats and maximizing the future opportunity.



experts' knowledge explains how would world financial crises (e1), dissemination of the epidemic diseases (e2) bad weather conditions (e3) and high inflation of the animal feeding prices (e4) wildcards affect on milk production gap in the future, if they were said to occur. should any of these events occur, (e2 and e3) have negative impacts (increasing the gap value) whereas the (e1 and e4) have a positive impact (decreasing the gap value). there are 10,000 scenarios are generated and the study is for 22 year ahead. the generated scenario results show that the world financial crises (e1) wildcard has a positive impact (decreasing the gap value). experts' consensus expected its occurrence, with different severities, from 2014 to 2021.



experts explain how e2 has the highest maximum impact on the gap and how its behavior is a high speed of disseminations due to lack of the powerful extension in all egyptian governorates, directorates and villages. e2 has a probability of occurrence with a high severity for separated seven years. also, the bad weather conditions (e3) wildcard has negative impacts (increasing the gap value). experts have a consensus about its probability of occurrence with a high severity from 2020 to 2030.



the consensus results show that the number of the political drivers is five, the number of the economical drivers is eight, the number of the soci-cultural drivers is two, the number of the technological drivers is two, the number of the ethical driver is one, the number of the environmental drivers is three, the number of legal drivers is two. all of the selected drivers are evaluated by weights with median values between 70% and 93%. also, more than 12 domain experts have to agree about the evaluated major driver. in addition, the consensus results show, also, that the number of strengths items is five, the number of weaknesses items is twenty two, the number of opportunities items is five, and the number of threats is twelve. all of the selected items are evaluated by weights with median values between 72% and 87%. also, more than 12 domain experts have to agree about the evaluated items.



complexity and uncertainty of the long-term futures are the major challenges to develop more justifiable estimates for to the quality of long-term policies. to summarize, in this paper, we can summarize, in this paper, we develop an intelligent recommender system (irs) to help policy/decision maker for more justifiable estimates to the efficiency and effectiveness of the suggested policies for the long-term strategic planning. the developed irs is based on integration of scenario-based, knowledge-based and explanation modeling capabilities. to illustrate the developed irs, a case study is provided concerning the impact of external wildcards on the milk production gap in egypt. in this case, our irs supports policy/decision makers in the egyptian ministry of agriculture for developing the strategic plan (2014-2035) of the national livestock production. this support deals with providing new levels of awareness situation that may lead to more efficient and effective decision making process. our future work could be extended by integrating the proposed approach with the interval based/fuzzy based tia. also, data-mining techniques can be used as powerful tool for automated ontology building. it could be used to speed up and improve the process of creating a formal ontology of a specific domain.



