robust and automatic thresholding of gray level images has been commonly used in the field of pattern recognition and computer vision for objects detecting, tracking and recognizing. the otsu scheme, a widely used image thresholding technique, provides approving results for segmenting a gray level image with only one modal distribution in gray level histogram. however, it provides poor results if the histogram of a gray level is non-bimodal. for enhancing the performance of the otsu algorithm further, in this work, an improved median-based otsu image thresholding algorithm is presented. finally extensive tests are performed and the experiments show that our method obtain more satisfactory results than the original otsu thresholding algorithm.



in the field of pattern recognition, machine learning, image processing and computer vision, gray level image segmentation is a fundamental task and a challenge for many image analysis and preprocessing process [1-2]. many algorithms for gray level image segmenting have been introduced recently [3-10]. among them, thresholding algorithm is a very famous technique applied in image thresholding field [2-10]. the objective of



among these algorithms, the otsu method is a very famous and excellent scheme [4]. otsu's algorithm is utilized the scheme for robust and automatic gray level image segmentation at certain commercial system, such as matlab. in image segmentation process, determining an optimal threshold t* is usually based on the estimates of dispersion and location of intensities in c1 and c2. as with various other algorithms, otsu's algorithm uses the average sample value and the deviation to calculate the dispersion and the location. unfortunately, for those images with the presence of very long-tailed distributions, the otsu method usually provides poor thresholding results. the average difference (denoted by mad) is commonly chosen as the estimate of the separation, when the point with median level is selected for the location. for addressing this problem, a median-based otsu method is proposed in this work and obtains very satisfactory results compared with original otsu algorithm.



in this paper, a median-based otsu algorithm for thresholding images is proposed. the original otsu scheme obtains improving results for segmenting an gray level image with a bimodal distributed histogram. unfortunately, it provides very poor thresholding results if the histogram is only one modal in the histogram. it is clear that, when the distribution of histogram of an image is skew distributed, or when there are noises in the gray level image, the median is a very effective selection of location compared to the total mean. in this motivation, we replace the means of the foreground, the background and the entire gray level image in the original otsu method with the medians of the foreground, the background and the whole image in the proposed otsu method. compared with the original otsu algorithm, our proposed otsu method obtains accurate threshold and satisfactory thresholding results.



this research was supported by the opening project of key laboratory ministry of education (no. 450060445325), the opening project of key laboratory of sea battlefield countermine simulation technology of ministry of education of jilin university (no. 450060481223), and graduate innovation fund of jilin university (no. 20121104).



