ramaiah ref. [12] uses illumination invariant face recognition using convolutional neural networks to address illumination conditions, abass et al ref. [13] addresses the issues of shift and rotation using complex wavelet transform (cwt) and fisherface. to address issues related to pose, kishor et al ref. [14] proposes robust pose invariant face recognition using dual cross pattern (dcp), lbp and support vector machine (svm).



kohonen ref. [15] is one of the early pioneers of the most famous face recognition system, which employed a simple neural net using network of eigenfaces by approximating eigenvectors through face images auto- correlation matrix. although, the method was not very successful to be practically implemented in a real-life environment due to associated high demand for normalization and positioning when run in a large database with many types of face conditions.



in harnessing and improving the work of kohonen, kirby and sirovich in 1990 as in ref. [16], directly calculated the eigenfaces using algebraic manipulation with fewer than 100 faces to implement facial recognition, which was further improved by turk and pentland in 1991 as in ref. [17] by determining the exact location and scales of faces and also the use of coding residual error originated from eigenfaces, but in a minimally constrained environment.



in addressing the issue of illumination variation, ref. [22] mitigated illumination variation in facial recognition by combining the strengths of robust illumination normalization, local texture-based face representa- tions, distance transform based matching and kernel-based feature extraction and multiple feature fusion, but the solution addressed only illumination issues. to address issues of noise in facial recognition, ref.



in addition, in ref. [25] a local binary pattern histogram (lbph)-based enhanced real-time face recognition was used to achieve real-time face recognition in low and high-level images and ref. [26] proposes a method of improving the recognition of faces using lbp and svm optimized by pso technique, in this method, two feature extrac- tion algorithms namely principal component analysis (pca) and local binary pattern (lbp) techniques are used to extract features from images. in the recognition process, it uses support vector machine (svm) for classification combined with particle swarm optimization.



this process will be repeated for each and every pixel of all other regions, to get the binary pattern so as to construct the feature vector of the input face images. for every region, a histogram with all possible labels is constructed. these constructed histograms with all its bins represent a pattern and contain the number of its appearance in the re- gion. the feature vector formed is then constructed by concatenating the regional histograms to one big histogram, which is unique for each in- dividual, and is compared with the template face images to recognize faces. this method improves the lbp code and our experiment results show that our method is very accurate and robust for facial recognition system that can be implemented in a real-life environment. it is also important to state that our research does not address the issue of occlu- sion and mask faces in facial recognition, but addressing these issues could be a perfect future work of this paper.



we wish to thank everyone at the machine vision and robotic lab in changchun university of science and technology for their valuable support throughout this research work. this research work is financially supported by consulting research project of chinese academy of engi- neering (2019-jl-4-2), marine s&t fund of shandong province for pilot national laboratory for marine science and technology (qingdao) (no. 2018sdkj0102-6), science and technology plan of jilin province (20170307002gx), thus we would also like to acknowldedge their support.



ship, under the united nation office of outer space affairs (unoosa), to pursue a second level specialization master de- gree in global navigation satellite systems from 2013 to 2014 at university of politecnico di torino, italy and recently ob- tained another master degree program in computer application technology at changchun university of science and technol- ogy, china. mr. bah is currently working with ministry of in- formation and communication infrastructure, the gambia as principal ict officer. his research interest includes face recognition algorithms, image analysis, image quality, artificial neural networks, artificial intelligence (ai) and computer vision.



degree supported by the full national government scholarship. he recieved his ph.d in hokkaido university of japan in the same major,2011. he was promoted to associate professor in 2013. his research interests include machine vision, robot vision and robust image processing etc.



