earlier research in the field of routing protocols was extensively based on one constraint like shortest path between source to destination. there are several other parameters (such as dropping header packets in case of congestion in the network or alternate path in case of link failure) which should be considered for making efficient routing decision. in recent years, active research in the field of routing protocols has been done to make routing decision based on more than one constraint. fuzzy inference system is one such system which offers a natural way of accepting multiple input constraints which are uncertain and imprecise in nature. this paper aims at analyzing the performance of aodv and dsr routing protocols using fuzzy inference system. further the behavior of these protocols is analyzed in both cases (with and without fuzzy inference system).



dr. lofti zadeh of university of california proposed the concept of fuzzy logic (ross, 1995; wang, chen, yang & gao, 2005) in the year 1965. it provides natural thinking mechanism based on human mind that include imprecision and ambiguity. the steps involved in working of fuzzy inference system (ross, 1998; torshiz, amintoosi, movaghar, 2011) are as follows:



identify relevant input and output variable. assign linguistic label to each variable. these variables are expressed using fuzzy set. the linguistic variables characterize the key features like minimum bandwidth, hop count, route selection, probability etc. and fuzzy sets labels these linguistic as low, high, small medium etc. then select proper membership function for input and output variables.



the set of if then rules are constructed to obtain the desired behavior of the system on the basis of knowledge of human expert. if x is a then y is b, where a and b are linguistic values of the linguistic variables x and y, respectively. in order to achieve the full functionality of the system, the rules can be kept on changing.



numbers of routing protocols have been created in last four decades. each has its own advantages and disadvantages, but no one is found better in all the conditions. to know their behavior by considering different metrics in different circumstances we have analyses aodv and dsr routing protocols based on fuzzy inference system. we have also analysed their advantages and disadvantages.



based on fuzzy inference system. these protocols are built upon conventional aodv and dsr routing protocol. it has been observed that by adding new metrics and made minor changes in the operation of aodv and dsr, routing protocols using fuzzy inference system increase the performance in real time applications. for further research fuzzy logic can be used with other reactive routing protocols also.



