materials and methods: this experimental retrospective study on 84 ct scans consisting of 54618 slices involves design, implementation, and evaluation of segmentation algorithm which can be used to generate a clinical report for the presence of ivc filters on abdominal ct scans performed for any reason. several variants of patch-based 3d-convolutional neural network (cnn) and the swin unet transformer (swin-unetr) are used to retrieve the signature of ivc filters. the dice score is used as a metric to compare the performance of the segmentation models.



conclusion: utilization of vision based transformer swin-unetr results in segmentation output with both low bias and variance thereby solving a real-world problem within healthcare for advanced artificial intelligence (ai) image processing and recognition. the swin unetr will reduce the time spent manually tracking ivc filters by centralizing within the electronic health record. link to github repository.



unet is a convolutional neural network (cnn) designed for image segmentation [27]. cnns have been extensively used in healthcare for creating diagnostic and prognostic models [1,32,19,13]. the underlying structure is made up of two paths: a contracting path and an expan- sion path. the contracting path is an encoder consisting of convolution layers and pooling layers. the expansion path is a decoder consisting of transposed convolution layers and concatenations with the feature maps from the encoder. the 3d-unet is an extension of the basic unet structure, allowing for 3d volumetric processing [7]. the 3d-unet still consists of the contraction and expansion paths, but all its convolution and pooling operations are implemented on a data cube instead of a 2d image. changing the basic unet model to fit 3d patches allows it to fully take advantage of spatially dependent features across all three dimensions [30].



the swin unet transformer (swin unetr) is a novel architecture that integrates the swin transformer into the traditional unet convo- lution architecture. swin unetr replaces the convolutional encoder of the original unet design with the hierarchical design of the swin transformer. the outputs of the swin transformer are reconnected to the standard unet decoder through residual block skip connections. swin unetr was originally designed for accurate and reproducible seg- mentation of brain tumors in mri images [16]. the integration of the swin transformer into the unet architecture was intended to allow the model to learn long-range dependencies for accurate segmentation of tumors that can appear in varying locations, shapes, and sizes. model was trained on the dataset provided as part of the 2021 multi-modal brain tumor segmentation challenge (brats). compared to the win- ning methodologies of the 2021 brats, swin unetr outperformed all other models with at least 0.7%, 0.6%, and 0.5% greater dice scores on enhancing tumor (et), whole tumor (wt), and tumor core (tc) semantic classes respectively. the model also achieved a highly com- petitive performance in the testing phase. swin unetr has also been applied to head and neck primary tumors and lymph node segmenta- tion using fgd-pet/ct images. 524 samples provided by the head and neck tumor (hecktor) 2022 challenge. swin unetr was pre-trained



1.3 million (1,357,954) and 22 million (22,587,138) for two and four layer versions respectively, this research established that a transformer- based model with similar parameters as a cnn can produce better training and validation outcomes when integrated with existing medi- cal information technology. the data augmentation strategies including random crop, random resize, random flip, and random rotation ensured that there was significant variation in the training dataset that consisted of 155 ivc and 155 non-ivc patches per sub-epoch. this augmentation strategy ensures that even if the same image is used repeatedly, there are significant variations introduced by randomness thereby reducing any chances of any model overfitting.



future work in the ivc filter detection incorporates algorithm val- idation and classification pipeline on an estimated 1,500 clinical ct scans predicted to be acquired from the health system. ivc filter pre- diction pipeline will be developed to provide a report of the presence of an ivc filter and its location. after receiving a predicted 3d mask from the swin unetr model, the program will use scikit-image image processing library [31] in python to analyze the region properties of the segmented image, removing any spurious segmentation that may occasionally arise. the entire algorithm will be tested on clinical ct scans performed in the health system to assess performance, with man- ual review of each scan. this may be supplemented with additional known-positive test cases, separate from the training set, if the number of true-positive clinical cases is too low to generate meaningful statis- tics. the results and statistics from this review will then be used to retrain the swin unetr, if necessary, with rapid re-deployment and re-evaluation.



