the majority of human activities are the primary cause of the contin- uous loss of vegetation cover on the earth's surface (sahana et al., 2016). the decrease in vegetation was a contributing factor to the increase in land surface temperature (lst). song et al. (2021) highlights that vege- tation is the main influencing factors that driven lst. the lst is one of the crucial indicators of ecological functioning of the environment. the lst is indicates the temperature of the earth's skin, which is an impor- tant component in regional and global land surface processing studies (thanh et al., 2018). the lst is increasing at global level due to land use land cover conversion (moisa et al., 2022a). studies conducted in different parts of ethiopia confirmed that there is a substantial increasing trend of lst (moisa et al., 2022b; wolteji et al., 2022; merga et al., 2022; dissanayake et al., 2019). similar to lst, the atmo- spheric temperature is significantly increasing as a results of land use land cover change (gemeda et al., 2020; gemeda et al., 2021; gemeda et al., 2022; moisa et al., 2022c).



to quantitatively describe degraded land, the normalized difference barren index (ndbai) and the modified normalized difference water index (mndwi) were used (gao, 1996; zha et al., 2003). the lst were compared to the normalized difference vegetation index (ndvi), ndbai, and mndwi to provide ambient environmental condi- tion for living things (qinqin et al., 2012). vegetation based indices can indicates the existence and abundancies of vegetation cover (moisa et al., 2022a; iang and tian, 2010).



analysis of spatial flexibility of the ndvi, lst, ndbai, and mndwi are tremendously crucial for decision making and natural resources monitoring in natural and environmental investigations (zareie et al., 2016). in addition, ndvi has been used to confirm the importance for represent distribution of green space (yuan and bauer, 2007). further- more, several scholars raised that, remote sensing indices like ndvi



although these indices have been used to model lst in previous study (chen et al., 2006), only a few of them have compared index re- sults from different years to monitor surface temperature. even though, agricultural expansion is the main causes that aggravated climate change particularly lst in western parts of ethiopia. no research has been conducted around gida kiremu, limu, and amuru district. it is ob- vious that the lst has increased over time due to a decline in vegetation cover for agricultural expansion. in addition, wetland degradation and the increment of barren land were other causes for the rising of lst. therefore, this study attempted to analyze lst based on remote sensing indices such as ndvi, ndbai, and mndwi in western ethiopia. this paper is organized as follows: the first section introduces the general in- troduction on lst and its correlation with different indices; section two describes materials and methods which includes the study area descrip- tions, data types and sources, and method of data analysis; section three presents' results and discussions and the final section concludes the findings of the study.



the average monthly rainfall of the current study area is ranged between 14.32 and 338 mm /year. the study area receive high rain- fall during summer that starts in june and ends in september and short rain season is in, spring, which encompass march, april, and may.



