load characteristics will be changing from time to time and may affect the system voltage stability to some extent. in order to investigate the effects of load characteristics on the system voltage stability, the static zip load model is used to describe the load characteristics and the method of p-v curve is adopted to analyze the system voltage stability under both normal operation and contingencies to find the maximum margin of real power transfer. system studies include the analysis of effects from different load models with three types of compositions and those with three kinds of single composition on the system voltage stability of a large power system under normal operation and contingencies. the results will be of use to the practices of system planning and operation.



voltage instability is typically associated with relatively slow variation in network and load characteristic. power system loads include the subtransmission and distribution networks that connect consumers to the transmission networks and generation. since loads are aggregates of many different devices, it is important to identification of load composition by grigsby, 2007. xu et al., 1997 and ranade et al., 2001 demonstrated load characteristic from field test.



this paper aims to analyze the effect of load characteristic on the system voltage stability. the load models are traditionally classified into two broad categories, which are static models and dynamic models. in this paper, the different proportions of each component of static zip models are used to describe load characteristic. the method of p-v curves is adopted to analyze the system voltage stability under normal operation and contingencies to find the maximum transfer real power margin and the bus reactive power margin.



the main purpose of this paper is to examine the effect of load characteristics on the system voltage stability. the method of p-v curves is adopted to analyze the system voltage stability under normal operation and contingencies to find the maximum margin of real power transfer. three kinds of models are employed to describe the load characteristics, which are model 1(high constant impendence proportion), model 2(high constant current proportion), and model 3(high constant power proportion). the results reveal that when the system is subject to n-1 or n-2 contingencies, the transfer power margin from high to low is model 1, model 2, and then model 3.



