the design of fuzzy control system involves many design parameters such as scaling factors, membership functions, and control rules. the generation of membership functions for fuzzy systems is a challenging problem. the performance of fuzzy controller is highly dependent on the membership functions. various methods have been proposed over the years for the optimization of fuzzy membership functions. control engineer has the difficulty in accessing the fuzzy controller because of the following limitations:-



the lab model of temperature controller can be divided in above mentioned five parts. the system is modeled using a chamber having capacity of 0.5 litres. chamber consists of a heater coil at the mouth of water inlet. temperature sensor is inserted in chamber near the outlet. signal conditioner is used to transfer sensed signal to the computer. here pcl-207 is used to interact between analog and digital signal.



as per graphical representation of controller output, it has faster response & rise time as well as settling time. at initial iteration the outlet temperature is near about 25oc, which attendances set point in few seconds. also there are on major overshoots observed after first crossover point of outlet water with set point. the error mean value is calculated based on readings available after first crossover point.



the outlet water temperature at initial stage is 21oc, which gradually increases towards set point. rise time and response of controller tends to be same as that for case i. the system is unable to archive set point and also doesn't maintain it constantly. output temperature of water remains at lower end, creating an average difference of 1.5oc. oscillations are seen in the outlet water temperature giving rise to increase in error mean value.



this paper demonstrates an application of artificial intelligent techniques in control of flowing water temperature. an effectiveness of anfis controller for wider range of practical conditions is been tested. different case studies are proposed, to give apparent performance during actual application implementation.



a differential study on various weather conditions and anfis designed controller analysis is presented here with the help of identical industrial lab model. the anfis controller is designed at start of summer and tested over the span of whole year. the graphical and analytical analysis is presented to study the performance of controller. it can be worth concluded that, anfis controller is well suited for conditions to which it is designed. the anfis have to be retuned or designed for each disturbance that is possible in practical implementation.



