the critical slip distance in rate and state model for fault friction in the study of potential earthquakes can vary wildly from micrometers to few me-ters depending on the length scale of the critically stressed fault. this makes it incredibly important to construct an inversion framework that provides good estimates of the critical slip distance purely based on the observed ac-celeration at the seismogram. to eventually construct a frame- work that takes noisy seismogram acceleration data as input and spits out robust estimates of critical slip distance as the output, we first present the performance of the framework for synthetic data. the framework is based on bayesian inference and markov chain monte carlo methods. the synthetic data is generated by adding noise to the acceleration output of spring-slider-damper idealization of the rate and state model as the forward model.



mological estimates based on geophysical observations (kaneko et al., 2017), and further to several meters as determined in high velocity laboratory experiments (niemeijer et al., 2011). understanding the physics that controls the critical slip distance and explains the gap between observations from experimental and natural faults is thus one of the crucial problems in both the seismology and laboratory com- munities (ohnaka, 2003). with that in mind, we provide a framework



in which synthetic earthquake data is used to quantify uncertainty in critical slip distance. while the resolution and coupled flow and poromechanics (dana and wheeler, 2018a; dana and wheeler, 2018b; dana et al., 2018; dana et al., 2021; danajoel ita and wheeler, 2020; dana et al., 2020; dana, 2018; dana and reddy, 2021; dana and reddy lyathakula, 2021) associated with subsurface activity in the realm of energy technologies and concomitant earthquake quantifi- cation is a hot topic, in this work, we focus on the effect of a standard trigonometric perturbation with exponentially decreasing amplitude.



the rate and state model for fault friction evolution is a piece of the puzzle in which forward simulations are used to arrive at the seismic impact of fault slip on earthquake activity. typically, the earthquakes are measured with seismograms and geophones on the surface as p-waves and s-waves, and then these readings are used to calibrate the seismic activity for constant monitoring. the acceleration field around the fault slip activity translates to these waves recorded on the surface, and for- ward simulations with wave propagation bridge that gap. that being said, a seismic recording on the surface cannot easily be backtraced to acceleration around the fault, and finally to the source of the fault slip. that is precisely inverse modeling, and the bayesian framework coupled with mcmc allows us to put such a framework in place. the accelerations are field quantities, and the inverse estimation of the field around the fault from the time series at the seismogram and/or geophone is not a trivial task. with that in mind, we test the robustness of the bayesian/ mcmc framework to inversely estimate a value instead of a field. the thing is that any inversion framework works on data as the input, and since subsurface data is not available other the sensors at the wells, the forward simulations are used to generate this data with all the compu- tational physics put in place. this generated data is then used to inversely estimate the acceleration field from the data at the surface. although such forward simulations to generate data are infeasible in real-time scenarios where we need estimates of what is happening in the subsur- face from the reading on the surface almost immediately, the framework robustness would eventually lend itself to that scenario. the scenario is that the recording at the seismogram and/or geophone would be fed into the bayesian/mcmc fraemwork as an input, and the framework would provide an estimate of the acceleration field around the fault as the output. in this work, we work on arriving at estimates of critical slip distance in the rate and state model by running a spring-slider-damper as the forward model instead of using a full-fledged forward simulator. in the future, we will be deploying the coupled flow and geomechanics simulator as the forward model, and gradually arrive at the aforemen- tioned scenario.



