ullah et al. (2017) aimed to review agricultural challenges, different methods of precision agriculture based on artificial intelligence and ma- chine learning and future directions. according to the survey, there were technologies useful for precision farming such as gps/gnss, mo- bile devices, robotics, driverless tractor, irrigation, unmanned arial ve- hicle (uav), internet of things (iot), sensors, variable rate seeding, weather modelling. data collection, analysis of data, managing decisions and farming are four main phases of precision farming. since last two decades, for precision farming, new technologies have been developed based on artificial intelligence such as artificial neutral networks (anns) and fuzzy logic controllers for regulation of temperature and humidity in artificially conditioned greenhouses. also, khanna and kaur (2019), presented detailed review considering iot as the back- bone in the field of precision farming.



farming process. noguchi et al. (1998)used the generic algorithm (ga) optimized fuzzy logic during field operations to classify crops. in the entire soybean growth period, it was noticed that results were accurate. after segmenting out the weed, for estimation purposes of the height and width of the soybean, ann was used (heckmann et al., 2017).



and treatment of plants by inbuilt gripper systems and eye-hand sys- tems. (acaccia et al., 2003). some other widely used robot applications are weed picking (slaughter et al., 2008) and robotic weed control (lee et al., 1999) which is based on a machine vision system and in- cludes a precision chemical application system. this seems to be largely beneficial as hand weed control is an extremely drudging and inefficient task that increases human labour. in addition to this, robots are used for crop phenotypic to assess the health of plants. although different robots make the use of different navigation systems, they are generally guided by a combination of gps and a human-operated laptop as it moves be- tween rows of plants. similarly, progress is being made in the use of ro- bots for the harvesting of crops such as apples, grapes, etc.



waheed et al. (2006) investigated the potential of hyperspectral re- mote sensing data to provide better crop management information. hyperspectral image processing can be used for all kinds of new and ef- ficient agriculture purposes (teke et al., 2013) such as leaf nitrogen accumulation(wei et al., 2008), nitrogen deficiency, invasive weed spe- cies (goel et al., 2003), invasive pests like the leafhopper (prabhakar et al., 2011), estimation of vegetation parameters.



accuracy was 96% for the irrigation factor, 83% for the nitrogen, and 100% for the weed control strategies, was obtained with the spectra at the early growth stage and single-factor analysis. based on results it was concluded that cart decision tree approach was an effective tool for solving hyperspectral tree problem such as allowing us to obtain full data as well as helps to take up a decision by describing risk in all the possible categories. furthermore to classify hyperspectral data deci- sion trees along with ann (goel et al., 2003) or support vector ma- chines (mercier and lennon, 2013) are both methods that will work alternatively for pattern recognition in hyperspectral data.



aqeel-ur-rehman et al. (2014) reviewed wsn technology and their applications in different aspects of agriculture, the need of wireless sen- sors in agriculture and reported existing system frameworks in the ag- riculture domain. the main objective of the authors was to use sensors and network successfully to get numerous benefits to solve agriculture domain problems. according to the review carried out, it was concluded that major concerns were that solutions were too complex, costly, the generalised solution was lacking for various problems.



keshtgari and deljoo (2012) used wireless sensor networks (wsns) for precision agriculture in 2011. wsn are usually used for collecting, storing and sharing sensed data. the aim is to take controlled decisions on the root of sensing real-time data of climatology and other environmental properties. to report the design, construction, and test- ing of a distributed infield wsn, a remote monitoring control, grid to- pologies, was the main objective. the outcome was a drastic reduction



patil and kumar (2011) aimed to provide various advanced methods to study plant diseases/traits using image processing to increase throughput and reduce cost arising from human experts in detecting the plant disease. to detect diseased leaf, stem, fruit, to quantify area af- fected by disease, to find shape of affected area, to determine colour of affected area, to determine size and shape of fruits, etc. image process- ing is useful. manual analysis scenario, shifting the rate-limiting step to image acquisition can be expanded beyond its feasibility study with the help of automation of image analysis experiments (spalding and miller, 2013).



a number of algorithms and methods may be used for classification and detection of disease through computer vision. deep convolutional neural networks were used (ferentinos, 2018) reaching a 99.53% success rate in identifying the corresponding disease and plant. neural networks have also worked for detection of diseases in crops such as rice (phadikar and sil, 2008). k- means algorithm (mehra et al., 2016), principal compo- nent analysis (pca), the coefficient of variation (cv) (schor et al., 2016), support vector machines (svm) (bhange and hingoliwala, 2015) are also some other alternative and in some cases more efficient model basis. in an example study, k-means clustering for classification into two groups: healthy and infected followed by support vector machines (svm) provided better results rather than ann. (omrani et al., 2014).



new, 2016). golhani et al. (2018) used available neutral network tech- niques to process hyperspectral data which have special emphasis on plant disease detection. moshou et al. (2004) used neural networks and more specifically multi-layered perceptron's to automatically de- tect yellow rust in wheat. classification performance increased from 95% to more than 99% using total of 5137 leaf spectra for evaluation with the help of ann technology.



laboratory lighting conditions, such methods can be used. similar tech- nique for disease detection in chilly plant through leaf image and data processing was adapted by husin et al. (2012). it is considered as one the most effective and fastest method for disease detection in chilly plant and simultaneously it lowers the production cost of the mainte- nance and produce high quality of chili.



improvement in yield is the primary objective and problem in plant breeding. dee and french (2015) aimed to propose an automated system based on computer vision which could perform detection and measure- ments from an image without human intervention, as a result, we can ob- tain high throughput with more accuracy in less time and even less expensive than traditional methods. according to coppens et al. (2017) robotized picture investigation strategies permit substantial increments in the throughput of characteristics estimations, in this manner counter- ing the supposed phenotyping bottleneck, which considers phenotypic estimations the rate-restricting element in the practical examination of explicit genotypes or the evaluation of phenotype execution in plant rear- ing. therefore, the effectiveness of new phenotyping and genotyping techniques should be evaluated with additional genetic gain for yield



one of the major challenges that are faced with the application of this system in phenotyping is the lack of large amounts of data. the ca- pacity of photosynthesis which is one of the most important factors of plant metabolism can be predicted using leaf reflection spectra. analysis of a diverse array of leaf spectra revealed major ranges of wavelengths in which leaf reflectance was highly correlated which provides potential to make efficient prediction models. prediction models are designed using a number of technologies such as partial least square regression (plsr) which is used to reduce the number of features and neural net- works which accounts for the nonlinearity that plsr does not.



a range of sensors can be integrated with the uav platforms (sankaran et al., 2015a, 2015b). the sensors are based on spectral inter- actions between the object and the electromagnetic spectrum. an ex- ample of this is reflectance in visible and infrared regions at the time of flight. these sensors are used to measure response of plants to both biotic and abiotic stress. examples of stress are water stress, plant nutri- ent deficiency stress, and heat stress (vanegas et al., 2018).



uas-friendly sensors are important because they allow efficient in- formation fusion. this is demonstrated by the fusion of rgb, multispec- tral and thermal data to estimate soybean (glycine max) biochemical parameters like chlorophyll content, nitrogen concentration, and leaf area index (lai) (maimaitijiang et al., 2017). in the model, spectral in- dices/features were combined to predict crop parameters using partial least squares regression (plsr), support vector regression (svr), and extreme learning machine based regression (elr) techniques.



liu et al. (2015) reviewed crop phenotyping under three condi- tions. the first was with the help of high-throughput phenotyping technique in controlled environments, for example, green houses or specially designed platforms. some of the sensing techniques for high throughput phenotyping include rgb, 3d laser scanning, multi and hyperspectral imaging, fluorescent sensing, and thermal ir cameras (shakoor et al., 2017). light detection and ranging (lidar) is an alternative remote sensing technology capable of ac- quiring three-dimensional (3d) data accurately. it has its potential in application to crop phenotyping and has been successfully used for 3d high-throughput crop phenotyping (guo et al., 2017).



the second was through phenotypic strengthening test under semi-controlled an environment such as lodge, drought and disease resistance. the third technique was multi-environmental traits (met) in uncontrolled environments, according to farmer's cultural practices crop plants are managed in it liu et al., 2015. this paper is aimed at reviewing research on and the applications of phenotyping techniques as well as proposing methods for met improvement. analysis of test resulted that for unbalanced data the met analytical methods should be adapted. therefore, it was concluded that there is urgency of research on methods and tools for test design and analy- sis, phenotypic acquisition and management to provide support for the establishment of reliable crop cultivar met system, improve- ment of testing efficiency and reliability as well as reduction of risk in the selection and introduction of cultivars.



bolger et al. (2017) attempted to highlight analysis of plant ge- nomes, describing current problems along with how plant genomes can be best leveraged in union with high throughput phenotyping to accelerate selective breeding. in the process of genome assembly, annotation and linking to phenotypic plant data necessary tools are listed in detail.



developed the automated techniques using image processing vision-based detection algorithm for identifying as well as classifying five diseases (black rot, downy mildew, powdery mildew, normal and leaf roll first) which effect plants. the developed algorithm classified and identified the disease with accuracy of 92.94%.



mustafa, nur badariah ahmad, ahmed, syed khaleel, ali, zaipatimah, yit, wong bing, abidin, aidil azwin zainul, sharrif, zainul abidin md, 2009. agricultural produce sorting and grading using support vector machines and fuzzy logic. 2009 ieee inter- national conference on signal and image processing applications. 10.1109/icsipa.2009.5478684.



