during the last years, several works have proved that sc tech- niques play a vital role in monitoring of forest fires [4,37,43]. in another works, sc was used to discover and predict valuable infor- mation about the relationships between variables for forest fires occurrence [1,17,44] and for estimating burned areas under future climate conditions [3,9,60]. several recent papers have also focused on sc techniques applied to forest fires prediction [5,13,18,27,45,50,65].



mpnnis a widely used feed forward networks due to its clear architecture, fast operation, easy to implement and its capability to solve complex classification problems [32,55]. the mpnn net- work includes three main layers: input, hidden and output. these layers are used for data input, data transmitting and data output respectively. the hidden layer function is to pass the results to the output layer [22,40]. the output of each neuron can be written as tion and regression problems. it performs the classification by sep- arating the data into two categories to determine the output and construct n-dimensional hyperplane. the main reason behind using svm lies in dealing and addressing various nonlinear issues, flexible use of kernel functions to increase the ability to convert data from some high dimensional space. the results of the higher dimensional space are similar to the results in dimensional input space. the svm algorithm is considered as an alternative technique for polynomial, radial basis function and multi-layer perceptron classifiers, the weights of the network are found and used to solve a quadratic programming problem with linear constraints. svm aims to find the hyperplanes that have high generalization ability by separating the training data without errors and developing a robust and effective solution. the svm classifier tries to minimize the following function



where yi represents the input that a single node j receives. the func- tion f can be a simple threshold, sigmoidor hyperbolic tangent func- tion. the weights between the nodes i and j is denoted by wij.. xi represents the output from node i.



the data nonlinearly. the function responses are then linearly merged to create the data of the output layer. rbf is widely applied in several applications such as system control, time series predic- tion, dynamic system problems and data classification because of its ability to forecast the behavior directly from input and output data [19,35,63]. rbf network tries to minimize the following error function (training error)



in this work, the correlation was only used as an initial process to find associations between the features. it was found that rh has a weak correlation with other variables. the pso method was used to cluster the data without rh column and the resulted data were employed as inputs to the predictors. however, both the computa- tional cost and the generated error are increased in the predictors remarkably. for this reason, we decide to apply pca technique to optimize the selection of the most correlated variables in the dataset.



every eigenvector has a corresponding eigenvalue and for the pro- portion of variance criterion, the analysis simply selects the com- ponents one by one until the desired proportion of variability is achieved. the minimum communality criterion states that enough components should be extracted, so that the communalities for each of these variables exceed a certain threshold, for example 50%. the maximum number of components that should be extracted is just prior to where the scree plot begins to straighten out into a horizontal line. the following illustrates the pca pseu- docode that was used to find eigenvalues and eigenvectors.



in this article, several sc techniques were applied on mnp data- set to determine the effective predictor that would potentially give more accurate results for forest fires. the pca was used to capture the correlation between features and pso technique was applied to find the number of clusters existing in the resulted data after using the pca technique. in the next stage, the obtained clustered data was used as inputs in the sc techniques. the quality measures used in this work make it obvious that svm attained best results with a high level of accuracy compared to other methods. the findings in



a. felber, p. bartelt, the use of the nearest neighbour method to predict forest fires, proceedings of 4th international workshop on remote sensing and gis applications to forest fire management: innovative concepts and methods in fire danger estimation, ghent, belgium, 2003.



