the proposal of residual fully-connected neural network (rfcn) im- plemented in autogenome [10] have shown us a good framework to model the single-omics data, we want to go further to extend it to multi- omics research, by considering a. the advantage of rfcn neural network architectures; b. the automl features from autogenome; c. novel multi- [10] (methods). step 3: the last hidden layers from the single-omics models are concatenated together as the input for the final multi-omics dnn model. step 4: automl is used again to train the final multi-omics dnn model against the learning target.



data integration: concatenated raw input + mlp (f1: 0.707), vae la- in addition, we compared autoomics with other strategies of omics tent + mlp (f1: 0.728), vae recon + mlp ((f1: 0.733), and raw in- put + autogenome (f1: 0.725), gene expression + autogenome (f1: 0.7315) and gene mutation + autogenome (f1: 0.708), and we found



bicin or daunorubicin metabolic process, regulations of cell prolifera- tion, growth factor activity and wnt signaling pathway etc.; and the top-50 ranked gene mutations were enriched in regulations of gene ex- pression, cell proliferation and apoptotic process and typical signal path- way in cancers. genes of the expression features enriched in location of extracellular space and exosome. interestingly, unlike gene expression, the mutation feature genes were enriched in location of mitochondrion and endoplasmic reticulum.



large-scale accumulation of multi-omics data and electronic med- ical records of patient individuals makes it possible to study precision medicine, that is, to specify medicine treatments for each patient accord- ing to their personal clinical responses and physiological and genomics features. these features may include susceptibility to diseases, mecha- nisms of onsets, prognosis conditions, responses to specific treatments and genetics background etc [23]. for complex diseases e.g. cancer, al- though patients may belong to the same cancer types based on pathol- ogy, their responses to drugs or immune therapy often vary largely. this is maybe due to their difference in genetics background [24]. therefore,



comparison of autoomics based drug sensitivity model to paccmann using gdsc data. we used smiles of 28 drugs and 936 cell lines shared in training sets of both our model and paccmann for comparison. gdsc ic50 values were used as golden-standard positives. evaluation comparison were performed in both cell-wise and drug-wise.



independent validation of autoomics based drug sensitivity model in a pdx mice data set and comparison to moli. independent validation of autoomics in a mice pdx data set. we tested the gdsc-ic50-trained autoomics model on a mice pdx data, which uses tumor size reduction as learning targets. here tumor size reduction quantity was used as ground truths for performance evaluation. 4 drugs shared between our model and moli were used for comparison



hyper-parameter search. hyper-parameter search method refers to our previous described approach in autogenome [10]. the hyper- parameters in search space are learning rate, total batch size, momen- tum, weight decay, number of layers in neural networks and number of neurons in each layers.



rfcn-densenet search space. search space are as followings. 1) the blocks structure for densenet, default value is [2, 3, 4,3, 4, 5]. 2) the growth rate of neuros in each block, default value is [8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024, 2048]. 3) the drop-out ratio of the first layer compared with the input layer, selected from [0.6, 0.8, 1.0].



efficient neural architecture search. enas search method refers to our previous described approach in autogenome [10]. search space are as followings. 1) the number of neurons in from the 2rd layer to the last layer, selected from [16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024, 2048]. 2) the connection relationship between different layers.



pression, mutation and protein expression data were downloaded from tcga ( where feature numbers were 20,531 genes, 16,806 somatic mutated genes and 226 proteins respec- tively. gene expression values were log2-transformed and silent muta- tions were removed from gene mutation data. pam50-based subtypes for patients were downloaded from published paper [35]. 396 patients shared between the feature data and subtype data were used for cancer subtyping prediction task. for pancancer type prediction, 5780 patient samples with gene expression and somatic mutated gene profiles were used for modeling.



