existing studies regard fault detection as a semantic segmentation which lacks the description of the relationship between faults and the establishment of the spatial topological structure of fault model. in order to further reduce the labor cost and improve the effectiveness of fault detection, we introduce instance segmentation to solve problem. compared with semantic segmentation, instance segmentation not only needs to distinguish fault and non-fault, but also needs to classify and mark different faults specifically (fault 1, fault 2 and etc). we adopt the idea of video instance segmentation to deal with fault instance segmen- tation because each frame of video data has continuity in time, while seismic data has continuity in space. video object segmentation methods can be divided into two types: propagation-based methods and detection- based methods. propagation-based methods mainly leverage the tem- poral coherence of object motion. these methods rely on the spatio- temporal connections between pixels. the detection-based methods, on the other hand, learn the appearance of target object from a given annotated frame, and perform a pixel-level detection of the target object at each frame. the core idea of our method is to combine such two modes of fault segmentation based on both the reference profile and the fault tracking from the previous profile. in our work, we make a set of 3d fault instance segmentation labels, based on the synthetic seismic data following wu (2019), as training data. we train the mask propagation neural network (oh et al., 2018) in a step-by-step process iteratively. we complete the fault instance segmentation in a user-defined range and show the final result of fault reconstruction. a multi-input, multi-level encoding and decoding convolutional neural network is used to learn the distribution and combination rules of fault between the adjacent profile and the reference profile to predict the target profile, so as to realize the



fault combination modeling of the whole seismic data. the reference profile is a pre-determined reference profile with fault marks, while the adjacent profile is the previous profile with new fault marks transferred down profile by profile. compared with traditional deep learning methods, such as cnn, we can not only identify faults and non-faults, but also describe the relationships between faults. such that we provide valuable information for a more effective fault interpretation.



inline direction as video frames and achieve the fault instance segmen- tation by the mask propagation method. the network achieving mask propagation has two mainstreams: one is to exploit the appearance of the target faults in a given reference profile called reference stream, and the other is to propagate the key profiles to roughly specify and locate the target faults of interest called the target stream. then the mask propa- gation neural network learns the rules of distribution and the shape-shifts among reference profile, previous profile and target profile, and to further complete fault instance segmentation in each profile of the seismic volume data. eventually, using the relationship between the faults obtained by fault instance segmentation, fault reconstruction can be completed more easily and quickly.



and its fault instance segmentation mask. the target stream consists of the current seismic profile and the fault instance segmentation of the previous profile. both share a multi-level encoder designed as resnet50 (he et al., 2016), and is contacted together through a global convolution block, which is used to match the features of fault instance segmentation between the reference stream and the target stream. to overcome the



the decoder layer is composed of numbers of decoding blocks and is matched with the encoder layer. the decoding block operates with skip connections of the encoding block and up-sampling. finally, the fault instance segmentation mask of the target profile is obtained as output through a convolution layer and a softmax layer.



for example, if we select the pth profile as the reference profile and the tth profile as the target profile, the whole training step indicates as follows: in the current training step, the reference stream always keeps the pth profile and the pth fault instance segmentation mask. the target stream is comprised of the tth seismic profile and the (t-1)th fault instance segmentation mask. the mask propagation neural network receives the two input streams and outputs the fault instance segmentation mask of the tth seismic profile. then we propagate it through the network as the previous fault instance segmentation mask in the target stream. in this way, 32 pieces of adjacent profiles are iteratively processed as one data set. we have trained 256 data sets for 100 epochs.



