the concentrations of heavy metals(cu, zn, pb, cd, fe and mn) were measured in the liver, gills and muscles of fourteen benthic and pelagic fish species collected from three main landing areas(shalateen, hurghada and suez) in the egyptian red sea. the levels of heavy metals varied significantly among fish species and organs. as expected, muscles always possessed the lowest concentrations of all metals. in most studied fish, the liver was the target organ for cu, zn and fe accumulation. pb and mn, however, exhibited their highest concentrations in the gills. different species of fish showed inter-specific variation of metals, as well as variations between fish from the same species. these differences were discussed for the contribution of potential factors that affected metals' uptake, like age, geographical distribution and species' specific factors. generally, recorded metal concentrations were within the range or below the levels in similar species from global studies.



and therapeutic benefits. in addition to its important source of protein, fish typically have rich contents of essential minerals, vitamins and unsaturated fatty acids. the american heart association recommended eating fish at least twice per weak in order to reach the daily intake of omega-3 fatty acids.



however, fish are relatively situated at the top of the aquatic food chain; therefore, they normally can accumulate heavy metals from food, water and sediments[3,4]. the content of toxic heavy metals in fish can counteract their beneficial effects; several adverse effects of heavy metals to human health have been known for long time. this may include serious threats like renal failure, liver damage, cardiovascular diseases and even death[6,7]. therefore, many international monitoring programs have been established in order to assess the quality of fish for human consumption and to monitor the health of the aquatic ecosystem.



in the last few decades, the concentrations of heavy metals in fish have been extensively studied in different parts of the world. most of these studies concentrated mainly on the heavy metals in the edible part(fish muscles). however, other studies reported the distribution of metals in different organs like the liver, kidneys, heart, gonads, bone, digestive tract and brain.



red sea is a semi-enclosed tropical body of water. it has been considered to be a relatively unpolluted marine environment. in the last few decades, however, evidence of heavy metal pollution has been found in various locations. in the northern part of the egyptian red sea, increasing population growth and industrial activities in suez city are the main sources of heavy metal pollution. while in the southern part, the tourism industry and shipping of ores are the major sources of the anthropogenic input of heavy metals.



species were analyzed in single organ; all results showed significant variations between species. furthermore, some fish from the same species collected from different sites also significantly accumulated different concentrations of metals(anova: p< 0.001 in all cases). variations of metals distribu-



fish of the present study always showed the lowest concentration of metals in muscle. the essential metals cu, zn and fe were accumulated mainly in the liver, while pb and mn exhibited their highest concentrations in gills. the accumulation pattern of cd differed between species where the highest concentrations were fluctuated between the liver and gills.



the accumulation of essential metals in the liver is likely linked to its role in metabolism; high levels of zn and cu in hepatic tissues are usually related to a natural binding proteins such as metallothioneins(mt) which act as an essential metal store(i.e., zn and cu) to fulfill enzymatic and other metabolic demands[28,29]. in the same way, fe tends to accumulate in hepatic tissues due to the physiological role of the liver in blood cells and hemoglobin synthesis. on the other hand, the liver also showed high levels of non-essential metals such as cd; this finding could be explained by the ability of cd to displace the normally mt-associated essential metals in hepatic tissues. similar results of high zn, cu and cd in the liver were observed in many field studies[4,30e33].



extent cd in gills. gills are the main route of metal ion exchange from water as they have very large surface areas that facilitate rapid diffusion of toxic metals. therefore, it is suggested that metals accumulated in gills are mainly concentrated from water. this is in agreement with the



findings of moore and ramamoorthy. they reported the lack of correlation between pb residues and feeding habits in aquatic organisms. similar results for high pb concentrations in gills were recorded by kargin, avenant-oldewage and marx, abu hilal and ismail and qadir and malik. also, eisler reported that fish's hard tissues had consis-



fish. in this context, ploetz et al. stated that cd concentrations in the liver of king mackerel, scomberomorus cavalla increased with increasing fork length. furthermore, kojadinovic et al. recorded cd concentrations in the liver of swordfish, xiphias gladius up to 46.9 mg/g wet wt.



it is suggested that benthic fish are likely to have higher heavy metal concentrations than fish inhabiting the upper water column because they are in direct contact with the sediments and their greater uptake of heavy metal concentrations from zoobenthic predators. however, results from several studies did not support this suggestion or even contradict it; zhao et al. found that cynoglossus gracilis had the lowest level of metal accumulation among investigated species despite that it is a typical benthic fish. also, bustamante et al. did not find segregation between pelagic and benthic fish in their accumulation of metals in the liver and kidneys. results of the present study provide weak or no support for this suggestion, where variations between pelagic and benthic organisms were detected only as high concentration of fe in the gills of the benthic fish synodus sp. when compared to other species. this finding may be attributed to higher levels of fe in subsurface water of the red sea as recorded in the study of sheridah et al..



although fish are mostly migratory and seldom settle in one place, metal accumulation in fish organs provides evidences of exposure to contaminated aquatic environment and could be used to assess the health condition of the area from which they were collected. in the present study, spatial distribution of metals showed significant high concentrations of cu, zn, pb, cd and mn in suez. also, the results from single species showed that, pelagic fish collected from suez(epinephelus sp., sardinella sp., lethrinus sp. and t. mediterraneus) recorded significantly the highest concentration of cd in muscles, and relatively high cd concentrations in other organs(liver and gills). these results agree with the previous studies that reported high metal levels in the seawater of suez bay when compared to those from the red sea proper[11,14], which is mainly due to the industrial and anthropogenic input of metals from suez city and the maritime activities through the suez canal.



the essential metals cu, zn, fe and mn were clearly below all the permissible limits for human consumption. while, the non-essential metal pb was below the pml recommended by who and maff, and was around or a little bit higher than the levels recommended by fao and fao/who. similarly cd was generally below the pml in most cases except for the pelagic species from suez that were higher than the levels recommended by fao and ec, but still below fao/who, who and maff recommended limit.



the results in previous literatures were somewhat closer to or higher than our obtained data for similar fish species. for example, abdallah recorded the concentrations of cd, pb, cu and zn in muscles of sardinella aurita, s. rivulatus and synodus saurus from two main harbors in alexandria, egypt, who reported metal levels much higher than those recorded in the same species of the current work. in addition, metal levels in the present study were generally lower or within the ranges of those found in the fish of the red sea recorded by hanna, abdelmoneim and el-deek, emara et al., ahmed et al., el-moselhy and ali et al..



health risk analysis of heavy metals in the edible parts of the fish indicated safe levels for human consumption and concentrations in the muscles are generally accepted by the international legislation limits. however, the levels of metals in pelagic fish and sardinella sp. should be continuously monitored in potential polluted areas since pelagic fish showed a tendency to accumulate cadmium in muscles from polluted water, and sardinella sp. accumulated high concentrations of cu, zn, cd, fe and mn in the muscles when compared to other species.



maff(ministry of agriculture, fisheries and food). monitoring and surveillance of non-radioactive contaminants in the aquatic environment and activities regulating the disposal of wastes at sea, 1997. in: aquatic environment monitoring report no. 52. lowestoft, uk: center for environment, fisheries and aquaculture science; 2000.



