all gels were photographed and analyzed using bio-rad video documentation system model gel doc 2000. the presence or absence of each band was treated as a binary character in a data matrix(coded 1 and 0 respectively). data analyses were performed using systat version 7.0 program.



the results revealed that this primer produced a total number of 12 bands. bands of molecular size 830 bp and 370 bp were recorded in all taxa under study. bands of molecular size 600 bp and 680 bp were recorded only in lavatera cretica so that this band could be used as a positive molecular marker for l. cretica. the band of a molecular size 700 bp recorded in all taxa



the results revealed that this primer produced 12 bands among the ten accessions of the six studied taxa with a molecular size ranging from 310 to 2500 bp. the band of a molecular size 1500 bp recorded only in m. parviflora collected from menia el-kamh el-sharkyia, it could be used as a positive molecular marker for this accession. the band of molecular weight 590 bp recorded in all taxa except two accessions of s. alba.



the molecular size of the pcr products ranged from 230 bp to 850 bp. bands of molecular size 680 bp and 420 bp recorded in all accessions of the studied taxa and missed in a. theophartis and the two accessions of h. trionum.



the primer gave five polymorphic bands and two common bands with molecular size 420 bp and 680 bp. band of a molecular size 330 bp recorded in all taxa under study except h. sabdariffa collected from nabrooh eel-dakahlyia governorate. band of a molecular size 550 bp recorded only in m. parviflora collected from nabrooh, this band could be used as a molecular marker for m. parviflora collected from nabrooh.



the molecular sizes of pcr products ranged from 200 to 2900 bp. this primer gave seven polymorphic bands and four common bands with molecular sizes 200, 850, 990 and 2900 bp. band with a molecular size 500 bp restricted to m. parviflora collected from nabrooh and the band with molecular size 1680 bp restricted to h. sabdariffa collected from menia elkamh el-sharkyia governorate. band of a molecular size 620 bp recorded in all taxa under study except h. sabdariffa collected from talkhael-dakahlyia governorate. this band could be used as a negative molecular marker for h. sabdariffa collected from talkhaeldakahlyia. band of a molecular size 1380 bp recorded in all taxa except m. parviflora collected from menia el-kamh. this band could be used as a negative molecular marker for m. parviflora collected from menia el-kamh.



m. parviflora collected from menia el-kamh. it could be used as a positive molecular marker for m. parviflora collected from this accession. band of a molecular size 1320 bp recorded only in h. sabdariffa collected from talkhael-dakahlyia governorate. this band could be used as a molecular marker for h. sabdariffa collected from this accession. this primer gave four common bands with molecular sizes 530 bp, 660 bp, 780 bp and 1750 bp.



the molecular size of the pcr products ranged from 315 bp to 1650 bp. this primer gave three common bands with molecular sizes 315 bp, 490 bp, 620 bp and eight polymorphic bands. band of a molecular size 590 bp recorded only in h. trionum collected from elriyadkafr el-sheikh governorate. it could be used as a positive marker for h. trionum collected from this accession.



this primer produced a total number of 12 bands. six bands are common and six polymorphic bands. band of a molecular size 3100 bp recorded only in s. alba collected from menia elkamh. this band could be used as a positive marker for s. alba collected from menia el-kamh.



this primer produced a total number of ten bands, three of which common bands and seven polymorphic bands. the band of a molecular size 740 bp recorded only in s. alba collected from menia el-kamh so that, this band could be used as a molecular marker for s. alba collected from menia elkamh. the band of a molecular size 700 bp recorded only in



the molecular size of the pcr products from 220 bp to 1500 bp. this primer opb-17 gave seven polymorphic bands and four common bands. bands of molecular sizes 420, 340 bp recorded only in h. sabdariffa collected from menia el-kamh el-sharkyia. these bands could be used as positive molecular markers for h. sabdariffa collected from menia el-kamh elsharkyia.



biochemical and molecular techniques are provided approaches for evaluating genetic diversity in plants. these methods are favored because they are independent of the developmental stage of the plant. biochemical evidences such as seed storage protein electrophoresis and isozyme polymorphisms are convenient evidences for assessing genetic relationships and.



the electro-phenogram of the examined ten accessions of the six studied taxa revealed a total number of eighteen bands. the highest number of bands 15 was observed in h. sabdariffa collected from menia el-kamh, el-sharkyia and the two accessions of m. parviflora. the molecular weight of these bands ranging from 11.3 to 115.3 kda, where as the lowest number 11 bands were recorded in h. trionum collected from talkhael-dakahlyia governorate the molecular weight of these eleven bands ranging from 11.3 kda to 115.3 kda.



proteins and isozymes electrophoretic markers have been used in many crops to some extent. the major limitation of these two procedures is the lack of enough polymorphism among closely related cultivars. for this reason, dna based genetic markers have been integrated into several plant systems and are playing a very important role in molecular genetics and plant breeding and.



