duck virus enteritis(dve), also called duck plague(dp), is a serious, contagious viral disease, and highly lethal in all ages of anseriformes. the mortality and reduction in egg production in commercial caused significant economic losses[1-2]. duck enteritis virus(dev) is a member of the alphaherpesvirinae subfamily, but it has not been divided into any genus according to the eighth international committee on taxonomy of viruses(ictv). previous researches focused on the epidemiology, diagnosis, prevention, the structure and morphogenesis of dev[4-7],but now, more about the dev gene expression, protein purification, protein function, detective studies have reported with molecular biology technology[8-10].



different herpesvirus have similar structure. the herpes simplex virion has four components: core, capsid, tegument and the envelope. the tegument which links the capsid and the envelope, composed of a multitude of about 20 proteins, including vp1/2(ul36), vp11/12(ul46), vp13/14(ul47), vp16(ul48), vp22(ul49), icp0, icp4, us2, us3, us10, us11, ul11, ul13, ul14, ul16, ul17, ul21, ul37, ul41, ul51 and ul56.



the hsv-1 ul21 gene product, a capsid-associated tegument protein, promotes the outgrowth of long cellular processes when it is over-expressed in non-neural cells. it is presumed that ul21 protein physically associates with microtubules. the early reports showed that both hsv and prv ul21 gene products are not essential for viral replication in cultured cells and its deletion resulted in only marginally reduced titers but clearly decreased plaque sizes[14-15]. the prv ul21 gene is a major determinant of prv virulence, and its point mutations affecting the ul21 gene of live vaccine strain bartha contribute to its attenuated phenotype. in addition, prv ul21 mutants which lacks ul21 gene has apparently reduced virulence for mice[17-18]. in short, the prv ul21 protein associates with virulence. but as far, studies about dev ul21 gene product are limited.



the secondary structure is related with protein function. the alpha helix of the protein have higher chemical bonding energy, can firmly maintain proteinic higher structure. the alpha helix of the protein plays a important role in dna binding motifs, but it seldom become b cell epitopes because it is difficult to gomphosis antibody better, and usually locates at protein interior. extended strand and random coil are more noncohesive flexibility structures and always include b cell dominant epitopes, because they are more loosen texture, which are easy to generate retortion and stretch out of the proteinic surface and gomphosis antibody[27-29]. dev ul21 protein consists of 44.56% alpha helix(h), 13.55% extended strand(e) and 41.89% random coil(c) respectively, indicating more extended strand and random coil structure may contain certain b cell epitopes. previous results suggest that herpes simplex tegument proteins are processed for antigen presentation in vivo and are possible candidate compounds for herpes simplex vaccines, about 20 main antigenic determinants in epitope analysis further suggests that ul21 protein is possible candidate compounds for dev vaccines to the prevention and diagnosis of the duck virus enteritis.



