the application of blockchain technology in an iot environment is made possible by integrating the two technologies. accordingly, this review examines numerous ways for integrating blockchain with iot that can be used in a range of application domains. the integration approaches vary in terms of the role of blockchain in the overall system, the extent to which blockchain is involved in data exchanges between iot devices, and the degree to which systems place an emphasis on blockchain for service provision. the integration mechanisms discussed in this review are classified broadly based on existing literature observations.



despite the challenges, various systems and prototypes are being developed in both healthcare and iot. along with demonstrating the benefits that blockchain brings to these two domains, this review discusses how it is being used for a variety of applications. as so, the review is organized as follows. following this introduction, background information on blockchain technology, the internet of things, and health information technology(hit) is provided. following that, the meth-



hence the reviews are longlisted, it may be necessary to conduct a review of the reviews as a tertiary review to assess the areas addressed and the limitations of the research conducted thus far, identical to what is done by kitchenham b. et al.. despite the abundance of reviews, there are still issues that have not been addressed by the prior reviews. it is noted that prior reviews.



along with accomplishing the aforementioned objectives, this review contributes to the current literature by filling in certain visible gaps. these include a shortage of comprehensive reviews of the literature on access control and data integrity in blockchain-based systems, as well as a dearth of comprehensive reviews on the integration of blockchain and iot. additionally, it contributes to a better knowledge of other issues, such as the privacy-preserving techniques used in blockchainbased systems. the following can be mentioned as significant contributions.



data security is a critical aspect of data management. in this regard, it is noted that the majority of literatures concentrate on three subjects. these include data integrity, access control, and privacy preservation. this review presents a taxonomy of the methods used in these three areas.



essentially, blockchain is a peer-to-peer network. p2p networks have a variety of topologies, communication patterns between nodes, and types of nodes that participate. predominantly, there are three main categories of network topologies, which are centralized, decentralized structured, and decentralized unstructured.



p2p networks can also be characterized as homogeneous or heterogeneous based on the peer types involved. a homogeneous network is defined by nodes that have similar storage, computation, communication, sensing, and energy capabilities. in heterogeneous networks, there is variation in one of the above issues between nodes.



consensus is used in blockchain to ensure that nodes agree on the validity of a block. consensus methods range from those that are entirely computational in nature, such as proof of work, to those that are communication-based, such as practical byzantine fault tolerance(pbft)[32,33]. there are various consensus mechanisms in between the two, including proof of stake(pos), threshold relay, and proof of burn. along with the popular ones, the reviewed literature makes use of their enhanced variants. in connection with this, there are other high-quality reviews, such as[40,41] that can be referred to for clarification.



a smart contract can be thought of as an automatically invoked procedure that is initiated when a transaction is executed. all blockchain systems support smart contracts; however, they differ in terms of the language in which smart contracts can be written and the environment in which they are executed. solidity, golang, serpent, java, python, and lll are the most often used smart contract languages. there are numerous execution environments available, including the ethereum virtual machine(evm), java virtual machine(jvm), docker image, and haskell execution environment[32,33].



in this context, certain sectors such as healthcare, financial systems, and digital rights management necessitate the use of a centralized peerto-peer network or a permissioned private blockchain. a single ledger is used at a central server in this scenario, with peers maintaining metadata or pointers to their data. decentralized structured topology is also recommended to be employed in banking by ref., in which a dht can be employed to maintain references to the data that can be accessible through blockchain. the data can be stored in a centralized store such as a cloud or in randomly selected nodes and dht is utilized to enhance data availability.



it is a well-known fact that iot devices have fundamental constraints such as limited memory space, poor processing power, and limited battery life. additionally, they are typically scattered and may be located in an open setting in a variety of geographical locations. furthermore, they are relatively new technology. as a result, they are vulnerable to attacks, and their security methods must account for these. moreover, communication between devices may be based on ad hoc ip protocols such as near field communication(nfc), bluetooth, ieee 802.15.4, wi-fi, zigbee, and 6lowpan. also, ad hoc communication can occur over the internet, a mobile communication network, a satellite network, or a wireless network. there is a possibility that such communications will expose information systems to threats such as intrusion and data tampering.



iot devices to attack and prevents them from communicating securely. furthermore, unlike traditional devices, which share some operating systems, there are no dominant operating systems utilized by a large number of devices in iot. moreover, there is a lack of specific data formats. as a result, establishing interoperability between them is challenging. one option that has been used is the use of middleware to facilitate the integration of iot devices, although this has inherent security problems. although numerous other efforts have been made, blockchain technology has recently been suggested as a possible



the overall goal of hit is to achieve benefits such as reduced medical errors, improved patient outcomes, enhanced patient care, increased physician productivity, increased hospital value, and improved operational and financial performance of hospitals[56,58]. when health iot is considered in isolation, it enables triage, patient monitoring, personnel monitoring, disease spread modeling and containment, assisting practitioners by providing real-time health status and predictive information, and providing information for policy decisions in pandemic scenarios, as explained in ref..



in general, demonstrates that hit is effective when used in aggregate. however, it has been a long time since fragmentation in utilization has been noted, and governmental initiatives to improve health information interchange between providers have been passed. in this context, it has been challenging to delineate clearly what information should be retained in a particular system. for instance ref., notes that many providers view ehr as an internal system. from another perspective, phr consumes data from a variety of systems, including ehr, and hence ehr has data that is useful to phr[5,63]. additionally, it is discovered that one system can induce the use of another. for instance, emar and pacs facilitate the use of emr and cpoe.



the existence of various types of duplicate information and dependency necessitates integration. despite this necessity, system integration is uncommon[5,62]. moreover, despite efforts, technological as well as non-technical challenges manifest on multiple levels. at the system level, incorrect workflow design and integration, combined with a mismatch in the rate of progress of hit and the complexity of security and privacy issues in both distinct and integrated systems, preclude integration. data integration between systems is hampered by the absence of unique patient identification, a lack of messaging that permits syntactic and semantic compatibility between systems and the absence of data encoding standards.



mission risk, and length of stay. therefore, deliberation that takes into account the various interests is mandatory. thus, blockchain is viewed as a tool for developing patient-centric systems in a variety of ways, including managing digital access rules, increasing data availability, increasing data liquidity, and assigning unique patient identities, all of which are addressed in greater detail below.



numerous authors, including[3,67], have emphasized the pervasive nature of blockchain, and as a result, several publications address the diverse prospective application domains. this increases the number of publications; as a result, the author must choose from a vast body of literature in order to undertake an in-depth review. to this purpose, the application domains, the technique for conducting the literature search, and the screening procedure for the gathered articles are as follows.



ments. afterward, through reading their titles and abstracts, the remaining publications were sorted as per their application areas such as cryptocurrency, iot, healthcare, smart contract, supply chain management, banking and finance, industry, and other areas. next, analytical reading was made to decide on which application areas further review is needed. in this regard, although the majority of the publications deal with cryptocurrency, the scope of this review is on those that are commonly categorized under blockchain 3.0. from this class of publications, the most prominent usages are on healthcare and employing blockchain along with iot. after sorting the documents and selecting the application areas from blockchain 3.0, the second search was started. this was conducted a year later, in december 2019 with search phrases,



between the two searches, analytical reading was conducted to have a better grasp of the subject and to establish criteria for document inclusion or removal. other supporting literature from the application fields was obtained and provided to substantiate the review based on the knowledge gained via the analytical reading. when a gap was discovered between prior information and publications dealing with blockchain, further publications were consumed to round out the evaluation and establish a connection between prior knowledge and the emerging trend in blockchain usage.



the inclusion criteria for the primary publications were as follows. publications that belong to the application areas and are published on a journal with an impact factor greater than 1.0, as per the source database of the publication and books or chapters of books are qualified for further processing. however, conference papers are considered cautiously as noted in ref., but those that are organized by trustworthy professional associations such as ais, acm, ieee, icis, inform, etc. as suggested by ref. were qualified for the next processing. however, they were also assessed against the google h-5 index, in which those that obtained 10 or more in the index were included.



technology readiness stage(trl). however, of all the application domains that are typically classified as blockchain 3.0, this is the most prevalent use. articles in this domain address a broader range of subjects, including how blockchain can be integrated with iot, how iot data is managed, iot security, and smart city-related challenges.



in iot, the most commonly covered topics include providing substantial information about the benefits of blockchain for iot and designing systems that can help in enhancing the security of iot data. additionally, various publications demonstrate the integration of blockchain with iot. furthermore, some papers explain smart cityrelated usages. all these are presented in greater detail.



however, the use of blockchain in healthcare is not without challenges, as discussed in refs.[6,7,77]. maintaining confidentiality is a problem, as is increasing the throughput and scalability of blockchain-based systems. moreover, security concerns and limited storage space make it difficult to store image data that is large enough to be maintained on a blockchain, and cost-effectiveness is another issue.



with this in mind, two articles seek to classify the integration methods of blockchain and iot into three distinct categories. on the one hand, classify integration solutions according to the amount of data that flows through blockchain during data exchange between iot devices. on the other hand, compares blockchain with cloud for service provision. the two approaches are not mutually exclusive; termed as cloud over blockchain(cob) as per. the second architecture allows a significant involvement of blockchain; hence all data created through the interactions between iot devices pass through it. in comparison to the cloud, in this architecture, blockchain serves as the central channel of service provision but obtains analytical and virtualization services from the cloud, which is termed as blockchain over cloud(boc) in ref.. in the last setting, a fair share of data interchanges happens on both the blockchain and the iot devices, which enables the simultaneous and direct utilization of the qualities of both technologies. from the perspective of cloud against blockchain dominance viewpoint, this method is referred to as mixed blockchain-cloud(mbc) in ref..



the iot is the topic of security-related literature, with a particular emphasis on data security. however, blockchain technology may be used to address a variety of additional security concerns. this section discusses the benefits of utilizing blockchain to accomplish this goal. however, the following section on data management discusses data security.



in the security challenges associated with iot and the manner in which blockchain technology can assist overcome them is discussed. similarly, conducted a review of the literature on the application of blockchain for security purposes, with an emphasis on iot security. numerous other researches, including[46,47,102,106], emphasize the potential security benefits of blockchain technology in the iot security arena. as a result, the following benefits accrue in this regard: ticate users with an interactive voice response system(ivrs). however, the most widely used form of establishing identity is through the use of a public and private key pair, with the public key serving as the digital identity, as described in ref..



4.4.3.3. privacy preservation. the other issue that the literatures address is the preservation of privacy. according to ref., privacy preservation techniques can be categorized into two broad categories: data privacy and context privacy. while data privacy concerns difficulties such as maintaining privacy throughout data aggregation and



while data security involves a variety of issues, it is noticed that blockchain-based systems are primarily concerned with resolving three topics: data integrity, access control, and privacy preservation. essentially, security concerns are not distinct from one another; rather, they are inextricably linked. despite, publications have concentrated on those subjects, which are discussed in detail below.



ensuring the accuracy and consistency of data throughout its lifecycle. prior publications, such as[141,142] expound on the fact that data integrity strategies are concerned with avoiding, identifying, and correcting data integrity issues. methods such as journaling and building encrypted file systems are aimed at avoiding data integrity issues. additionally, check-summing, mirroring, cyclic redundancy check(crc), and parity are used to detect data integrity risks. on the other side, correcting data integrity concerns are addressed using methods such as majority vote and raid parity.



in situations when blockchain is used as part of a system, conducted a literature survey and classified privacy-preserving techniques into four categories. these are(a) smart contract or key management derivation through the use of secure multiparty computation(smpc), and(b) identity anonymization, which focuses on securing the identities of users participating in a transaction through the use of mixing, ring signatures, and zero proof of knowledge.(c) transaction data anonymization, which focuses on ensuring the privacy of transaction contents through mixing, differential privacy, zero-knowledge proofs, and homomorphic hiding; and(d) on-chain data protection, which focuses on securing data stored on the blockchain using encryption techniques such as asymmetric encryption and attribute-based encryption.



combinations of the aforementioned mechanisms, structures, and actions are noted in several of the reviewed literatures. for example, in ref., the data dissemination mechanism is publish and subscribe, in which a blockchain publisher provides information to an iot-enabled blockchain, from which nodes can acquire data by subscribing. in ref. a hybrid of pulland push-based data transmission techniques with a hierarchical framework is employed. the cluster head takes data from sensors and then distributes it to peers.



information dissemination-based systems. in this regard, publications such as[119,122] use trigger to disseminate data. these publications, on the other hand, propose distinct network structures. in ref., propagation occurs either from a single vehicle to a large number of vehicles or from a single vehicle to another vehicle or to infrastructure, with the goal of establishing two-tier blockchains(local dynamic blockchain and main blockchain). in ref., messaging between vehicles occurs in a one-to-many or point-to-point fashion.



despite these, data retrieval is not a primary objective of many of the reviewed papers. the only publication that focuses on it is, in which blockchain is situated as a contract service between biomedical databases and data consumers. the blockchain data acts as permanent proof of data retrieval activity, which is tracked in part by comparing the hash value of a query to the hash value of a result.



challenges, making it particularly sensitive to privacy concerns. additionally, the size of the data has an effect on its storage. as a result, huge files, the majority of which are the result of radiology, are treated differently than laboratory tests and other research data.



of data storage, among other things. in accordance with this, one of the objections leveled towards blockchain-based systems is that their immutability precludes them from being regulated, however, the authors address this concern through the use of ontology. ontology has the potential to resolve semantic heterogeneity associated with the use of various iot devices. this is accomplished, for example, by raising awareness of security threats. however, they use it for intelligence policy analysis in their system, which includes consent management for data acquisition, update, and disposal.



the smart city concept is a subset of the smart planet agenda, with a spatial demarcation for its execution that is conceptualized in two distinct ways. the first defines smart city or smartness as the level at which places are connected through iot, implying that technocracy plays a role in cities management. on the other hand, the second one stresses the establishment and spread of a knowledge-based economy, in which information and communication technologies play a crucial role in the development of the envisioned economic model. both conceptualizations emphasize the importance of technology in the form of iot.



to address these and other challenges, blockchain is considered to make a substantial contribution, as seen by the growth of publications addressing its usage. as a result, authors such as[123,125] suggest frameworks for utilizing blockchain technology in smart city applications. in ref., blockchain serves two purposes. on the one hand, it is used at the prosumer level to connect smart devices to a smart meter. additionally, the smart meter is linked to the micro-grid, smart appliances, and sensors. the micro-grid acts as a data hub and a tool for energy exchange in the design. on the other side, each community and smart grid are connected through a blockchain at the household level. according to the authors, this type of usage enables a community to self-manage its energy consumption. the architecture described in ref. places edge computing between a blockchain, which serves as the core network, and an iot device network. the obvious goal of pro-



smart grids have also garnered attention from authors, including[83,127]. in ref., a survey of blockchain application cases is presented. as such, in conjunction with the smart grid, blockchain may be utilized primarily as an infrastructure for peer-to-peer energy trading and as a deterrent to data tampering in the power-producing and distribution industries. consistent with this, a layered structure based on blockchain that they believe can enable energy policy enforcement, energy trading, and security enhancement is proposed. to accomplish these goals, the blockchain is deployed through a virtual private network, with each node implemented by software.



the medicine is tracked, each entity scans and signs the code as the drug passes through the supply chain, preventing counterfeiting. similarly, develops a method for ensuring the transparency of drug-related transaction data across the supply chain. their system is comprised of four entities: alliance members who grant licenses to miners(government and manufacturers), full nodes(wholesalers and hospitals), and normal nodes(pharmacies and consumers). according to their design description, a public key is utilized to generate a quick response(qr) code that acts as a unique identifier(id) for medications. when medicine is manufactured, information about it is stored on the blockchain as the hash value of its name, location, and timestamp of the manufacturing date and time. unspent transaction outputs(utxos) and private keys, respectively, can be used to detect fraudulent transactions such as sales by unlawful distributors and unauthorized persons.



the purpose of this review is to discuss how blockchain is utilized for data management and delves into the application areas of iot and healthcare. additionally, it assesses the integration strategies utilized to integrate blockchain with iot. as a result, selected works from a list of publications are reviewed to demonstrate the approaches used to integrate blockchain and iot. moreover, data management activities which are data acquiring, processing, security, dissemination, retrieval, and storage strategies used in blockchain-based systems are demonstrated. furthermore, the use of blockchain in smart cities and the drug supply chain is discussed.



clearly, blockchain, like iot, is pervasive[3,67], and its adoption can benefit a wide variety of applications. healthcare is one sector where hiot has the potential to make an impact. however, while the integrative use of both technologies is beneficial, the qualitative aspects of both technologies have an effect on the integration efforts. these include the existence of a large number of sensors, the low memory capacity of blockchain and iot, the low processing capacity and battery life of iot, and the low latency of various blockchain-based consensus processes. blockchain is being used in iot not only for its qualitative benefits but also to resolve some of the shortcomings that iot currently possesses.



in healthcare, blockchain-based data management is designed to provide patients authority over their data. their empowerment enables individuals to control who has access to their data and to track who has accessed it. additionally, blockchain technology improves the integrity, availability, access control, and preservation of privacy.



acquiring data from the appropriate source is crucial to data management success. in this regard, the authors demonstrate that, in addition to the widely used technique of identifying objects and persons through their public key and pseudonym names, alternative means of authentication, such as voice recognition, have been used in blockchainbased systems. additionally, it is noticed that architecturally assigning entities, such as management servers, are utilized for assigning unique ids to objects and users.



there is no single dominating strategy for access control and privacy preservation that has been widely adopted by a significant number of authors. however, due to their certificate authority and multi-signature provisioning capabilities, established blockchain platforms such as hyperledger and nem are being used for access control. in some works, on the other hand, access control is believed to be managed structurally, for example, by allocating access control tasks to selected participant nodes. on the other hand, there is a publication that demonstrates how to utilize a decoder to ensure compatibility between multiple access control models.



common mechanism in this area is a method called trigger but publications differ in the architecture they follow. on top of disseminating data from a vehicle to a vehicle, some authors include the dissemination of data from infrastructure to vehicles as well. in other publications, hybrids of pull and push data dissemination methods are being employed. in all these dissemination methods blockchain plays a



fourth, is the disintegrative use of hit, which is caused, among other things, by the lack of a trustworthy technique for assigning unique ids. in this sense, one of the characteristics of blockchain is that it can help solve such a problem; yet, it is uncommon to come across literature that uses blockchain to integrate disparate healthcare systems. thus, integrative hit utilization has a beneficial effect on the domain; these issues can be viewed as a solution to a long-standing problem.



this review examines how the selected publications leverage blockchain technology to streamline data management activities and how they integrate blockchain with iot. furthermore, in addition to examining the presence of trends in developing instantiations, the article demonstrates the benefits of adopting blockchain in subsets of the two domains, namely smart cities and drug supply chains. the preceding observations allow us to deduce the following.



other data management tasks, such as data acquisition, benefit from the authentication enhancement capabilities of blockchain-based systems. various authentication methods have been reported to be applied, ranging from biological mechanisms to public-key encryption schemes. this means that independent of the application domain, a variety of decentralized autonomous authentication procedures for blockchainbased systems can be developed. similarly, one of the benefits of blockchain for data processing is the revival of smart contracts, which were available before the widespread use of blockchain but were not widely used as a data processing tool. however, blockchain-based systems leverage it for a range of activities, including autonomous data processing.



dissemination and retrieval of data are the least targeted tasks in data management. nonetheless, numerous authors present the dissemination mechanisms employed in their instantiations in an unambiguous manner. it is learned that the majority of dissemination mechanisms are based on publish and subscribe, hierarchical structures, and triggerbased one-to-many and many-to-many procedures. however, despite the fact that blockchain adoption has an effect on data retrieval processes, the literatures do not discuss or address data retrieval methods to be used in blockchain-based systems.



alternatively, it is recognized that a large number of variables have a significant impact on data storage. to circumvent these obstacles, designers employ solutions such as creating a data lake, preserving only file locations, and registering a list of files. to address legal problems, developers customize their systems to conform to the applicable legal standards.



