a new solvent extraction method that removing the ca(ii) from calcium lactate by di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (d2ehpa) to produce lactic acid was proposed. the influences of composition of organic phase, phase ratio, temperature and calcium concentration, on extraction yield, were investigated. the optimal technological conditions of extraction were obtained: reaction temperature 323 k, phase ratio (o/w) 4:1, the initial calcium concentration 1.03 mol l 1, the d2ehpa volume fraction 40%, and 5% 1-octanol as modifiers. the reaction occurs at the interfacial zone possibly, and the rate is mostly controlled by chemical reaction. reaction order with respect to h2a2, ph and ca2+ was determined and the rate of calcium extraction could be expressed as: f = 10-6.81[ca2+][h2a2]0.5[h+]-1.



lactic acid is a chemical commodity utilized in chemical and pharmaceutical fields [1]. approximately 90% of the total lactic acid produced worldwide is made by bacterial fermentation at present [2]. solvent extraction was a kind of method to recovery lactic acid from fermentation broth, and the lactic acid was extracted to organic phase. however, this process has drawbacks of consuming extra chemicals and forming a waste salt.



to resolve these shortcomings, the way of keeping lactic acid in aqueous phase was proposed in this paper. in this process, calcium lactate solution produced by the addition of calcium hydroxide to the aqueous fermentation broth was contacted with d2ehpa (h2a2) to remove cations to organic phase, while lactic acid retained in aqueous phase. for this new approach of separating lactic acid by solvent extraction of cations, it is necessary to perform detail experiments to optimize the extraction conditions and make some insight of kinetic mechanism for finding out the determining step of the solvent extraction process.



the materials used in this study were calcium lactate (kindly provided by henan jindan lactic acid tech co., ltd.) which has an analytical purity of 98 %. the content of d2ehpa (tianjin chemical co.ltd,) was of 99 %. 1-octanol, 2-octanol and iso-octanol, aromatic free kerosene were of reagent grade and were used without pretreatment. deionized water was produced by millipore milli-q water system.



the experiments were carried out in 250 ml conical flask. proportional volumes of aqueous and organic phases were shaken for 5 min at constant temperature on the magnetic stirring apparatus, unless for the tests about reaction time effect on the result. the phase separations were carried out in 250 ml separatory funnels.



the construction of the lewis cell and the working procedure with the lewis cell used in this investigation was discussed before [3]. the stirring rate was controlled at 180 rpm except the effect of it on kinetic experiment. the aqueous concentration of calcium was estimated by sampling and complexometry. a mettler toledo ph meter was used for ph measurements. all experiment were carried out at 293 k, the interfacial area was kept at 1.776 cm2 unless for the tests about temperature or interfacial area.



the influences of h2a2 volume fraction, modifiers, phase ratio, temperature, and calcium concentration were researched, and the initial conditions were: reaction temperature 298 k, phase ratio (o/w) 4:1, the initial calcium concentration 0.68 mol l-1, the h2a2 volume fraction 40 %, and 5% 1-octanol as modifiers. the major criterions to choose technological conditions were extraction yield and concentration of h+.



the optimal technological conditions of extraction by d2ehpa were obtained: reaction temperature 323 k, phase ratio (o/w) 4:1, the initial calcium concentration 1.03 mol l-1, the h2a2 volume fraction 40%, and 5% 1-octanol as modifiers. under these conditions, the extraction rate could reach 91%, and the concentration of h+ could reach 1.4 mol l-1.



the optimal technological conditions of extraction by d2ehpa were obtained: reaction temperature 323 k, reaction time 5 min, phase ratio (o/w) 4:1, the initial calcium concentration 1.03 mol l-1, the h2a2 volume fraction 40%, and 5% 1-octanol as modifiers. under these conditions, the extraction rate could reach 91%, and the concentration of h+ could reach 1.4mol l-1.



