indeed, deep learning has enabled significant advances in plant dis- ease identification through various approaches (martinelli et al., 2015; ferentinos, 2018; golhani et al., 2018; ngugi et al., 2021; ouhami et al., 2021). starting with alexnet, the first neural network architecture to go beyond the support vector machine known as svm (a machine learning model) (krizhevsky et al., 2012), numerous models have been created and evaluated using the public plantvillage dataset of performing the storage and training tasks, was used to store the dataset and regularly re-train the vit model to perform updates. the latest up- date will then be sent to the individual users' s edge device via the appli- cation for better accuracy. on the other side, the smartphone will acquire new cactus photos or select some from the gallery and perform the classification. we also contributed with new dataset for images of cochineal infested cacti. the proposed system could be a valuable tool for farmers growing cacti.



this work is organized as follows; the first section provides a brief overview of the research. the second section presents a description of the dataset, the materials and the methodology used. the third section details the conduct of experiences. in the fourth section, results are re- ported with a discussion in the same section. then conclusions are drawn in the final section.



mechanism to understand the semantics in the provided data, like nat- ural language processing (nlp), which leads to better results. cnn, on the other hand, focuses locally on the neighbors of the pixels, so it may miss useful information. the problem arises when we have multi-features, such as having an early-stage cochineal infestation on the top of the cactus with a spiny rackets, in this cases the model cannot predict with a high accuracy. this precision is crucial for agents since we cannot wait for the cochineal to spread. the low accuracy mainly on damaged, earlystage, and healthy, is due to the similar features shared between them. while cochineal has the main characteristic of white wax on the leaves of cacti and is very bright in the late stage, in the early stage, indications that a cactus is infected can easily be mistaken for thorns with sun reflection or dust or even another infestation other than cochineal.



the process of using the app is easy for farmers. after logging in, they just take a picture and obtain results. the main advantage of our mobile application is that it uses the serialized model of the original model. so, the farmer does not need to be connected to internet to obtain results. all processing is performed on the phone.



