in order to model a context and adapt it to any domain, it is necessary an ontology that captures generic concepts to a higher level. the context model must provide mechanisms to extend the specific informa- tion of a context in a hierarchical manner. in this paper, we propose cameonto, an ontology with these characteristics, based on the principles of 5ws: who, when, what, where and why. cameonto is used by carmicloc, a reflective middleware for context-aware applications, and is instantiated in several case studies, in order to test how cameonto works correctly and can reason to infer information about the context.



in [8] was presented carmicloc, a reflective middleware for context-aware applications in the cloud, which offers various ser- vices for context-aware systems, among which is found the model- ing. the context modeling is proposed using ontologies, because it is a technique that gains force as a standard, due to its semantic expressiveness and interoperability [8]. in this way, in this work we propose the modeling of the context ontology of carmicloc.



our ontology must be used by the services of carmicloc to represent the context, to reason about it, to be shared, among other things, without the use of sophisticated tools and processes. this ontology is called cameonto, which is an ontology that allows the modeling of the context, so that it can be used by the set of ser- vices of carmicloc in order to allow the autonomy of the context- aware applications, so that they can discover it, analyze it, and based on it, make decisions. our ontology provides a simple con- text modeling based on the 5ws (who, when, what, where and why), with sufficient information about the context to reason and learn from it.



in [9], alegre presents an investigation about the context-aware systems and their applications, and illustrates how the systems understand the situations, provide services and adaptive their functionalities for very specific needs. alegre presents different aspects related to the state of the art of context-awareness sys- tems (cass), for example: 1) the methodologies used for the devel- opment of cass, 2) the challenges and techniques to construct cass, 3) and the conceptualization of cass. it also presents the directions and challenges that should be considered in the future researches regarding context-aware computing. especially, in the engineering of the context aware systems, he defines the following investigations: principles of design of the human-computer inter- action, architectural patterns, paradigms of programming, methodological supports, among others.



with respect to the context modeling, perera exposes in [10] that there is not a standard for context modeling. in [9,10], alegre and perera, respectively, show the most common techniques used for context modeling. alegre exposes that each technique has some advantage. for example, the ontology-based modeling allows the semantic reasoning, the expressiveness in the context representa- tion, a strong validation, context sharing and the independent utilization.



there are several works that have developed the modeling of context through ontologies [11,12,19]. the use of ontology allows, according to [11,4]: 1) the reasoning using a very well defined declarative semantic, 2) the knowledge sharing in dynamic sys- tems and, 3) the interoperability. in [11], guermah implements a framework of context-aware services. guermah propose an ontol- ogy, called conon (context ontology), which has two levels. the first level is the services platform, with the general representation of the context; and the second level is extensible and allows adding other specific ontologies. finally, the framework allows the adapta- tion of services based on the wsmo (web service modeling ontol- ogy) [13]. they define the next set of classes: user, activity, service, device, and environment.



in [14], skillen shows a user-centered ontology, and describes an ontological modeling of the user profile for the customization of context-aware applications, defining a method for capturing and representing user profiles for changing environments. the classes that he defines are: user, time, context, activity and loca- tion. in [12], naqvi presents a mobile context awareness approach in a cloud, and an ontology where its main entities are the user, the platform and the service that is instantiated. it is deployed on a middleware that is defined as a platform as a service (paas).



context modeling. the context modeling is also widely referred to as context representation. context models can be static or dynamic. in addition, they may have several states [2]: ready, running, suspending, resuming, expired, and terminated. there are different modeling techniques which are described in [1].



one important aspect of carmicloc is that it allows the con- text switching using the services that it has implemented. when something changes in the base level, the se1, se3 and se2 services work together to produce the new context. particularly, the con- text modeling service (se2) is one of the most important because it allows the maintenance of context information and can create new models based on new contexts acquired.



the relationships of our ontology allow describing the context: the environment has a location, and devices that provide services according to their specific description. also, the devices are used by the users at this location, whom have roles in the activities car- ried out in the environment in a given moment. now, we specify each class of our ontology.



in this article, we have proposed a meta ontology for the con- text modeling, called cameonto. it is a general ontology, without being biased to a single application domain. we have tested in dif- ferent contexts, for example, in the context of a smart classroom or in a surgery room, and in each case our ontology can model the context. we were able to create the relationships between the activity domains, the situation the user is going through, among other things.



this meta-ontology describes the main components of knowl- edge to be considered in a cas, which can be extended with the specific information about the domain of application in its second level. our ontology allows the modeling of the context based on the 5ws, using a set of models for each dimension. in this way, we describe the main details of a context.



in future works, we are going to test the creation and integra- tion of domain-specific ontologies, in order to observe how the proposed ontology could be adapted in real time. also, carmicloc has a set of services (s21 and se2) to automatically populate our ontology, in order to avoid a human-based population process of the knowledge base. currently, we are working on the implemen- tation of these services using an approach that analyses the exchanges of messages in an environment using dpi (deep packet inspection) techniques, in order to discover information of the con- text in order to instantiate cameonto.



in the case studies, the pellet reasoner is used, nevertheless it is just a test. in future works, we are going to evaluate the perfor- mance of cameonto into a real environment with large data. finally, other important work is to test the context switching with carmicloc based on its services, in a way to update cameonto with the new information of the context in realtime.



