the grassland is the largest terrestrial ecosystem in china, covering more than 40% of the country's territory. about 78% of this grassland is located in arid and semiarid regions (ren et al., 2016), and it plays a critical role in facilitating animal husbandry and environmental conser- vation (akiyama and kawamura, 2007). grassland degradation has been a worldwide issue in recent decades, and about 90% of the entire useable grassland in china has degraded to varying extents (nan, 2005). the degraded area in china accounted for 22.7% of the total area of grassland from 1982 to 2010 (zhou et al., 2017).



to quickly and accurately monitor the degradation in grassland, one uses the critical proxy of vegetation coverage to estimate essential pa- rameters and functions of the ecosystem through remote sensing (lehnert et al., 2015). two approaches are widely used with satellite remote sensing datasets: spectral mixture analysis (sma) and empirical models (ge et al., 2018). the former decomposes each pixel in an image into a linear component of the reference spectrum, referred to as an endmem- ber (jiapaer et al., 2011). the model of pixel dichotomy is a simplified linear sma to simulate vegetation cover rapidly. empirical models represent the relationship between remote sensing data and data from field surveys. the remote sensing data of a band or a combination of where bnir, br, and bb are the atmospheric or partially corrected atmo- sphere surface reflectances in the near-infrared (nir), red, and blue bands, respectively. l is the canopy background adjustment used to address nonlinear, differential-nir, and red radiant transfer through the canopy. c1 and c2 are coefficients of aerosol resistance. the blue band is used to correct the influence of aerosol on the red band. the coefficients in (6) are set to l = 1, c1 = 6, c2 = 7.5, and g (gain factor) = 2.5 (merchant, 2000).



compared with the other three methods, the proposed method improved the extraction accuracy of four different coverage grasslands. the accuracy of grassland coverage monitoring and the overall accuracy and kappa coefficient reached 96.32% and 95.08%. although the accu- racy of extraction of the svm algorithm for bare land was higher than identifying low-coverage grassland was less than 90%. while the lstm nn is widely used for time series processing, it yielded less than 80% classification accuracy. only on high-coverage grassland did it perform well, with an accuracy of 98.75%. its overall classification accuracy was only slightly higher than that of the svm algorithm.



this study proposed a quick and efficient method to classify grassland coverage that can classify grasslands into four quantitative types: high, medium, low, and other. evi time series data of the cycle of grass growth were used to predict grassland coverage. we used the capsule network to classify remote sensing images. the proposed method yielded an accu- racy of classification higher than 90% on each grassland class, with an overall accuracy of 96.32%. its kappa coefficient was 0.9508. it also outperformed the svm, rf, and lstm algorithms in accuracy assessment in the comparative analyses.



