prediction of chaotic time series based on the phase space reconstruction theory has been applied in many research fields. local linear model is widely used in chaos prediction due to its versatility and small computation amount. the embedding dimension and time delay parameters of the local linear prediction model can take different values with those of the phase space reconstruction. the binary particle swarm optimization (bpso) is applied to choose the optimal parameters of the new local linear prediction model for its strong search ability. the main objective of this approach is to increase the predictive accuracy of the local linear model. in this paper the local linear one-step and multi-step predictive model predicts the chaotic time series respectively. simulation results show the feasibility and effectiveness of the proposed method.



this paper is organized as follows: the local linear prediction model, bpso and adaptive weighted fusion algorithm are described in section 2. the new local linear prediction model is illustrated in section 3. simulation and results are shown in section 4 and discussion is described in section 5. the conclusion is given in section 6.



parameters of the traditional local linear are valued the same with that of phase space reconstruction during the traditional predictive methods. ref [8] points out that parameters of the model can be assigned different to improve the predictive result. for these two parameters, the authors estimate the optimal value of one parameter with the other parameter fixed by minimizing the standard prediction error in ref [8]. this method improves the predictive error indeed. but the problem is that there always a corresponding value for one parameter with the other parameter settled, so the obtained value could not be optimal in theory. in this paper the bpso is used to evaluate the both parameters simultaneously.



to get better predictive value, we can also use some other methods such as the adapted weighted fusion algorithm to fusion the obtained data. the adapted weighted fusion algorithm allocates the weighted factors automatically according to the adaptive criteria-[15]. it merges the output obtained by local one-step and multi- step prediction model with weighted factors and improves predictive accuracy and the algorithm can minimize the predictive error theoretically.



