classification of network traffic has become popular recently due to breakthroughs in technology. the increasing growth of high-speed internet traffic demands has increased the need for such tasks. network traffic classification facilitates the efficient management of network resources, which is also essential in managing and securing the network. accurate classification of network traffic will assure that customers are provided with a quality of service(qos) and that the network is managed efficiently.



various encryption methods are available today, and among the commonly used ones include https, ssh, ssl, and programs such as tor and truecrypt. these methods are used in internet traffic encryption to safeguard the privacy of internet users from breaches. thus, there is a need to classify these network traffics that are generated by the applications. the classification will facilitate network management while preventing malware and maxi-



ensemble learning techniques are proposed in this study to classify encrypted network data. the traffic is classified using deep learning and machine learning methods. deep learning is employed as a learning algorithm, which automatically learns features based on the raw network traffic. many researchers used different statistical features for developing their models. this has resulted in models with different overall accuracy levels. for instance, the researchers in ref., employed 44 statistical features extracted from the raw pcap file, while the researchers in ref. employed four(4) statistical features. however, there are some researchers, such as[8,9] they did not provide nor mention the number of statistical features they have used.



the motivation of the research comes in twofold: one is motivated by network uses, and the other is motivated by achieving better tradeoffs to meet the identification needs, ultimately boosting network activities. another reason is that the number of application types significantly impacts the accuracy of ml-based and ensemble learning classification. the preceding motivates us to develop a lightweight ensemble classification system capable of accurately and quickly identifying vpn traffic.



tion of traffic(through the use of https) throughout the process of communication from the source to the concerned destination based on the i.p. address, protocol encapsulation through the use of i.p. security protocol, and application-specific port numbers, or particular applications, like gmail. some of those real-time applications have complex nature because they employ various services. hence, the applications are usually identified with their associated tasks[1,10].



mcgaughey et al. formulated a statistical feature selection method involving selecting features with predictive values from raw network traffic data by applying the fast orthogonal search(fos) algorithm for encrypted communications classification. selecting just a subset of features from the raw traffic data in the classification process can minimize errors. the raw traffic data feature is the primary feature set extracted using netmate. a total of



aouini et al. constructed a system to classify residential encrypted network data using the c5.0 machine learning algorithm. the system employed an extensive french residential aggregation network with over 34,000 users as traffic data input. from the training data, the proposed system could classify seven features. features with high accuracy rates in positively impacting the categorization process were manually created during extraction; therefore, the authors could not determine the importance of the source of the option. meanwhile, the turbo mode of c5.0 increased the training time nine-fold, and despite the use of the destination port to improve the speed, there was a risk of overfitting.



based on iot technology, al-qurabat et al. used compression and minimum description length technology to send data from sensors to set up a remote monitoring system for smart agriculture. the results showed that this method could significantly slow down the speed of data transmission and provide a better way to monitor in real-time. china was slow to start smart farming, and smart farming based on the internet of things is still in its early stages.



all works that use machine learning algorithms for network traffic classification must be retrained to remain robust in the face of new and diverse data. furthermore, most such efforts select a subset of applications or protocols to test the feasibility of classification. as a result, such solutions are most effective for training applications and protocols, posing scalability and adaptation concerns. in any discipline of traffic analysis, the problem of high false-positive rates is a crucial obstacle. unfortunately, due to the great diversity and variability presented in recent years, it does



in the present research, the ensemble model was designed using 3 machine learning from various categories. the researcher used random forest(r.f) from the tree categories, neural networks as computational machine learning(n.n.), and support vector machines(svm) as statistical machine learning.



the researcher conducted several experiments assessing the proposed system and having it compared with other comparable systems. the vpn-non-vpn dataset[11,24], utilized in numerous experiments by researchers like, was used in this study. the researcher utilized the intel(r) core(t.m.) i7-8700 cpu@



this section describes the proposed vpn and non-vpn traffic analysis and a classification system based on stacking ensemble learning. based on the empirical results, ensemble learning shows better performance when significant differences among the ensemble models exist. the stacked model involves several learning stages, and the ensemble learning approach has been the most popular. therefore, the researcher proposed a new system, which possesses 2 levels of structure, namely a base module and a combining module. it aims at employing the base modules and combining ones.



support-vector networks(svm) is a known classifier. this classifier can classify with a limited set of samples. however, it can have predictions optimized. researchers in ref. proved that svm is better than anns in terms of detecting intrusions while experimenting with basic security module(bsm) audit researcher applied cn to generate a classification matrix during the testing phase. after repeating this procedure for(k) times, he obtained(k) matrices of classification and averaged them by rows to generate a matrix an(n= 1,..., n). this procedure shall be repeated to the n classifiers. regarding the whole, the matrices of prediction pn will be combined into a set of training p. regarding all the an. they are averaged for generating a modern test set(a) for making a prediction result representing every classifier in level



in this section, the researcher presents the results obtained from the dataset described in subsection 3.1. the conclusion and the most important results are duly highlighted. the researcher used various measures utilized in regression to assess the performance level of the base methods and ensemble scheme. those measures were: accuracy, precision, recall, auc, f1_score,



the choose machine learning and the meat classifier at the final layer contribute to the complexity of the suggested approach. it is essential to select a base classifier with minimal complexity and a wide range of base classifiers. based on the above two ideas, we consider random forest(rf), neural networks(nn), and support vector machine(svm) as base classifiers(svm).



in our experiment, 10-fold cross-validation was used to estimate the classifier performance. the results showed that the proposed ensemble model performs better than any individual ml classifier. however, to determine if the differences between different model predictions are statistically significant, we used the wilcoxon signed-rank test to ensure statistical differences between the proposed ensemble model and each machine learning classifier. so, we perform the one-tailed hypothesis test. the null estimates the wilcoxon statistical results for the accuracy metric. based on the results, we can conclude that there are no significant statistical differences between svm and knn, which means they have the same performance in classifying vpn network traffic. however, when comparing the ensemble model with the machine learning classifiers, we found significant differences between them, whereas a p-value< 0.05 that mean can reject the h0.





