component based software development has gained a lot of practical importance in the field of software engineering from several researchers and also from industry perspective. finding components for efficient software reuse is one of the important problems aimed by researchers. clustering reduces the search space of components by grouping similar entities together thus ensuring reduced time complexity as it reduces the search time for component retrieval. in this research, we instigate a new a generalized approach for clustering a given set of documents or text files or components by defining a new similarity function called hybrid xor function for the purpose of finding degree of similarity between two document sets or software components. we construct a matrix called similarity matrix of the order n-1 by n for a given set of n documents or components or patterns by applying hybrid xor function. we define and design the algorithm for component or document clustering which has the input as similarity matrix and output being set of clusters formed dynamically as compared to other clustering algorithms that predefine the count of clusters. the output is a set of highly cohesive pattern groups or documents. the approach can be justified as it carries out very simple computational logic and efficient in terms of processing with reduced search space and can be also be used in general for document clustering or software component clustering.



the representations or descriptions of clusters so formed shall be used in decision making such as which software component or pattern need to be selected. one important feature of clustering is that all the patterns within a cluster share common or same properties in some sense and patterns in different clusters are dissimilar in corresponding sense. in view of software engineering, all the components within the same cluster have high cohesion and low coupling.



clustering algorithms may unsupervised or supervised [11]. in unsupervised clustering the partitions are viewed as the unlabelled patterns or components. supervised clustering algorithms label the patterns which can be used to classify the components for decision making. hence the partitions obtained by clustering process may be labeled or unlabeled.



a new method called maximum capturing is proposed for document clustering [3].maximum capturing includes two procedures: 1. constructing document clusters and 2. assigning cluster topics. the search complexity can be reduced by using the algorithm [10] where ever necessary as part of component retrieval.



step 6: at each step, find the cell with maximum value and document pairs containing this value in the matrix.group such document pairs to form clusters. also if document pair (i, j) is in one cluster and document pair (j, k) is in another cluster, form a new cluster containing (i, j, k) as its elements.



we are very much thankful to all the anonymous reviewers and mainly thankful to sri dr. c.v.gururao for his invaluable suggestions and support throughout the work. we are also thankful to mr. v.sreekanth, senior technical lead, business intelligence and warehousing architect,ibm, bangalore for his cooperation in carrying out the work.



c.srinivas is a masters degree holder in computer science and engineering from jntu, hyderabad. presently he is working as an associate professor in cse department at kakatiya institute of technology and sciences, warangal and is a research scholar at kakatiya university under the guidance of dr.c.v.guru rao. he has over 15years of teaching experience and presented papers at several national and international conferences and workshops. his areas of interest are software reuse, cloud computing.



