in this paper we construct a setting in which the question of when a logic supports a classical modal expansion can be made precise. given a fully selfextensional logic s, we find sufficient conditions under which the vietoris endofunctor v on s-referential algebras can be defined and we propose to define the modal expansions of s as the logic that arises from the v-coalgebras. as an example, we also show how the vietoris endofunctor on referential algebras extends the vietoris endofunctor on stone spaces.



we investigate systems whose state space can be described by a set x together with an algebra a of subsets of x. we think of the elements of a as the admissible predicates over x(or the observations that can be made of states in x). the operations of the algebra reflect the ability to built new observations from given ones using logical connectives. this interpretation, as well as the analogy with topological spaces, suggest to call these structures



the construction of vx is well-known and presented in section 3. the main contribution of this paper consists in giving a construction of va. this construction is motivated by the logical interpretation of referential algebras as models for selfextensional logics and uses the duality theory for selfextensional logics.



and complete w.r.t. their corresponding class of referential algebras. one of their features is that any two formulas are interderivable if and only if they are mapped to the same subsets in any referential algebra. thus for selfextensional logics, interderivability captures the identity of meaning(intension), in a compositional way. since referential algebras, that are the canonical semantic structures for selfextensional logics, can be regarded as abstract versions of general frames, selfextensional logics can be loosely thought of as generalizing modal logics. on the other hand, many logics that are neither modal nor intensional, like classical and intuitionistic propositional logics, are selfextensional as well. this paper is the starting point of a line of investigation that aims at a better understanding of the relation between selfextensional logics and modalities.



the main contribution of this paper is the construction of the vietoris endofunctor on s-referential algebras. one natural question is how this construction is related with the vietoris endofunctors on certain classes of topological spaces that are known from the literature, like the vietoris endofunctors on stone and priestley spaces. there is a natural way in which this construction extends the known ones, and it is based on the fact that those topological spaces can be represented as referential algebras. indeed, the categories of those topological spaces are isomorphic to full subcategories of referential algebras, in such a way that the following diagrams commute: gebraic logic, and the s-referential algebras. this duality is shaped around logic, for atlases and referential algebras correspond to one another in such a way that their logical content is integrally preserved. the key feature of this duality is that its logical import is in-built it its definition. the second part is about how this duality uniformly extends a wide class of known dualities, which includes the stone and priestley ones. the involved categories of algebras and topological spaces are shown to be respectively isomorphic to categories of atlases and referential algebras, in such a way that the duality functors are lifted too, and as the logical import of the duality for atlases and referential algebras is given by definition, this embedding provides a way to make the logical interpretation of the embedded dualities explicit and uniform. this comes as no surprise: the logical import of dualities has been widely recognized in the literature by showing their systematic connections with soundness and completeness theorems, and dualities have been widely used in the literature to give a logical interpretation to set-based structures such



in this section, we are going to show that we can perform the construction of the vietoris endofunctor on the referential algebras that correspond to stone spaces under the embedding described in section 2.2, and that this construction extends the familiar definition of the vietoris endofunctor k on stone spaces, i.e. that the following diagram commutes: like in the intuitionistic modal logic ik, and so on. other interesting modal expansions would include n-ary modal operators, and the list could continue. each of these cases would correspond to defining an endofunctor on referential algebras. perhaps extending the definitions of other hyperspace topologies to endofunctors on referential algebras would be a good starting point for a systematic investigation that would hopefully lead to a general methodology for wide classes of modal expansions.



