in this paper a comparison between two popular feature extraction methods is presented. scale-invariant feature transform (or sift) is the first method. the speeded up robust features (or surf) is presented as second. these two methods are tested on set of depth maps. ten defined gestures of left hand are in these depth maps. the microsoft kinect camera is used for capturing the images [1]. the support vector machine (or svm) is used as classification method. the results are accuracy of svm prediction on selected images.



feature vectors. the most common used local visual descriptors are sift and surf [5]. the theory about these descriptors as well as experiment description is presented in first chapter of this paper. the results of this experiment are shown next and conclusion at last.



in this experiment the database of depth images is created. sift and surf are applied on images of this database. resulted feature vectors are divided in to train set and test set. for creation of svm model the train set is used in process called training. next the test set is used for prediction. results are prediction accuracies of all tested images for sift and surf.



scale invariant feature transform is one of the mostly used local visual descriptors. the method works in two steps. detection of feature point as the first step. feature description as the second step. at the beginning of procedure the computing of gradient magnitudes and orientations of pixels are computed. this is done in neighborhood of key point by using the scale of the point. this will make choice on what gaussian kernel will be used for blur the image. feature vector is combination computed from the orientation of histograms within the sub-regions around the feature point. the feature vector is normalized at least. for more information about sift see [6].



capturing the color image of hand, its followed segmentation can take significant calculation time as well as processing power. some methods for segmentation aim for color of skin, as to detect the region of hand. results of such process can vary by the light condition or color tone of a particular person. microsoft kinect camera has the advantage that it uses infrared spectrum of light. as such it is invariant to light conditions and color of skin. kinect system can track parts of detected human body.



from results it is clear that the invariance to rotation of sift descriptor is a disadvantage here. some hand gestures, mainly 1 and 5, wave similar shape and occurs as one, only in different orientation. for human mind it is clear that gesture represented by class 1 has different interpretation that of class 5. another major error occurs for class 7 and 2. on both pictures the shape of hand is not the same but it is very similar shape.



