the large number of blog posts and comments created on blogging sites become more interesting when we look at the user profile statistics. according to an estimate by blogging.org, approximately 60% bloggers are hobbyists (infographic, 2012). they are not guided by business or professional motives, but voluntarily write about various things ranging from politics, religion to society. while a major reason behind the popularity of blogging is the ease of creating blog posts, low barrier to publication, open standards of content generation and the free-form writing style; but it is the urge of expression and availability of a convenient platform, which has made blogosphere to attain the current size and scale.



one aspect of the blogosphere that remained relatively unexplored till the recent times is that it is a rich and unique treasure house for cross-cultural psychological & sociological analysis as well. this paper presents our computational exploration of the blog text data with this broader aim. the section 2 describes the motivation for this work. the computational formulation combine used by us is described in section 3. the section 4 explains the dataset collection and its properties and section 5 presents the detailed experimental setup and results. the paper concludes with a summary of observations illustrated in section 6.



latent dirichlet allocation (lda) (blei et al., 2003) is a statistical method that uses a generative process (an imaginary process by which the model assumes that documents are generated by the topics). a topic is formally considered as a distribution over a fixed vocabulary. the main idea behind lda is thus to model documents as arising from multiple topics, more specifically we assume that some k topics are associated with the documents collection and that each document exhibits these topics with different proportions. all the documents in the collection thus share the same set of topics, but each document exhibits those topics with different proportions. with a good topic modeling algorithm, the inferred hidden topic structure resembles the thematic structure of the document collection. the bayesian non-parametric topic model, dynamic topic model, and the correlated topic model are few other variants of topic models (blei and lafferty, 2009).



singh vk, mukherjee m, mehta gk, tiwari n and garg s. opinion mining from weblogs and its relevance for socio-political research. in m natarajan, c nabendu and n dhinaharan (eds.) advances in computer science and information technology. computer science and engineering; part ii, jan. 2012, lnicst 85, springer, pp. 134-145.



