a study on the use of two different distance measures, euclidean distance and divergence distance, for fcm is conducted for an image classification problem in this paper.conventional fcm algorithm which uses euclidean distance measure utilizes only mean information from an image block for its feature while fcm algorithm with divergence utilizes both of variance and mean information. evaluationson a set of caltech databaseshow that divergence-based fcm gives higher accuracy when compared with some conventional algorithms with euclidean distance.



compared with som and k-means algorithm. by combining the ideas of fcm and divergence measure for the problem of image classification, we expect a better feature extraction procedure for more accurate classification scheme. the method adopts the fcm algorithm with divergence measure [3]-[5]for acquiring texture information from image data.



fcm calculates the parameters of center and membership values by applying all the data at once in batch mode. however, the d-fcm used in the proposed classifier calculates and updates their parameters at each application of each data vector as the gradient-based fcm [3]. the advantage of this iterative application and updating the center parameters was reported in [3]. when each data vector is presented to the network, the following can be also found :



a comparative study euclidean distance and divergence distance for fcm is conducted in this paper.when used for an image classification problem, conventional fcm algorithm which uses euclidean distance measure utilizes only mean information from an image block for its feature. on the other hand, fcm algorithm with divergence utilizes both of variance and mean information from an image block for its features. self-organizing map is also used in our experiments as a baseline method for the performance comparison purpose. experiments on caltech database are performed for a four category problem. classification accuracies from different classification schemes imply that divergence-based fcm is a better fit for image classification problem than the conventional fcm or som that use only the mean information as their features for image data. we can conclude that the divergence information of image data plays an important role in image classification problem and the resultant classification scheme that uses the divergence information as well as the mean information from image data is a better choice for image classification problem. however, a further effort should be given to find a feature extraction method for overcoming the confusion between motorbike data and airplane data.



