as several major participates in the process of employment of college students, governments, universities, businesses, media plays an important role in the information exchange on employment of college students. information barriers between government and universities mainly reflect in the government's conditions, not knowing about teachers of colleges, maladjustment of introduced policy situation in colleges and universities .information barriers between universities and enterprises is characterized not what businesses need to have quality personnel in colleges and universities, and not targeted for training; information barriers between government and enterprise mainly for government enterprises, enterprise talents did not fully grasp the development of, developing economic policies and development needs of local enterprises are different.



this article is as the base to asp. student employment information platform management system for the application of net background, research the following two issues: using the more advanced than asp asp. net technology to build systems model and classification module, using ado .net technology to access the database and build a complete management system of college student employment information public platforms. improving asenet technical security mechanisms, to comprehensive evaluation of the system, services for the ui layer, so the design of the business logic is directly related to the success or failure of the entire system. the data system is the bottom of system, which stores all the data of the system, the system database of this system uses sql server 2000 to achieve, through the ado. net to manipulate the data for the business logic layer providing data services, such as storing the results of data manipulation, data retrieval to return the results and so on.



database is the bottom, which stores all the system data. dynamic link library database operations (dll), which accesses to the database of application system directly, from aspnet2sqlhelper to achieve. data access layer is based on the database, providing data services for the web display layer, application program access the database through the layer. data access general operation of the database layer package to select, add, update and delete operations, but also provides for the business logic for access to the database interface or function or methods. it is associated with the database, while the presentation layer for web services, so the data access layer design is directly related to the success or future of the entire system.



students in basic information management by the page student manage. aspx to achieve, studentmanage. aspx. cs code-behind file for it. in the interface design phase, the first page studentmanage. add a listbox control on aspx, two lmage button controls and a button, names are studentlist, editbtn, deletcbtn, addbtn. which controls studentlist used to display information for all students, control editbtn, deletebtn, addbtn were modified to achieve student information, delete and add functions. initialization phase of the page. display information for all students to achieve the functionality achieved by the function page load0. among them, the student information from the function calls of the student class getstudent0 bindstudentdata0 way to get from the database and stored for use sqldatareader object reet results show that all students in the information, and then close the database connection.



based on asp asp.net application integration is the service technology integrated technology of the first important change, and it is considered a new generation of application integration technology. in the college students' employment service information system integration using asp.net service technology, beneficial to protection and utilization of college left over from the past heterogeneous system; at the same time because it is based on open standards and so on, also conducive to data sharing and reuse; at the same time as a modular and loose coupling, also simplified the maintenance, reduce maintenance costs. of course, asp.net service technology is currently in a period of development, many contents still not mature, for example to solve the security authentication, the service charge, transaction processing and reliability, and many other problems although some related standards, but to public college students' employment information platform security realization are further research needs, based on the grid technology in order to improve the university students' employment information platform, make it play out the business benefits should be.



