in the present digital world, digital images and videos are the main carrier of information. however, these sources of information can be easily tampered by using readily available software thus making authenticity and integrity of the digital images an important issue of concern. and in most of the cases copy- move image forgery is used to tamper the digital images. therefore, as a solution to the aforementioned problem we are going to propose a unique method for copy-move forgery detection which can sustained various pre-processing attacks using a combination of dyadic wavelet transform (dywt) and scale invariant feature transform (sift). in this process first dywt is applied on a given image to decompose it into four parts ll, lh, hl, and hh. since ll part contains most of the information, we intended to apply sift on ll part only to extract the key features and find a descriptor vector of these key features and then find similarities between various descriptors vector to conclude that there has been some copy-move tampering done to the given image. and by using dywt with sift we are able to extract more numbers of key points that are matched and thus able to detect copy-move forgery more efficiently.



the remaining contents of the paper are presented in following manner. next section deals with all previous work related to image forgery detection. section 3 completely explains the proposed method, section 4 deals with simulation results and evaluation of performance parameter and in the end, we have conclusion and references.



and also provide further recommendation for future research. mahalakshmi et al [14] provided detection of digital image forgery by exploring basic image manipulations done on the images. here they have presented techniques to detect image is manipulated using basic method like copy-move, region duplication, splicing etc. anand et al. [16] proposed an algorithm to detect the digital image copy move forgery to overcome the sustained attacks using sift and dywt methods.



through this paper, we are going to propose a new technique for copy-move forgery detection. first image is transformed into wavelet domain and sift is applied on the transformed image to obtain the features. as wavelet produces multispectral components, features are more predominant [7]. thus after obtaining interest point feature descriptor we go for finding matching between these feature descriptors to conclude whether tampering is done to the given image or not. our works confirm that sift features are an optimal solution because of their high computational efficiency and robust performance.



[8] introduced the dywt to overcome the drawback of dwt. dywt is shift invariant and is different from dwt because in dywt there is no down-sampling like that of dwt. the dywt of an image is computed using the algorithm [1].



we would like to thank our guide and coordinator of centre of excellence dr. avinash g. keskar for his constant encouragement and guidance toward this project. this project is funded from centre of excellence (coe), department of electronics engineering, vnit nagpur. special thanks to director vnit nagpur for providing institutional facilities and needed administrative and authoritative support during the work at vnit.



anand, vijay, mohammad farukh hashmi, and avinash g. keskar. "a copy move forgery detection to overcome sustained attacks using dyadic wavelet transform and sift methods." in proceedings of the 6th asian conference on intelligent information and database systems (aciids 2014), springer international publishing, pp. 530-542, april 2014.



