since there is no fixed infrastructure, the nodes in the network forward traffic for one another in order to allow communication between nodes that are not within physical radio range. nodes must also be able to change how they forward data over the network as individual nodes move around and acquire and lose neighbors, i.e., nodes within radio range. routing protocols are used to determine how to forward the data as well as how to adapt to topology changes resulting from mobility.



energy consumption attacks, and black hole attacks. deng et al. further discuss energy consumption and black hole attacks along with impersonation and routing information disclosure in. jakobsson et al. categorize attacks as manipulation of routing information and exhaustive power consumption, and provide detailed treatments of many characteristic attacks in.



hardware and software setup for our implementations. we then present details on the actual implementation for each of the three protocols. finally we detail the design of the experiments used to evaluate the protocols and explain why these tests are more relevant than other more common metrics.



process and update rrep and r ack messages. due to the fact that some of the operations we measure have a runtime less than the resolution of our timer(10ms as per the linux kernel), we perform a large number of operations back-to-back per measurement. we then make multiple measurements.



as the results show, there is much less per-packet overhead for taodv when compared to saodv. the main source of overhead involved the r ack packets. since the r ack packets are new packets rather than packet extensions, it was necessary to allocate a packet buffer in the message sending system of our implementation each time a r ack packet was to be sent. with other messages that were extended, the packet buffer was already allocated and the extension was simply written into free space at the end. this difference contributed significantly to the 0.193ms overhead for sending the r ack message.



the round trip tests for route discovery were performed for all three protocols. this was particularly important due to the differences in which node sends the rrep as described in section 4.3. due to the nature of the measurements, only one route discovery operation could be executed per measurement. overall 5000 of these



taodv, on the other hand, takes only 1.11 times as long as aodv. this shows that the trust-based calculations and additional information exchange can be used without incurring the overhead of saodv. while there is some expense for the trust calculations, it is not nearly as expensive as the cryptographic operations. the results show that taodv is indeed at the opposite end of the trade-off from saodv. this is due to the fact that the taodv information itself in each packet is not secured.



overall, the results show that there is indeed a wide spectrum in the tradeoff between cryptographic security and dos. by adding an appropriate lightweight security mechanism to secure the trust information in the routing packets, a hybrid protocol can be created which is less expensive than saodv and more secure than taodv. future protocol designs should seek to use various new combinations of smarter, trust-based metrics and lightweight security mechanisms in order to develop hybrid protocols across this spectrum.



in this paper, we have compared the saodv and taodv protocols for securing adhoc network routing. we presented the results of implementation and evaluation of both protocols on real resource-limited hardware. the expected difference between the two protocols was shown to be consistent with this real world scenario. these experiments showed that there is significant room between the two protocols for a secure hybrid protocol to be developed which takes advantage of the strongest points of both.



future work needs to delve further into the extensive body of work on various trust metrics. this includes the testing of other trust metrics for use in ad-hoc routing as well as developing the aforementioned hybrid protocols and testing their performance against the results presented in this paper. in addition, it is necessary to test the quality of the routing decisions produced by all of these protocols in a malicious environment.



