we all know that the punctuation system allows readers to distinguish between an interrogative sentence and a declarative one. in a similar way, the technical writer, who is the information tayloring expert, will be able to identify and use an appropriate visual representation provided by the annotation system in order to make gcp and lcp explicit. in some ways, ctml can be defined as a communicative traffic control system.



ctml is based on the concept that you may enhance and mutually control communication by visually processing text. the starting point is a visible global organization of text, and the ending point is the actual language of the text. this approach is soundly grounded in cognitive research that is explicitly aimed at explaining the complexities of how our minds apprehend, process and communicate knowledge.



describe: from latin describo: write around. it means complementing the original sentence with as much information as may be found interesting to add, without any specific constraints. it is represented by a spiral, which starts from a central point of the spiral indicating the original sentence and proceeds toward expanding the sentence at various degrees, linking it with other sentences coming in from different sources and found to be relevant to facilitate interpretation.



explain: from latin explano: unwrap, open up. it means that facts and reasons are given to support interpretation of a certain event, within a certain sentence. we may start by indicating the originating cause and proceed toward showing the effects or start with effects and go back to the cause, according to what is found to be more significant.



regress: from latin regredior: go back. it means that more information about a certain topic, presented within the sentence, is absolutely needed to gain a deeper understanding. it represents a specific topic focusing process and an in depth information expansion, which is activated only for that precise topic. the reader may want to consider if further information is needed and ask for availability of further resources.



express: from latin exprimo: push out and press out. it means adding personal opinions and individual feelings related to facts and events within a certain sentence. it indicates the most subjective mode of information packaging, which is openly seen as bound to very personal evaluations, judgements and emotional states.



