al is a subdiscipline in machine learning (ml) where the algorithm iteratively selects the most useful samples from the unlabeled dataset and queries the expert (or some other information source) to label them, so as to reduce the cost of labeling while improving model performance. to our knowledge, the application of al algorithm to drug discovery starts with the pioneering work of warmuth et al [4]. their work high- lighted the fitness of al to process labeling tasks in pharmaceutical research and development. recently, the topic has gained momentum, driven by the improved accuracy of ml prediction models [5]. several promising studies have been reported for different drug development projects in the last two decades such as focused library design [6], ra- tional de novo design [7], and drug combination [8]. given the long- standing practical verification of its effectiveness, al has shown poten- tial to be an easily deployable technology to assist researchers in their molecular reasoning and experimental design.



in addition to the application of prospectively guiding labeling tasks, retrospective applications of al on data sets with known labels have also been explored by researchers. first, deploying al on labeled data sets can rapidly compare different model architectures and query strate- gies to obtain the best al workflows before applying them in costly prospective studies [10,13]. secondly, al can serve as a data filtering tool [10] to remove redundant data that have already been understood by the ml model based on previous training data and thereby cannot offer any further knowledge. finally, some studies reported that the sub- sample of training data chosen by al are always balanced, even when the original dataset is highly imbalanced. it suggests that al algorithm may also contribute as a data balancing technique [14].



ding x, cui r, yu j, liu t, zhu t, wang d, chang j, fan z, liu x, chen k, jiang h, li x, luo x, zheng m. active learning for drug design: a case study on the plasma exposure of orally administered drugs. j med chem 2021.



