managing good customer relationship in an organization refers to the concepts, tools, and strategies of customer relationship man- agement (crm). crm as a tools with web/apps technology pro- vides organizations ability to understand customers or potential customers its usual practices and thus deliver a particular activities that might convince them to make transactions and decisions [1]. crm has been discussed in many fields such as business, health care, science, and other service industries. the massive adoption



big data have quantum leap to a digital era where public gener- ates a huge data in any sectors and industries. the amount of data are captured, collected, and processed by organization through dig- ital sensors, communications, computation, and storage had cap- tured information which was valuable to businesses, sciences, government, and society at large [3]. a large amount of data streaming from smartphones, computers, parking meters, buses, trains, and supermarkets [4]. search engine companies collect enormous amount of data per day and share these data to useful information for others as well as their own used.



and so on. since many organizations either privates or publics have realized the value of data gathered as an asset, data no longer trea- ted as its initial purpose. with the capabilities of processing huge amount of data, it has created a new industry of data analytic ser- vices. for example ibm and twitter involved partnership on data analytics for the purpose of selling analytical information to corpo- rate clients in order to provide businesses a real-time conversa- tions to make smarter decision. with ibm analytical skills and twitter massive data source, the partnership had created an inter- esting strategic partnership as both partners leverage on their respective strength and expertise [13]. big data is considered as the recent development of decision support data management [14]. big data have big impact towards businesses ranging from crm, erp, and scm. in the next section is discussed recent litera- tures on crm and big data [15].



analytics. value is generated from big data processing that sup- ports the right decision. organizations need to refine and process it to gain value from big data analytic [21]. for instance, value gen- erated from big data analytic can help to reveal the conditions and save life of a new born baby by recording, examining or analysing every heart rate of an infant, data analytics help to finalize the indi- cators of the new born [22]. one of the applications on the use of big data is to optimize machine or device performance. for instance, toyota prius is installed with cameras, gps and sophisti- cated computers and sensors to ensure safety precaution on the road automatically [23].



of crm strategies by having the abilities or knowledge on how to recognize big data and its advantage. while, big data analytics is a process to reveal the variety of data types in big data itself. there are some crm strategies that can happen through big data and big data analytics.



big data in crm can certainly enhance long term relationship with customers [40] and manifest into an impressive set of crm activi- ties [41]. there is an example of the successful usage of big data in crm when netflix used big data to run their streaming video ser- vice [42]. instead of using traditional methods of data gathering, they were able to find out what their customers want and made measurable marketing decisions. big data can perform better crm strategies than any processes with double the speed.



crm with big data features becomes more aggressive in term of marketing strategy like push notification through smartphone to the potential target audiences. web / apps users who make com- ment, liking page, or comes back visiting web or apps are potential customers are targeted for pushed notification. technically, there are many third parties for apps or web that can help business to set up push notification right to the users. for instance, there are also many plugin supports web push facilities in cms based web- site. notification can be set up auto generated or manual whenever new contents are available directed at customer convenience in the form of text message, link sharing, or smartphone notification offering promotion at nearby shop. crm aims to quantify sales transactions, promotion, product awareness, while its strategies for building long term relationship and loyalty. businesses cannot simplify marketing strategies only focusing a short term relation- ship with customers without any path in attracting, retaining, and extending for long term relationship.



