one of the main computational tools for structure-based drug discovery is molecular docking. due to the natu- ral representation of molecules as graphs (a set of nodes/atoms connected through edges/bonds), deep graph learning has been successfully applied for multiple tasks on this area. this work presents an overview of deep graph learning methods developed within this research field, as well as opportunities for future development.



in this section, a brief introduction to deep graph learning in molec- ular docking is provided. detailed descriptions of the field and its ap- plications in multiple areas can be found in [7,8]. in simple terms, a graph is a data structure consisting of a set of nodes connected by edges.



mesh representation of the protein surface. regardless of the graph rep- resentation employed, nodes and edges encode chemical properties at a surface, atom, or residue level (shape index, atom type, residue type, etc. for nodes; and distance, bond type, etc. for edges).



far from competitive when its output conformations are not further re- fined by well-stablished docking software. on the other hand, diffdock addressed the docking task as a generative modeling problem, imple- menting a diffusion generative model (dgm) over the degrees of free- dom involved in the docking process (translation, rotation and ligand torsional angles), learning a distribution over ligand poses conditioned on the protein structure. in addition, a confidence model is also trained for diffdock to score the generated poses; preliminary results available for these two models combined suggest an improved performance in terms of speed and accuracy in comparison to standard docking soft- ware.



although significant advances have been achieved in the develop- ment of dgl models for molecular docking, important challenges need to be addressed. most of the developed models have been tested in datasets where the protein is treated as a rigid body. the graph represen- tations employed to describe the complexes often include the distance between atoms as an edge feature, allowing an implicit description of the flexibility of both protein and ligand (since different conformations would yield to different graphs). however, the impact of this flexibility in the models has not been studied in detail.



