for this study, we have collected more than 100 research papers from scientific databases, including pubmed, web of science, and scopus, in the area of deep learning-based computer vision. further, we investigated all these works that leveraged deep learning-based computer vision technologies to address key agriculture tasks such as plant health monitoring, disease and weed identification, irrigation management, soil analysis, livestock management, yield estimation, etc. the main objective of this study is to evaluate the penetration of deep learning-based computer vision approaches in key agricultural problems, and this review is intended to be useful to agriculture re- searchers as well as general computer vision researchers who are inter- ested in the application of computer vision solutions to automate and solve potential agricultural problems. the practical implications of these technologies along with major challenges in implementing large-scale applications were also constructively pointed out in this study.



convolutional neural network-based deep learning architectures are popular for computer vision tasks like image classification. a convolutional neural network is a type of neural network architecture that takes input images and extracts relevant features to efficiently identify and classify images. cnn uses labels to perform convolutions and generate feature maps. the introduction of imagenet dataset that contained millions of tagged images had laid a foundation and benchmark for building advanced computer vision-based models (kriegeskorte and golan, 2019; miikkulainen et al., 2019; yoo, 2015). lenet-5 was one of the earliest cnn proposed by yann lecun (lecun



the image classification mainly identifies the class, a specific image belongs to. the image classification approach is often not successful when there are multiple objects in the same image. object detection aims to detect the location of objects in the image/video. object detection task comprises two major components; class information and location in- formation. the location information is described by bounding boxes around the target object. object detection architectures such as yolo (you only look once) (redmon et al., 2016), ssd (single shot multibox detector) (liu et al., 2016), faster-rcnn (region convolutional net- works) (ren et al., 2016) are widely used for object detection and auto- mation across different domains including agriculture.



a generative adversarial network (gan) is a special type of neural network used for unsupervised learning. gan is an approach to genera- tive modeling that can learn to mimic a given distribution of data. these models effectively reduce the data into its fundamental properties or generate new data points with varied properties. the application of gans has achieved state-of-the-art performance in many image generation tasks, such as text-to-image synthesis (xu et al., 2017), super-resolution (ledig et al., 2017), and image-to-image translation crop productivity (kushwaha et al., 2022; suchithra and pai, 2020). tra- ditional soil texture analysis entails taking soil samples and bringing them to a laboratory, where they are dried, crushed, and sieved before being used. for coarse textured or sandy soils, sieving is the most typical laboratory analytical method, while for smaller textured particles, a hy- drometer or pipette approach based on sedimentation theory is used (kushwaha et al., 2022; sudarsan et al., 2016).



similarly, zhang et al. (zhang et al., 2003) proposed a soil texture classification system that uses the wavelet transform approach to dis- tinguish between different types of soil. wavelet transform, which is a strong image and signal analysis method due to its multi-resolution ca- pabilities, is used to extract features. a set of training instances is used to create a maximum likelihood (ml) classifier. this method of ml



similarly, chang and lin (chang and lin, 2018) developed a compact intelligent agricultural machine which is capable of autonomous weeding and variable watering on the cultivated ground, using a combi- nation of computer vision and multitasking. the system classifies the plants and weeds in real-time so that it can weed and water while main- taining an average herbicidal rate of 90% and a deep soil moisture level of 80%. this strategy has a lot of potential because it allows for not only multitasking integration but also resource utilization in its entirety.



plant stress induced by biotic and abiotic factors is expressed in the plant canopy as multiple symptoms. in case of water stress, the plant closes stomata and delays photosynthesis and transpiration activities indicating colour changes in the leaf and temperature (nilsson, 1995). similarly, nutrient deficiencies-related symptoms are typically visible in leaves color and texture (xu et al., 2011). image analysis can detect these changes in a pattern quite effectively. deep learning-based com- puter vision approaches are viable solutions in addressing timely dis- ease identification and avoiding consultation of human experts. the availability of a large number of public image datasets such as plantvillage (hughes and salathe, 2016), plantdoc (singh et al., 2020) have proliferated the research in the area of disease identification and many works have taken encouraging steps towards disease-free agri- culture (hassan and maji, 2022; ji and wu, 2022; nagasubramanian et al., 2019).



computer vision approaches come to rescue at this point by accurately identifying the objects as precise spraying of weeds depends on the ac- curate identification and location of weeds. recently, several studies were carried out by researchers on adaptability of computer vision tech- nology for the agronomic classification of plant species at the field level, viz the classification of crops from weeds, off types etc. (sau and ucchesu, 2019; sau et al., 2018; subeesh et al., 2022). detailed applica- tion of the same in the automatic identification of plant species based on the leaf recognition pattern has been proposed for preserving and cataloguing plant species (putzu et al., 2016) along with the botanical characterization of germplasm (lo bianco et al., 2017). methods of achieving weed detection at the field level mainly include the utilization of computer vision technology using the traditional image processing and deep learning. when, the conventional methods of computer vision are used, extracting the different features such as colour, shape, texture etc., and combining them with the machine learning methods such as the svm becomes necessary. but with the improvement in computing power, the deep learning algorithms can beneficially extract multidi- mensional and multi-scale spatial and semantic feature information of weeds through alexnet, vggnet, resnet, etc due to their enhanced ca- pability for image data expression thereby avoiding the disadvantages of traditional methods of feature extraction. the application of deep learning in agronomic classification of plant species has gained momen- tum after the outbreak of cnn and alexnet (krizhevsky et al., 2012b). hall et al. (2015) have utilized the cnn architecture in classifying leaves of 32 species of crops and weeds by capturing nearly 1900 images of the same.



utilization of cnn architecture in the classification and differentia- tion of weeds from different species of wheat, sugarbeet, corn, soybean, sunflower, etc. has been proposed by kussul et al. (2017), while the modified version of vgg16 for the classification of barley, grass, oil crops and weeds have been proposed by mortensen et al. (2016).



early and accurate yield estimation is essential for farmers and other stakeholders in making strategic decisions on post-harvest planning, policy-making and crop management (al-gaadi et al., 2016; chlingaryan et al., 2018; wei et al., 2020). some of the studies underline that yield estimation using deep learning-based computer vision on ae- rial images is superior to traditional approaches. in a study conducted by yang et al. (2019) rice grain yield from low-altitude remote sensing data was used to estimate the rice grain yield using convolutional neural net- works. the models were trained on both rgb and multispectral images collected by uav, and results showed that the cnn trained on these im- ages outperformed the vis-based traditional regression models for grain yield estimation at the ripening stage.



introduced to the farming community. several technology-driven solu- tions were introduced into precision livestock farming to ensure opti- mal health and output of animals also. the technology startup cainthus (cainthus) offers a computer vision-driven ai system for dairy farmers to monitor their cows and send timely alerts and reports via associated applications. smart cameras are deployed to watch over the activities of the cows to provide the right amount of feed available on a timely basis. similar to this, piguard (piguard), an innovative live- stock management software, leverages deep learning-based computer vision approach to monitor the health status and behavioral patterns of animals.



reliability, etc. as these solutions integrate several digital technologies starting from the internet, iot, cloud computing or edge computing, and wireless sensor networks, the system should accommodate security features for all these technologies and ensure data and device integrity, data accuracy, and availability. from land preparation to harvesting, dif- ferent stakeholders are leveraging new ways to improve the ability to derive insights from images, object detection and tracking, etc. deep learning - computer vision models will undoubtedly continue to expand and become more innovative and intelligent, handling more complex computations in agriculture with utmost precision. above all, for obtaining efficient and desirable outputs, strong business cases with the capability to scale on a larger scale is necessary.



