a design method for network attack and defense simulation platform is discussed in this paper. firstly the component and function of the platform are analyzed. then visio second development method is used to construct the virtual network topology. the parsing of virtual network topology is also researched and the relative flow sheet is described. lastly an example is carried out to test performance of the platform. simulation results show the effectiveness of the proposed method.



a design method of virtual network attack and defense simulation platform is constructed in this paper. the composition and function of the platform is analyzed. the establishing and parsing of virtual network topology is researched based on the visio secondary development method, and the simulation is also presented.



the creation of a virtual network topology is necessary for the construction of virtual network environment. there are various methods for the creation of a virtual network topology. the secondary development of drawing software technology is one of the most effective methods. it can simplify the development of the graphics editing module, and the capabilities of devices can also be carried out in the programming software. so visio secondary development technology is used in the creation of virtual network topology.



microsoft office visio 2003 activex control (visio drawing control) can provide the full function for visio application as an embedded component through the visio object model. visio drawing control can be driven by events or codes in the host application. in addition, the visio drawing control provide chart production environment in the context of the application user interface for users[3].



in the establishment of the mold, the drawing cell symbol is mapped out in the drawing area firstly. then, the shape sheet spreadsheet is used to set properties for the drawing cell. finally, the completed drawing cell will be dragged to a new mold, which can be saved with a new name.



the control on the drawing cell with program contains two aspects: one is obtaining information of the drawing cell; the other is writing information to the drawing cell and controlling the state. the function shape.getcells() is used to obtain information of the drawing cell, and the specific values selected from shape sheet should be determined in accordance with the relevant parameters. for example, if there is a row called



the composition and function of virtual network attack and defense simulation platform are analyzed in this paper. the creation of virtual network topology is achieved through the visio secondary development technology and the parsing method of virtual network topology is also researched. finally, the platform is tested by network attack and defense instances. simulation results show that the main function of the virtual network attack and defense simulation platform is realized, and the design objectives are achieved.



