this paper presents an improved operation of the custom power park with a newly proposed control algorithm for series active filter. custom power devices operated for multiple customers in an industrial area form a common platform called custom power park (cpp). cpp delivers high quality high reliable supply than from the utility at different grades. the enhanced operation of cpp is proposed with gto based static transfer switch, shunt and series active filters.the shunt active filter provides the harmonic and reactive power support for the park while voltage sag/swell and voltage harmonic mitigation is done by means of series active filter with a newly proposed control algorithm. the entire model of cpp is developed and operation is verified using matlab/ simulink model.



impossible for most situations and now days cannot provide different grades of power. in such a context a custom power park (cpp) can be built and operated so as to provide different grades of power to same ordifferent customers at different tariffs.the different grades are achieved by incorporating different devices in the park which will be discussed in later sections.



the series active filter (seaf) provides the voltage support and voltage harmonic elimination for the aaa loads. at certain time the voltage of both the feeders goes below 90% of the nominal voltage.such times the series active filter provides voltage support to the aaa loads. in case of increase of the voltage levels it can absorb the excess voltage, provided for values up to 10% of over voltages. another situation there exists in which the seaf provides 100% voltage support when both the feeder voltages fall below 60% and during the startup delay of the dg. thus seaf should be capable of supporting the entire aaa loads for 3 to 5 seconds



the dg/res should be capable of providing the entire aa and aaa loads in case of failure of both the preferred and alternate ones. it generally takes some time to start up and synchronization is completed in few seconds. instead of using dg the renewable power can be supplied to the aa and aaa loads through voltage/ current source inverters which can achieve with no time delay or very small delay.



[3] except the dg turn on and dg ready checking capabilities.depending on the voltage detection scheme the speed of operation (isolation and switching) will vary.the voltage detection scheme used is the abc to dq0transformation method.the detection scheme is similar to [3]. the measured voltage is converted to dq0 axis with abc to dq0 transformation technique, then passed through a second order mid rejection filter to attenuate the voltage transients and send to the cpp main controller for conditional checking.



has reduced to 70%. the a and aa loads are receiving low voltage same as the feeder voltage whereas aaa voltage is maintained due to the series active filter support. at 0.125s the voltage has increased to120%.at this event also the aaa loads are receiving nominal voltage. at 0.2s harmonics is injected to the system voltage and this has no effect on the aaa load operation due to the voltage harmonic compensation capability of the series active filter. thus the aaa loads are resistible to feeder voltage issues.



