cowpea (vigna unguiculata (l.) walp) is one of the most ancient human protein food sources and has existed as a crop since neolithic times. it is used for both consumptions and as industrial raw material for other products. the world produces over 8 million tones of dry cow- pea seed yearly; with 90% percent of the production from africa and asia. america and europe are the largest exporters, though being the least producers. this is because asia and african producing countries can not meet international export standards (henshaw, 2008, iita, 2015, acb, 2015, snapp et al., 2018, rawal and navarro, 2019, faostat, 2020, fao, 2021). this study's goal is to change that trend, by developing an automated cowpea seeds quality detecting and sepa- rating device for less developed producing countries.



experiments. this is because a constant sample weight of 2 kg was used throughout the evaluation experiments. 2 kg represent 8.3% of the device material carrying and processing capacity at a time. from this information, this study deduced that the device can carry and pro- cess 24 kg (100% utilization) at a time.



an automated (artificially intelligent) quality separating device was developed with three units. these units are the metering, automating, and belt conveying outlet. to evaluate the device; its separating effi- ciency, throughput, and maximum capacity were modeled and opti- mized. an optimal: impurity separating efficiency of 92%, impurity separating throughput of 2.689 kg/h, and maximum impurity separat- ing capacity of 32.781 kg/12 h were achieved. the effects of operating factors like cowpea variety, cowpea export grades, and metering speed on device evaluation parameters like impurity separating: effi- ciency, throughput, and maximum capacity were established. it was also established that the metering speed of the device should not go below or above 20 rpm for optimal impurity separating results. this ar- tificially intelligent (smart) device can also be used in cowpea seeds grading processing line to achieve cowpea seeds export grade quality.



