to fill this gap, this paper provides a comprehensive study on dp in edge computing-based smart city ap- plications, covering various aspects, such as privacy models, research methods, mechanisms, and applications. our study focuses on five areas of data privacy, including data transmitting privacy, data processing privacy, data model training privacy, data publishing privacy, and location privacy. in addition, we investigate many potential applications of dp in smart city application scenarios. finally, future directions of dp in edge computing are envisaged. we hope this study can be a useful roadmap for researchers and practitioners in edge computing enable smart city applications.



[24]. in this work, we focus on dp applications in five specific areas, including data transmission, data processing, data model training, data publishing, and location privacy, for smart city application scenarios based on edge computing. the reason for this is that the first four areas are typical data management stages, and location privacy is the most representative privacy issue in edge computing-based smart city applications.



definition of edge computing, the definition of dp, and its mechanism. in section 4, we enumerate the typical privacy challenges for edge computing-based smart city applications. section 5 reviews the privacy- preserving technology and the advantages of dp in the environment of edge computing. in section 6 we summarise the application and imple- mentation of dp for the smart city applications for edge computing. section 7 envisages future directions, including anomaly detection and data attack defence. finally, section 8 concludes the paper.



reviewed articles considered differential techniques to achieve the privacy protection mechanism. the existing privacy protection methods contain dp, secure multipart computing, private information retrieval, etc. the advantages of dp are enhancing data availability, reducing the computation complexity, etc. the index content is detailed in a description in section 5.



edge computing is a new and innovative computing exemplification. edge computing uses an open framework that provisions resources to the end devices from the network edge, which integrates network, computing, and storage and application services. hence, edge computing can play a substantial role in smart city applications, for instance the deployment of network video cameras, the construction of intelligent sensing system platforms, data acquisition, transmission, and processing. to provide readers with a better understand the concept of edge computing, we summarise some representative terminologies efficiency was greatly improved by the hilbert curve. nie et al. [59] proposed a dp tensor computing model to solve data analysis security problem in sdn-based iot. in the tensor computing model, dp is used to protect data privacy transmitted to the cloud layer. zhang et al. [20] designed a lightweight dp protection mechanism in order to solve the



untrustworthy environment guo et al. [62] proposed a mechanism named online multi-item double auction (mida) to solve the method of allocating finite edge servers to iot devices they improved the mida mechanism on the basis of dp to protect sensitive information from being compromised. zhang et al. [65] put forward a federated learning framework supported by mobile edge computing that integrates the model partition technique and dp simultaneously. they reduced the



gaussian, laplace mechanism, and exponential mechanism. in subse- quent work, many mechanisms have occurred successively. the stair- case mechanism and the stage laplace mechanism have been proposed to reduce the noise power introduced by dp. these two mechanisms can reduce the influence of data query and function computation [70]. the improved matrix gaussian mechanism (imgm) for matrix-valued dp has been proposed to solve the influence of data correlation [71]. the dp bounds and the corresponding central limit theorem have been proposed to solve multiple queries and iterative calculations [72]. some re- searchers proposed the privacy amplification approach of different scenarios to reduce the loss of the dp mechanism to performance, such as the privacy amplification based on sampling, iteration, reorganisa- tion, etc.



in this section, we identify several privacy challenges in smart city applications in an edge computing environment. we begin by providing examples of privacy and security cases that have arisen in this context. we then offer a concise overview of the typical privacy challenges that smart cities face. this section focuses on addressing the following issue



in the smart city application scenario, duan et al. [82] classified data privacy issues into three categories: data privacy, information privacy, and knowledge privacy. however, the broader issue of data security has become a significant concern, encompassing data privacy, data avail- ability, and data integrity [83]. in recent years, there has been extensive research on data privacy protection to address this concern.



encryption technology has emerged as a primary means of protecting privacy in recent years. for instance, xia et al. [87] developed an encryption method to safeguard sensitive data and prevent unautho- rized access. liu [88] proposed methods for constructing a secure public-key encryption scheme, while li et al. [89] presented a time-domain multi-authority outsourcing attribute encryption method to address data collection and sharing in edge computing. however, encryption technology has a significant disadvantage in that key man- agement and distribution can be costly and complex, limiting its prac- ticality in some contexts.



vulnerable to attack [100]. the edge server provides access control for users, and the data collected by the end devices can be offloaded to other untrusted servers. the privacy challenges for data collecting in edge computing-based smart city application scenarios are summarised as follows.



in edge computing environments, the wireless transmission of data poses a significant risk of data breaches as it is susceptible to eaves- dropping and data theft by hackers. furthermore, the distribution of devices in the network increases the potential of data breaches. as a result, ensuring the privacy of transmitted data is a major challenge in edge computing environments.



in the edge computing environment, the proliferation of devices and distributed computing has led to an increase in data interaction between devices. furthermore, the development of data mining and analysis technologies has also increased the risk of privacy breaches. as a result, the issue of privacy protection in data release has become a significant challenge for edge computing [103]. the challenges to privacy in data publishing in this environment can be summarised as follows.



the first group of privacy protection methods include data distur- bance [104], data anonymity [105], and data encryption [106,107]. data disturbance mainly adds noise and random disturbance to the original data to distort sensitive data. however, this technology cannot guarantee that the data statistics are disturbed, as well. therefore, the data release with dp technology [44] using data disrupting technology has also appeared one after another, but the computational cost is relatively high. data anonymization changes or publishes the data to be used in some way to prevent key information from being identified. data anonymization is used for the published trajectories [108] and health data [109]. nonetheless, data anonymization is unable to handle the huge size of data processing [110]. data encryption technology trans- forms a message into meaningless cipher text through an encryption key and encryption function. then, the plaintext was restored into the cipher text by receiver through the function and key to decryption.



[56] proposed a dp method for preserving location privacy that reduces the computational complexity and resource consumption at the edge node. gai et al. [124] developed a privacy-preserving mechanism for iot and blockchain in the edge computing environment to enhance trust- worthiness and achieve optimal task allocation through dp. addition- ally, liu et al. [57] designed a dp framework for data release in the edge computing environment, which enhances the accuracy of queries. in summary, the main advantages of dp in edge computing are as follows.



this section focuses on the applications and implementation of dp in smart city scenarios based on edge computing [8]. we begin by intro- ducing the detailed classification of dp research for these scenarios. then, we explore the application of dp in various stages of data man- agement in the edge computing environment, highlighting its benefits in protecting data privacy. specifically, we focus on four stages, including data privacy in transmitting, processing, model training, and publishing. in addition, typical data privacy issues, such as location/trajectory pri- vacy protection, are also discussed. some typical applications of smart city, such as smart manufacturing service, smart logistics, and data data. in addition, malicious attackers predict user behaviours according to the data. for example, the china railway service 12,306 data transmission security incident caused the leakage of 600,000 accounted and 4.1 million pieces of contact information in december 2018 [130]. data transmission that is not properly handled can cause a great infringement on user privacy. therefore, the privacy preservation of



edge computing environment. for secure computing methods, shafagh et al. [134] designed a platform named pilatus to protect the security of data transmission. aujla et al. [135] designed a framework named sdn-aided to provide privacy-preserving with the secure grid-based cryptograph system for edge-cloud interplay data transmitting and sdn-assisted management. shen et al. [136] showed a scheme with bilinear mapping and homomorphic encryption to judge the positional link of multi-query keywords on the transmitted data.



on the dp method, nie et al. [59] put forward a dp tensor computing model (dptcm) to protect the data privacy for transmitted to the cloud. they implemented the privacy of transmitting data through the flexible computing function of edge computing. at the same time, the dp method does not generate excess overhead. hassan et al. [35] reviewed the security of data transmission with transportation systems. they divided dp implementation into three types in the transportation sys- tem: the networks of railway freight and vehicular, the data of auto- motive manufacturer. wang et al. [137] considered the privacy of the connected vehicles, which mainly contains the process of the vehicles transmitting data to the roadside unit and base station, such as the speed and location. they proposed a system architecture named privacy-preserving vehicular edge computing (pp-vec) by disturbing the context information of connected vehicles to address the privacy protect issues of the transmitting process.



data processing usually involves data mining and retrieval. data mining is the process of extracting the potential information for data that is hidden and unknown but potentially useful from a large amount of data. the goal of data mining is to build a decision model that predicts future behaviour based on data from past actions.



in the research field of edge computing environment, some re- searchers have focused on dp to protect the privacy of data mining for the smart city application scenarios in recent years. to economise computing costs and increase efficiency, sun et al. [30] considered that data mining applications complete the data mining task when the data are not shared by owners aspiration. they focused on the tree-based distributed data mining scheme with dp in the edge computing envi- ronment. the participants built a decision model with their data; then, they shared the model after being injected with noise. sharma et al.



[142] proposed dp using an algorithm named fuzzy convolution neural network (dp-fcnn) to address the problem of data accessed by an un- authorized user. the data providers were responsible for injecting noise into the datasets that the data owners uploaded. the scalability, model accuracy, and processing time of dp-fcnn are showed good efficiency.



[145] proposed an attack method for the training data is adjusted by conspired malicious participants in strategically. the attack made a certain dimension weight of the aggregation model is rose or fallen by the pattern. he et al. [146] designed a new attack method to compro- mise the inference data privacy in a collaborative deep learning system. they verified the effectiveness and generalisation by evaluating the attack method under different settings, models, and datasets. ji et al.



opp (output perturbation) and ojp (objective perturbation), to protect the model training data privacy, and the algorithm satisfies dp. in order to abate the computing cost of the local device, mao et al. [150] enabled training of deep convolutional neural networks to face recognition models with the dp mechanism. they indicated that the training accu-



dp applies to data publishing scenarios in various fields, such as histograms and matrix mechanisms. dwork et al. [68] designed the laplace mechanism with a histogram, and laplace distribution (lap 1 ) noise was added to the data. su et al. [159] proposed a method named privpfc, which involves publishing data for classification based on dp. they use the exponential mechanism with a novel quality function. they indicate that using fewer steps to avoid spreading the privacy budget is too thin. yan et al. [160] focused on the data published in v2g networks, and proposed dp algorithm to protect the privacy of the data release in v2g networks. they defined a variable sliding window to improve the utility of data.



anism of the haar wavelet transform, and they added noise to the haar coefficient. jia et al. [162] showed an approach called structurefirst, which uses square error and an exponential mechanism to compress the original histogram. acs et al. [163] combined the adaptive hierarchical



clustering technique and the greedy bisection strategy to propose the method named p-hpartation. jia et al. [162] designed a method named noisefirst, which obtained the optimal partitioning of data grids by adding noise and then splitting and merging. however, noisefirst is only applicable in the one-dimensional histogram. therefore, xiao et al.



[164] presented a dpcube that can obtain multidimensional v-optimi- sation histograms by combining the kd-tree and the unit division to solve the one-dimensional histogram. these five methods have common advantages that support longer-range count queries, and the query ac- curacy is high. miao et al. [56] proposed a new noise quadtree data-basedapproach to statistical data release for moving objects. the approach satisfies the dp-preserving model. liu et al. [102] proposed a location data and distributed data release method in the edge computing environment to preserve user privacy with the release of location data. they constructed a dp complete quadtree and adjusted the quadtree by the threshold to balance the error.



in this section, edge node privacy and edge layer privacy are dis- cussed. there is a mass of individual and business edge nodes in the smart city scenarios based on edge computing [18]. those nodes contain the ability to compute and process data. the edge node is a business



miao et al. [56] proposed a privacy-aware framework named mepa for edge computing, the location privacy of the edge node as an anon- ymous central server is protected. du et al. [18] considered the privacy issue of any edge node dealing with the data. they strengthen the per- formance of privacy preservation by injecting noise to the blocked data beforehand and then computing and processing it though each edge node. zhang et al. [175] and zhang et al. [176] prevented the node from re-identifying the sensitive information revealed by the attackers.



in the smart city scenarios based on edge computing environment, edge layer privacy is the data privacy of edge layer servers. the data streams from the cloud and infrastructure layer are received, processed, and forwarded in the edge layer [177]. therefore, in the operation of data processing exists some malicious attacks. for example, the data will be transmitted to malicious nodes in the edge layer [83].



layer. they proposed the markov decision process-based a dynamic customisable model to protect privacy. sharma et al. [142] proposed a method that implements dp using a fuzzy convolution neural network (fcnn) with a laplace mechanism for injecting noise to the privacy leakage at the edge layer.



in summary, for edge node privacy, most research work considered the tree structure of the node in the edge computing environment. the existing method for dp demonstrates that the smaller the privacy budget is, the higher the privacy level. however, the noise increases as the privacy budget decreases. therefore, some researchers proposed the privacy threshold to control the mean absolute error (mas). for edge layer privacy, first, the scalability measures the system/framework to support a building number of input data. second, the processing time measures the individual datasets in the system/framework to evaluate the performances. finally, the accuracy evaluates the efficiency of dp with the privacy budget value. a smaller privacy budget will normally lead to lower accuracy.



through the summary of existing studies, we can see that dp is one of the best solutions to privacy problems in smart city applications. how- ever, there are still many deficiencies in the environment of edge computing, which are discussed in section 7. for example, the param- eters are adjusted to improve the data utility according the datasets size. the dp algorithm cannot provide effective privacy preservation because the privacy budget cannot be adjusted. in addition, untrusted edge de- vices with intentionally or unintentionally leaking privacy are considered.



behaviours in real-time. the application applies in many scenarios, such as time-series data monitoring, fraud in the financial context, data anomaly in feature engineering, data anomaly in the elt process, etc. nonetheless, data anomaly detection mainly contains multi-sensor data anomaly detection and network anomaly detection in the edge computing environment.



in recent years, ma et al. [189] considered the data poisoning attacks can be defended by dp method. they showed that private learners are resistant to that attack when the attackers are only able to poison a small number of datasets. shadi rahimian et al. [190] protected the machine learning model by adding noise to the gradients and as an alternative method. they evaluated the effect of two dp techniques against mem- bership inference attacks.



in smart cities, the research direction of data attack defence has great potential and needs to be further explored. for example, the gap be- tween the theoretical limit and the empirical performance remains an issue. we believe that the dp method can enhance the development of smart cities and can produce optimal services in smart cities.



blockchain technology is an alternative for constructing transparent security to store or govern data. however, blockchain is a type of decentralised ledger storage system that contains tamper-proofing. it is ambiguous to develop a solution method for edge computing and blockchain for smart city applications. gai et al. [191] proposed an implemented method for dp in blockchain systems to prevent



in smart city applications, the edge nodes need to share data effec- tively, although the communication between each edge node is unreli- able. however, there is a series of sensitive information that leads to data owners being unwilling to share. furthermore, users are increas- ingly concerned about sensitive personal information in smart city applications.



federated learning is a collaborative method for achieving global model training without sharing any raw client data. it involves training a local machine learning model by the data owner and updating the model to an aggregator for collection and averaging. one of the advantages of federated learning is that it can handle heterogeneous local datasets that may be non-independent, identically distributed, and unbalanced among various participants [4,181,195]. lu et al. [196] designed a data sharing scheme to preserve the devices privacy in the industrial internet of things. for their viewpoint, the data-sharing issue is identified as machine-learning issue by incorporating dp and federated learning. the model-sharing is parameter-sharing of the machine model instead of revealing the raw data of participant. zhang et al. [197] proposed a medical data privacy protection framework to protect privacy by adding dp noise into federated learning. they considered the data privacy of patients in the smart health application. wang et al. [198] designed a control algorithm to solve the issues of low resources for the federated learning model in iot devices.



in the edge computing environment, the core infrastructure provides network access and centralised cloud computing services functions for devices at the edge. however, the core infrastructures are not fully trusting in many cases, and thus, there is a high possibility of security- threatening attacks, including privacy disclosure, tampering with data, dos (denial of service) attacks, and service manipulation. therefore, the privacy of the core infrastructure is a research direction with dp methods for smart city application scenarios based on edge computing. the edge data centre is one of the main components in edge computing and takes charge of virtualisation services and multiple management services. nevertheless, edge data centres on some security issues, for instance the attacks of physical, privacy breaches, service manipulation, and data tampering. therefore, the research of data se- curity and privacy protection technology for the smart city application [137] proposed a k-neighbour joint optimisation algorithm for task offloading and resource distribution using a histogram with local dif- ferential privacy [199]. the method can protect the privacy of con- nected vehicle and reduce the effect of the task offloading algorithm. in future work, research direction should focus on managing privacy for resource distribution and proposing optimal privacy algorithms for the different tasks of resource management.



with the advancement of edge computing, smart city applications have become an essential part of our daily life, ranging from manual operation to automatic operation and first generation wireless cellular technology to 5th generation mobile communication technology (5g). the advantages of edge computing technology, such as the sinking of resources, ultralow latency, high bandwidth, and high real-time computing power, make it a wide framework in smart city scenarios. nevertheless, massive data are involved in data transmission, data processing, model training, and data publishing to provide better ser- vices in smart city scenarios. however, important privacy and security issues are raising great concerns at the same time.



in this paper, we present a comprehensive summarisation and thorough comparisons of the existing dp methods for edge computing- based smart city applications. our coverage of dp in edge computing is extensive, encompassing a wide range of application areas including data transmission, data processing, model training, data publishing, and location privacy. compared with other data privacy protection solu- tions, the dp mechanism can achieve better performance in the energy cost, data types, latency, computing cost, accuracy, processing time, data utility, and model performance.



yao x, zhou x, ma j. differential privacy of big data: an overview. in: presented at the 2016 ieee 2nd international conference on big data security on cloud (bigdatasecurity), ieee international conference on high performance and smart computing (hpsc), and ieee international conference on intelligent data and security. new york, ny, usa: ids); 2016.



ezabadi sg, jolfaei a, kulik l, kotagiri r. differentially private streaming to untrusted edge servers in intelligent transportation system. in: presented at the 2019 18th ieee international conference on trust, security and privacy in computing and communications/13th ieee international conference on big data science and engineering. rotorua, new zealand: trustcom/bigdatase); 2019.



sun y, he q, qi l, rafique w, dou w. dpoda: differential privacy-based online double auction for pervasive edge computing resource allocation. in: presented at the proceedings of the 2nd acm international symposium on blockchain and secure critical infrastructure; 2020. new york, ny, usa.



yao a, jiang f, li x, dong c, xu j, xu y, et al. a novel security framework for edge computing based uav delivery system. in: presented at the the 20th ieee international conference on trust, security and privacy in computing and communications. trustcom; 2021. p. 2021.



