means it can achieve the screening of super large molecular library with minimal computational cost. here, it was applied to screen the enamine real library with 1.4 billion commercially available compounds. ac- cording to the deep docking protocol, a series of relatively small molec- ular subsets were first extracted from the library to iteratively train deep learning models to identify molecules with favorable scores as potential active compounds. then, the model with the best performance on en- richment of true active compounds was used to predict the remaining molecules in the enamine database. the molecules with high docking scores were then selected as virtual hits (vhs) and docked to the crys- tal structure of a2ar receptor and automatically filtered with pharma- cophore models which characterized the binding modes of known a2ar antagonists. the filtered compound poses were further examined by vi- sual inspection, which generated the final hit list for virtual screening. to validate the effectiveness of the computational method, tens of com- pounds were selected for in vitro assay and a series of novel a2ar antag- onist was successfully identified. the screening results demonstrated the effectiveness of the deep docking method to accelerate virtual screen- ing from a super large molecular library and the potential to facilitate traditional virtual screening.



a2ar is a g protein coupled receptor (gpcr) located in the cell mem- brane. when bound with adenosine by its extracellular domain, the re- ceptor is activated and then stimulates the release of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (camp) in cells. based on this mechanism, a cellular assay named ultra lance camp (perkinelmer, catalog no. trf0262) was employed to determine camp produced by cells upon a2ar ac- tivation through time resolved fluorescence resonance energy transfer technique. in the reaction kit, europium-labeled camp tracer complexes compete with cellular camps to bind with the camp-specific antibod- ies labeled with alexa fluor 647 dye. in the absence of cellular camp, maximum fluorescence signal was generated at 665 nm. the cellular camp upon a2ar activation decrease the fluorescence signal, while an- tagonists can reverse this signal proportionally. the inhibition of a2ar antagonists was quantitatively evaluated through this method.



crystal structures of a2ar, two hydrogen bonds with asn253 (i.e., hb1 and hb2) and one aromatic feature corresponding to the pi-pi stacking interaction with phe168 (i.e., ha1) were found to be common for all a2ar antagonists. they were included in each pharmacophore model. considering the different binding modes among the a2ar antagonists, the hydrogen bonds with his278 (hb3) and his250 (hb4) and the hy- drophobic interaction with trp246 (hp2) were optionally selected to combine with the common features, which resulted in seven pharma- cophore models. after pharmacophore filtering, 13718 molecules which at least possessed three common pharmacophore features (hb1, hb2 and ha1) were remained. among them, the number of molecules matching the hydrophobic feature hp1 was much larger than with other phar- macophore models. in fact, majority of known a2ar antagonists made hydrophobic interaction with trp246. only a few molecules matched all



