communication and sensing integrated networks (csins) refer to the ability of physical digital space perception and ubiquitous intelligent communication at the same time. these networks realize the perception and coop- erative communication of multidimensional resources through the cooperative work of communication and sensing resources and have the ability of intelligent interaction and processing of new information flow. first, this study proposes the technical architecture of an enhanced csin (e-hfwn), studies its key technologies and performance indicators, and explains the air interface technology, including frame structure design, carrier aggregation, channel detection, physical skyline mapping, beamforming and management, resource allocation and scheduling. in the resource allocation scheme, an actor-critic reinforcement learning (rl) framework is used to divide the wireless resources. the goal is to maximize the amount of mutual information (mi) and minimize the end-to-end delay of the sensing terminal. then, the performance of the e-hfwn is tested, including nu- merical simulation of wireless resource management, system peak rate, capacity, end-to-end delay and communication perception waveform sidelobe ratio. finally, from the results of the e-hfwn index test, the e- hfwn is further enhanced on the basis of 5g mmwave. the enhanced sensing function can provide a priori information for the optimal and rapid scheduling of distributed computing power and provide richer data sources for artificial intelligence (ai) services and applications to enhance the robustness of the training model. the e- hfwn can contribute to the development of technologies related to 6g synaesthesia computing integrated networks, promote the consensus between academia and industry.



processing where information is distributed layer by layer [2]. the existing wireless network architecture and related technologies have been unable to meet the emerging application needs beyond the 5g (b5g)/6g era. it is urgent to develop new network architectures and enabling technologies that efficiently utilize resources and intelligently adapt differentiated applications [3].



synaesthesia integrated network architectures and related technologies [5]. in addition, the rise of ai technologies represented by machine learning, rl, neural networks, etc., has had a broad and profound impact in various fields, such as communication network optimization, intelligent perception and control applications, and has promoted the improvement of the overall performance of communication and sensing integration [6].



based on this, if 6g realizes the integration and symbiosis of communication and sensing capability on the basis of ai technology, it will give 6g networks the ability to perceive the physical world all the time and everywhere. they will not only fully meet the blending and interworking of multidimension intelligent perception of network nodes but also support wide area intelligent cooperation based on communi- cation capability [7], realizing the vision of 6g csin. ai services and applications will also be sent to thousands of households with the help of 6g csin to help thousands of industries to realize the ubiquitous interconnection of man-machine and objects, intelligent cooperation, and the interaction of the physical world and digital world.



an ai rl method is introduced into the e-hfwn system, which is aimed at the channel resource allocation and scheduling algorithm of communication and sensing. in this study, an actor-critic rl frame- work is used to divide the wireless resources. the goal is to maximize the amount of mi and minimize the end-to-end delay of the perception terminal.



construction and testing of the experimental platform. for the e- hfwn system, this study tests platform performance with commu- nication and sensing. first, the rl is simulated to allocate the communication perception channel resources, and the actor-critic learning framework is fitted from convex optimization theory to achieve the goal of maximizing the mi amount of the system perception signal. second, the communication performance of the e- hfwn system is tested, including the peak rate, capacity and end-to- end delay. compared with 5g and 5g mmwave networks, the enhancement effect brought by air interface technology is compared and analyzed. then, a sensing performance test of the e-hfwn system is used to calculate the sidelobe ratio of communication and sensing waveform and obtain the peak and integral sidelobe ratio. this result shows that the e-hfwn system has a strong environment sensing ability.



the integrated waveform centered on communication realizes the function of perception based on the existing communication wave- form. constant envelope waveform design should be considered so that the perception can transmit signals with a maximum available power budget without signal distortion. it has good correlation characteristics, which minimizes the sidelobe levels of the spatial spectrum and reduces the false detection rate of target detection. in the integrated waveform design scheme based on cellular mobile and wi-fi networks, ofdm and fmcw waveforms are combined to improve the resolution and accuracy performance of endogenous sensing to increase the time-bandwidth product [20].



in future smart factories, the dense access of a large number of ter- minals will bring the problem of network resource congestion and interference. under the premise of ensuring the basic csin performance constraints of the business, the terminal nodes of dense access can utilize resources in various dimensions to achieve the purpose of optimizing other indicators. for example, reasonable allocation of shared band- width for sensing communication, optimization of target positioning performance under power constraints, control power allocation of sub- carriers to optimize system performance, etc. [29].



structure; therefore, it is not very effective for communicating short packets. to provide high efficiency, rt data frames sent by ue to different bss are concatenated into a single frame-through-frame ag- gregation. the e-hfwn inherits the carrier aggregation function in the nr standard. it can support up to 16 carrier aggregations, so there will



to distinguish communication and sensing signals, the e-hfwn sets the rank of matrix w to 2. at this time, w1 defines four adjacent beams corresponding to four columns of b, so the function of w2 is to choose which direction to transmit. since w2 reports each subband information, the beam direction and interpolarization phase can be adjusted, so w1 and w2 can adjust the directions of the sensing and communication beams, respectively.



after beamforming in the previous section, it needs to be managed. the beam management of the e-hfwn includes functions such as beam scanning and tracking. the purpose of beam management is to improve the signal transmission gain of bs and ue, increase the data transmission rate, and enhance network coverage. on the one hand, based on inte- grated synaesthesia waveform technology, the dual functions of communication and sensing can be realized by adjusting the beam di- rection; on the other hand, beamforming technology can also be used to construct multiple beams to achieve the dual functions of communica- tion and sensing in different directions.



p3 process: sometimes high-precision terminals (such as mmwave radars) also have their own refined beams. at this time, the p3 process is used to determine the refined beams used by the terminal. in the p3 process, the transmit beam on the bs remains unchanged, the ue switches the receive beam and then selects the beam with the best signal quality as the beam of the service channel. the beam selection and switching on ue are not perceived by bs.



since the allocation of communication and sensing channels is crucial in the e-hfwn, starting from data acquisition, determines the basis of service quality in the entire system. the actor-critic deep rl algorithm performed numerical simulations. first, parameters are set. when simulating the e-hfwn numerically, the number of bss is set to 1, and the number of ues is set to 20, including n communication modules stronger; the capability of the system itself includes technical indicators such as system bandwidth, beamforming capability, resource sched- uling, and anti-interference. based on the above conditions, the design of the e-hfwn system has a significant improvement in cell throughput. on the basis of the original 5g mmwave, the system bandwidth is increased, mu-mimo pairing is optimized, and the mu-mimo ratio is increased. at the same time, the actor-critic deep learning communication-sensing resource allocation algorithm (section 3.6) im- proves the efficiency of resource allocation and further improves the cell throughput rate.



on the outgoing port of the air interface. in the delay design of the e- hfwn, the time is divided into three time-slot windows: protected window, unprotected window, and guard. in each slot window, a different stream is transmitted. therefore, for the service flow, if it ar- rives at the switch at the same time, it is sent according to its priority,



the time when the packet arrives at the receiving terminal. the results show that the qci index of normal services has a large interval for sending packets in time. under the time slot action mechanism of the e- hfwn frame structure, the end-to-end delay is determined, and there is no interference flow affected.



long time. in this state, the queuing delay of only a few data packets is caused by the scheduling mechanism of the e-hfwn (section 3.6), so that the end-to-end delay of data packets is on the whole in a straight line, with occasional delay oscillations (jitter).



the authors declare the following financial interests/personal re- lationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: jianquan wang reports financial support was provided by ministry of science and technology of china. jianquan wang reports a relationship with ministry of science and technology of china that includes: funding grants, xiangna han reports financial support was provided by ministry of science and technology of china. xiangna han reports a relationship with ministry of science and technology of china that includes: funding grants.



