downey mildew(induced by plasmoparaviticola), and grape powdery mildew(induced by uncinulanecator(schw.) burr.), are two significant diseases of grape in numerous parts of the world(guanlinli and wang, 2011). these diseases affect both leaves and grapefruits. downey is particularly severe under severe precipitation, high relative moistness, and significant stretches of dampness on leaves and fruits(indu et al., 2010); whereas high humidity and moist weather favours the development of powdery disease(mundankar et al., 2008). crop protection products(fungicides) are applied to minimize these diseases. fungicides are expensive for farmers and can cause ecological contamination(weissteiner et al., 2014),(zhang et al., 2011)(zhao and pei, 2012). thus, only applied when there are vibrant signals about the existence of the disease.



u.s. and australia have various systems in place that use both hourly and daily meteorological conditions to anticipate the onset of a variety of different crop diseases but not for grapes. the disease model developed by(thomas et al., 1994) computes the day-to-day average temperature along with the hours of moisture and propose treatment solutions for ascospore infections. they discuss the model testing in california climatic conditions. there is a need for devices to quantify the climate conditions in real-time such that onset of grape disease can be predicted. in recent years, modern mechanisms from the internet of things(iot) have been utilized to acquire real-time onsite observations(pesonen et al., 2014) and it is crucial to build disease models referenced to these iot devices.



the rest of the paper is organized as follows: section 2 presents the background. section 3 details methodology used to detect downey and powdery mildew grape disease, in vineyards. section 4 shows experimental results of this system followed by insights on performance. section 5 concludes the work and proposes commendation of future work.



temperature sensor and rain sensor measure essential environmental parameters viz. temperature, humidity and rainfall. each sensor is managed by a nodemcu(a low cost firmware and development board particularly designed for internet of things(iot) based applications(nodemcu esp8266, 2020)). nodemcu is programmed by the



this section discusses about the experimental setup deployed in the field and actual results captured from the field at real time. captured data from iot sensors were analyzed using the algorithm stated to test for the occurrences of downey and powdery mildew. after analysis the proposed system is compared with the existing system which reveals that the proposed system is worth detecting the occurrence of both diseases.



depending upon the proposed system, the grape diseases can be effectively identified at a much early stage. the novelty of the proposed system lies in using the rain sensor along with temperature and humidity sensor. the accuracy of disease notification is therefore considerably increased then if a rain gauge was omitted. thus, the projected device demonstrates higher performance in recognizing grape diseases.



from the above results we can observe that 94.4% of recordings were correctly identified in case of downey mildew disease occurrence and 96% for powdery mildew. thus, the accuracy achieved has helped the farmers to reduce the use of fungicides on grape plants. this increases the quality of grapes.



