smart electricity application and electric energy data acquisition has become an important part of china's smart grid construction. and smart electricity application is physically based on the electricity data acquisition system. it likes an interactive bridge between power supply enterprise and the user.



testing section provides 3 module testing positions, each for the concentrator carrier module, three-phase meter carrier module, single-phase meter or collector carrier module. in order to reflect the real measured carrier module power characteristics, this system needs a high speed, and high precision sampling. the voltage and current signal can be considered as a continuous signal f (t) . the sampling process can be



the measurement section is controlled by a microcontroller, which measures the current and voltage in real-time. this part is the key part of the measurement apparatus. with the control of the microcontroller chip cs5550, adr431 and an analog switch 74hc4052, measuring section collects the current, voltage real-time acquisition.



cs5550 cirrus logic chip contains two - a/d converter (adc) and a highly integrated serial interface - a/d converter. one adc interface of cs5550 for measuring carrier module current, is connected to the output of 74hc4052. another adc interface for measuring carrier module voltage, through the divider resistance means, is connected to power supply of the carrier module. cs5550 serial interface is connected to the spi of the mcu.



protocol. connected to the three-phase ammeter carrier module uart is used to simulate of three-phase electricity meter communication protocol. connected to the collector of the carrier communication module is used to simulate collector acquisition communication protocol. the uart connected to the pc completes the instruction interaction with pc, which control the measurement and reading of the measured data.



the measuring device of mcu uses uc/os-ii system. uc/os ii (micro control operation system two) is a based on the rom operation, which can be trimmed, preemptive real-time kernel, with a high degree of portability, particularly suited to the microprocessor and a controller. it has an nice operating system performance for the real-time operating system (rtos).



pc interaction tasks in serial initialization, by blocking the way for collection of data receive mailbox. in the interrupt, when receiving data, it will judge whether it has a frame header and a tail sign, for combination a complete data packet. after receipt of a complete data packet, it will be sent to a data receive mailbox. when pc interaction task receives a data mail, pc will make a crc trading, and then parses the command word, finally give the response, sent to pc.



the task simulation concentrator sends the data to concentrator carrier module, and triggers the carrier module in the transmit state, to measure the power characteristics. the way using tasks with interrupt mode is similar and pc interaction task. collector and meter simulation task is using a similar way to simulation.



