etc. with regard to such challenges, this paper further proposes a novel approach of employing belief-network (also popularly known as bayesian network) to reduce dependency on the rules and learning algorithm similar to the reinforcement learning for iot edge controller. usefulness of such belief-network, i.e. proba- bilistic approach to learn from experiences was earlier discussed in [23].



i.e. each connected thing is contextualized by answering those questions. based on this context information (conin), controller would provide knowledge to the connected things. for instance, in a smartfarming scenario, the controller would collect raw- data from sensing devices, for example, about water condition and controller would first contextualize the raw-data into conin, and based on the knowledge about the conin, controller would take actions; an action could be determining when and how long to sprinkle water. context information is further processed to exe- cute the dap. this is what edge controller has been proposed as to provide the low-level intelligence. now based on the knowledge hierarchy, from raw-data to wisdom, below each of the steps cor- responding to low-level intelligence is discussed.



learning experiences which are then forwarded for learning and/or prediction. learning and/or prediction usually take place in scenar- ios when one or more conin is missing. in such cases, first associ- ated conin (aconin) is obtained which is along with the available conin then decides whether to predict or learn an action.



the example shown above, i.e. prior-belief for each conin, works when all the conin are available. however, in a situation when one or more conin is unavailable, the iot controller would be unable to make a decision since one or more of the beliefs to



internet of things, the next technological revolution in the cur- rent world, applications have so far been relied on cloud-based solutions for computations, analytics, etc. while the advantages offered by cloud-based solutions cannot be disregarded; the need for computations, analytics closer to the things, i.e. at the edge is gaining growing attention recently. edge analytics are dominated by rules which are computationally expensive and fail to scale well with the ever-mounting number of things in the iot paradigm which mandate to look into alternative solution such as ai based solutions. ai based solutions can also cater for uncertain and new events. the paper has presented an ai based distributed- intelligence assisted future internet of things controller (fitc) that utilizes both edge and cloud based intelligence. more specifi- cally, edge controller is employed to provide low-level intelligence and cloud controller would provide high-level intelligence.



moreover, to complement the work presented in this paper, few of the work that can be done in future are as follows: further ver- ifying the fitc performance by incorporating a cloud controller along with the presented edge controller; a distributed edge con- troller for large scale iot applications such as traffic/environment management, smartagriculture, etc.; learning was limited to expe- riences and finding new belief in this paper and this could be extended to learning other actions such as when to sense data, activate an actuation, when to send data to cloud, etc.; providing multi-modal context-aware reasoning (can) in order to employ edge controller for various iot applications. it would also be inter- esting to investigate dynamic behaviour of the controller.



rahim rahmani earned a ph.d. in communications in heterogeneous networks and he is an associate professor of computer science at the department of computer and system sciences at stockholm university, where his research focuses on col- laborative ubiquitous services and context-aware mobile communication and ser- vice architectures and self-organizing application infrastructures. he is a member of the editorial board of international journal of wireless networking and commu- nications.



