abstract presented in this paper is a novel system for face recognition that works well in the wild and that is based on ensembles of descriptors that utilize different preprocessing techniques. the power of our proposed approach is demonstrated on two datasets: the feret dataset and the labeled faces in the wild (lfw) dataset. in the feret datasets, where the aim is identification, we use the angle distance. in the lfw dataset, where the aim is to verify a given match, we use the support vector machine and similarity metric learning. our proposed system performs well on both datasets, obtaining, to the best of our knowledge, one of the highest performance rates pub- lished in the literature on the feret datasets. particularly noteworthy is the fact that these good results on both datasets are obtained without using additional training patterns. the matlab source of our best ensemble approach will be freely available at 2357.



recent developments in the first class of shallow methods include the work of pinto et al. [9] who describe a set of v1- like features that are composed of a population of gabor fil- ters. v1-like features are insensitive to view, lighting, and many other image variations. the feature sets proposed by cao et al.



[10] that encode the local micro-structures of a face into a set of more uniformly distributed discrete codes are excellent examples of a good tradeoff between discriminative power and invariance, as are patterns of oriented edge magnitudes (poem), a feature set proposed in [11,12]. poem is an ori- ented spatial multiresolution descriptor that captures informa- tion about the self-similarity structure of an image. some feature sets that work well in the wild include those described in [13] and more recently in [14], where monogenic binary cod- ing (mbc) is presented. mbc decomposes an original signal into three components (amplitude, orientation, and phase) that encode local variation. a histogram is then extracted from the local features. this efficient descriptor significantly lowers the time and space complexity compared with other gabor- transformation-based local feature methods.



another approach for overcoming variations in pose and illumination is to combine texture-based descriptors with other techniques. for example, in [15] an accurate 3d shape model works by mapping images that vary in pose to a full frontal view. discriminative models capable of handling aging, facial expressions, low light, and over-exposure are then obtained by comparing billions of faces. one approach described in tures obtains, to the best of our knowledge, one of the highest mean accuracy ratings on the feret datasets published in the literature. moreover, the fusion produces very good results on the lfw dataset. the ensemble based on the fusion of learned and handcrafted features improves performance on both the feret and lfw datasets even further.



mined according to the sum rule by summing up the scores/ similarity values (simi) obtained from each classifier. in this work, the simple angle distance is used in the feret datasets, where the aim is identification. linear svms [42] and sml [25] are used on the lfw dataset, where the aim is to verify a given match.



the lbp operator represents the difference between a pixel x and its symmetric neighbor set of p pixels placed on a circle radius of r (when a neighbor does not coincide with a pixel, its value is obtained by interpolation). in this work we use p =8 and r = 1. we also use lbp with uniform bins. the lbp descriptor is extracted from a set of subregions that are



step 2. calculate the magnitude accumulation. a local his- togram of orientations is calculated considering all pixels within a local image patch (cell). as a result, each pixel car- ries information about the distribution of the edge direction of a local cell.



step 3. calculate self-similarity. in this step the accumulated magnitudes are encoded across different directions using the lbp-based operator within a larger patch (block). based on previous experimental results [26], the dense lbp (dlbp) is used in our experiments instead of standard lbp.



the poem descriptor depends on a large number of parameters that need to be tuned specifically for each applica- tion. in our experiments the number of orientations dis- cretized, and the size of the cell, the size of the block, and the number of neighbors considered in lbp have been set according to [43] (i.e. to 3, 7, 5, and 8, respectively).



each step in mbc (the multiscale log-gabor filtering, sub- region histogram computing, and feature combination by lda) involves several parameters. in our experiments, all parameters have been set according to those in the original paper. however, in this work an unsupervised feature trans- form (pca), as described below, is used instead of lda. the final descriptor is composed of three feature vectors, one for each component (amplitude, orientation, and phase) of the original signal, labeled in the experimental section as mbca, mbco, mbcp, respectively. the three descriptors are not fused at the feature level but rather at the score level according to the weighed sum rule: mbc = (mbca + mbco + mbcp)/3.



hasc [39] is applied to heterogeneous dense feature maps and simultaneously encodes linear relations by covariances (cov) and nonlinear associations through information-theoretic measures, specifically entropy combined with mutual informa- tion (emi). the basic supposition behind hasc is that linear relations alone are unable to capture the structural complexity of many objects. using covariance matrices as region descrip- tors is advantageous because it is low-dimensional and robust to noise and pose changes; however, a single pixel outlier can dramatically alter results, making the descriptor highly sensi- tive to impulsive noise. moreover, the covariance among two features is optimally able to encapsulate the features of the joint pdf only if they are linked by a linear relation. emi overcomes these limitations. the entropy (e) of a random vari- able measures the uncertainty associated with the value of the variable, and the mutual information (mi) of two random variables captures the generic dependencies (both linear and nonlinear). hasc takes advantage of these two properties by dividing an image into patches and creating an emi matrix. each diagonal entry of the emi matrix captures the amount of uncertainty or unpredictability related to a given feature whereas off-diagonal entries capture the mutual dependency between two different features.



hasc boosts discriminative performance because the com- bination of cov with emi captures different features of the joint underlying pdfs. multiple experiments in [39] demon- strate that hasc is superior in performance to its individual components cov and emi. this makes hasc a versatile descriptor for a large range of applications. hasc is extracted separately from subregions of the whole image. the subregions



the original lbp does not preserve structural information among binary patterns; therefore, a set of co-occurrences among adjacent lbps (i.e. a co-occurrence matrix among lbp pairs, or coalbp) is extracted and converted to a coalbp histogram feature. the rotation invariance of coalbp is obtained by attaching a rotation invariant label to each lbp pair [46]. in this work the riclbp descriptor has been tested using the following lbp parameters: (r = 1, p = 8), (r = 2, p = 8) and (r = 4, p = 8).



we tested several approaches for dimensionality reduction in our experiments to find the best way of reducing the dimen- sionality of each descriptor before the classification step. according to [48] nearly all spectral methods provide approx- imately the same accuracy when used with the same energy cut. in our experiments, however, the best performance was obtained using pca [41], one of the most popular methods for unsupervised dimensionality reduction. pca maps feature vectors into a smaller number of uncorrelated directions calcu- lated to preserve the global euclidean structure, and it also extracts an orthogonal projection matrix so that the variance of the projected vectors is maximized.



in the feret datasets, where the aim is identification, we use the angle distance as the similarity function to compare two faces. the angle distance between two vectors is the size of the angle between the two directions originating from the observer and pointing toward these two vectors. it can be calculated as the angle whose cosine is the ratio between the dot product of the two vectors and the product of their magnitudes. in the lfw dataset, where the aim is to verify a given match, a gen- eral purpose binary classifier can be used to distinguish between genuine and impostor matchings. in this work we test linear svm [40] and sml [25].



dimensional feature space. we used different kernels in our experiments, but the best results were obtained with a linear kernel. the svm classifier is trained to distinguish between genuine and impostor matches. therefore, a training pattern is the combination x of two descriptors xi and xj and a label



our proposed system is evaluated on the feret [53] and lfw [54] benchmark databases. the feret database con- tains five datasets: fa (1196 images), fb (1195 images), fc (194 images), dup1 (722 images), and dup2 (234 images). the gallery set is fa, and the other datasets are used for test- ing. fb contains pictures taken on the same day as the fa images, using the same camera and under the same lighting conditions. fc is a dataset of pictures taken on the same day as fa but with different cameras and under different illumina- tion conditions. the dup1 and dup2 datasets contain pictures that were taken within the same year as fa for dup1 and later than one year for dup2. the standard feret evaluation pro- tocol involves comparing images in the testing sets to each image in the gallery set. in our experiments, all feret gray



the official testing protocols of both datasets are employed in the experiments reported in this section. for lfw, the image-restricted/no outside data results is used. the perfor- mance indicator is the recognition rate in the feret datasets and accuracy in the lfw dataset. accuracy is the proportion of true classification results (both true positives and true neg- atives) in the population.



(m) denote the computational costs for the preprocessing steps, the extraction of descriptors, and matching, respectively. t(d) includes the extraction of both descriptors (poem and mbc) from all nine preprocessed images. the computation time of the feature transform, performed by pca, is negligible.



