in order to optimize the phellinus linteus fermentation process, the fermentation temperature, the inoculum size, the rotation speed and the bottling capacity have been regarded as the independent variables and the fermentation yield has been considered as the dependent variable. the quadratic regression orthogonal rotating combination design method has been adopted to build the model for phellinus linteus fermentation process. and this model has been also analyzed in this paper. the results have shown that the most important factors which affect the fermentation yield include the fermentation temperature, the inoculum size, the rotation speed and the bottling volume. there exists the significant interaction between the inoculum size and the bottling volume. the optimal fermentation conditions of phellinus linteus are: the bottling volume is 120ml, the inoculum size is 17ml, the temperature is 26? and the rotation speed is 135r/min. at this time, the theoretical extreme value of fermentation mycelium production is 24.51mg/ml. the experimental results have shown that the model fits well with the actual situation and the credibility is higher.



phellinus igniarius (l.ex fr.) quel is a traditional and perennial medicinal fungus. its fruiting body can be used as the medicine[1]. due to the constraints of biological characteristics and external environment, the fruiting bodies of the wild phellinus linteus are scarce and they are not easily cultivated. the study has indicated that the phellinus linteus polysaccharide is the main medicinal components of phellinus igniarius quel, which has the good anti-tumor effect[2]. and the effect of the mycelium polysaccharide after fermentation is the same as the one of fruiting body polysaccharide[3]. as the fermentation cycle is short and the fermentation is not constrained by seasons and environment, the development cost of phellinus linteus can be greatly reduced. therefore, the development of phellinus linteus mainly refers to the fermentation development[4, 5].



the fermentation yield of mycelium is closely related to the fermentation conditions. in this paper, the fine strains after mutagenesis have been selected as the test materials. and the orthogonal rotation combination design has been adopted to build the model for fermentation process. the model analysis is helpful to optimize the fermentation conditions, which can lay the foundation for the actual production.



200ml seed medium is installed in 500ml flask. the slope strains are put into it and they should be statically cultivated in 28? incubator. the flask should be shaken in the morning and evening. when the medium is evenly covered by the white flocculent mycelium, the cultivation is finished. it should be put into the refrigerator at 4?. the seed medium is consisted of 35g glucose, 10g peptone, 5g yeast extract, 1g potassium dihydrogen phosphate, 0.5g magnesium sulfate and 1000ml water.



from formula (3), it is found that z1z2 is the only significant interaction item, which indicates that there exists a significant interaction between the inoculum size and the bottling capacity. when the bottling capacity is lower, the inoculum size will be increased. the fermentation yield of phellinus linteus is slowly increased and it has been decreased in some intervals. when the bottling capacity is higher, the fermentation yield of phellinus linteus will be rapidly increased with the increase of inoculum size, which is more in line with the actual production situation.



