deep learning and computer vision techniques have gained significant attention in the agriculture sector due to their non-destructive and contactless features. these techniques are also being integrated into modern farming systems, such as aquaponics, to address the challenges hindering its commercialization and large-scale imple- mentation. aquaponics is a farming technology that combines a recirculating aquaculture system and soilless hy- droponics agriculture, that promises to address food security issues. to complement the current research efforts, a methodology is proposed to automatically measure the morphological traits of crops such as width, length and area and estimate the effective plant spacing between grow channels. plant spacing is one of the key design pa- rameters that are dependent on crop type and its morphological traits and hence needs to be monitored to ensure high crop yield and quality which can be impacted due to foliage occlusion or overlapping as the crop grows. the proposed approach uses mask-rcnn to estimate the size of the crops and a mathematical model to determine plant spacing for a self-adaptive aquaponics farm. for common little gem romaine lettuce, the growth is esti- mated within 2 cm of error for both length and width. the final model is deployed on a cloud-based application and integrated with an ontology model containing domain knowledge of the aquaponics system. the relevant knowledge about crop characteristics and optimal plant spacing is extracted from ontology and compared with results obtained from the final model to suggest further actions. the proposed application finds its signifi- cance as a decision support system that can pave the way for intelligent system monitoring and control.



have made a great contribution to the research community, the analysis shows that none of the studies has focused on using these traits as a key feature to assess plant spacing. hence, to complement the existing ef- forts, this study proposed a new methodology to determine morpholog- ical traits of lettuce crops grown in aquaponics facility and assess the plant spacing between grow channels. additionally, based on the capa- bility of instance segmentation, mask-rcnn is used to estimate the morphological attributes in this study (kang et al., 2020; lu et al., 2019).



after data collection, object detection and instance segmentation are performed on crop images to achieve class, mask, and bounding box values for lettuce foliage. in this study, mask r-cnn is used which is a state-of-the-art method in the field of object segmentation. instance segmentation is a computer vision task for detecting and localizing an object in an image through the identification of boundaries at a detailed pixel level (yu et al., 2019).



there are two masks and two bounding boxes as each image consists of two lettuce foliage. the foliage area of two lettuce plants is calculated by extracting features from their respective predicted masks. the masks are a set of matrices that contain pixels belonging to the area of a seg- mented object (area of interest) which in this case are two lettuce fo- liage. these pixels are retrieved from the prediction and further processing is done to give this data useful meaning.



where (wc1 = wc2), (wc1) is the width of channel 1, (wc2) is the width of channel 2 and (s) is the distance between two adjacent channels. the width of channels is constant whereas (s) is a dynamic parameter. by changing (s), the horizontal channel spacing i-e., the dis- tance between channels can be changed.



overlap between ground truth and predicted bounding boxes or masks divided by the area encompassed by both the predicted bounding box and the ground-truth bounding box (yu et al., 2019). for this purpose, the test dataset consisting of 140 images is used. the (iou) is calculated as follows:



facility and determine the effective plant spacing between grow channels. the idea is to develop an approach that can lead to a self-adaptive aquaponics system, where based on crop morphological attributes, the grow channels adjust their positions effectively to ensure high crop yield and quality by avoiding occlusions and foliage overlap- ping. the presented work has used the mask-rcnn algorithm to enable a fine-grained detection of lettuce foliage within the images and the generation of a pixel-wise segmentation mask for each detected instance. the segmentation masks distinguish foliage from the back- ground and provide a mechanism to identify non-foliage classes, such as channel, rockwool cubes, etc., by considering their high heterogeneity in form and texture.



the manual measurement of morphological traits is time- consuming and labor-intensive. even for an experienced agriculturalist, it would take a significant amount of time to measure all morphological traits. the proposed approach can automatically estimate the morpho- logical traits of lettuce foliage that vary in size and shape. plant spacing is one of the key features that impact crop growth. it is dependent on crop type as well as crop morphological traits. in this study, plant spac- ing is automatically measured for each segmented foliage using the mathematical model.



the final model is deployed on a cloud-based application and inte- grated with the ontology model. the ontology model provides informa- tion about crop characteristics and grow bed design parameters for a variety of crops grown in nft-based aquaponics. the application acts as a decision support system, which analyses the results from the models, compares them with the relevant knowledge from the ontology model and suggests the final action by sending a control signal to the aquaponics facility for automatically adjusting the grow channels based on the value of plant spacing predicted by the proposed model.



1.5 cm for plant spacing. the final model is then deployed on a cloud-based application and an ontology model is integrated with it. the proposed method is accurate and flexible and hence can easily be applied in real scenarios. this contribution has great significance to the research community as it promotes the implementation of a self- adaptive aquaponics system that can be constantly improved using dynamic data. moreover, the presented methods offer the opportunity to rely on smart technologies for the application of new concepts such as research on complex relationships between optimal parameters, and detection of nutrient deficiency in crops using computer vision which will pave the way for large-scale implementation of aquaponics farming technology.



