the paper is organized as follows. in section 2, we present the key ideas and elements of the spatial and temporal algorithms implemented in ssdc, whereas in section 3, we give a brief overview of the soft- ware implementation and infrastructure. section 4 briefly describes the computing environments of the on-premise ibex cluster and amazon ec2 cloud computing environment. section 5 presents the performance results of the test case studies to analyze the performance of the ssdc solver on ibex and amazon ec2 clusters. finally, the conclusion and future work are drawn in section 6.



the purpose of this study is to analyze the performance of the ssdc solver on ibex and amazon ec2 clusters for complex flow problems and provide the current cost per core hour. the default number of cpu cores for an ec2 instance depends on its type. we only allowed the instance to use the available physical cpu cores. this means we disabled hyperthreading. in the following sections, we report the arithmetic average of the wall-clock time (wct) in seconds of three independent runs and the associated estimated cost in united states dollars (usd).



1.7 for all the runs. as for the previous application, moving from the c5a.4xlarge to the c5a.8xlarge instances lead to a reduction in the wall-clock time by around 35%-to-40%. furthermore, the smallest wall- clock time is obtained using the ec2 arm c6 g instances, for all orders of accuracy. in addition, almost perfect scaling is observed. doubling



mengaldo gianmarco, de grazia daniele, witherden freddie, farrington antony, vincent peter, sherwin spencer, peiro joaquim. a guide to the implementa- tion of boundary conditions in compact high-order methods for compressible aerodynamics. in: 7th aiaa theoretical fluid mechanics conference. 2014, p. 2923.



balay s, abhyankar s, adams mf, benson s, brown j, brune p, buschelman k, constantinescu e, dalcin l, dener a, eijkhout v, gropp wd, hapla v, isaac t, jolivet p, karpeev d, kaushik d, knepley mg, kong f, kruger s, may da, mcinnes l curfman, mills r tran, mitchell l, munson t, roman je, rupp k, sanan p, sarich j, smith bf, zampini s, zhang h, zhang h, zhang j. petsc/tao users manual. technical report anl-21/39 - revision 3.16, argonne national laboratory; 2021.



