recent advances in the field of artificial intelligence, specifically regarding deep learning methods, have invig- orated research into novel ways for the exploration of chemical space. compared to more traditional methods that rely on chemical fragments and combinatorial recombination deep generative models generate molecules in a non-transparent way that defies easy rationalization. however, this opaque nature also promises to explore uncharted chemical space in novel ways that do not rely on structural similarity directly. these aspects and the complexity of training such models makes model assessment regarding novelty, uniqueness, and distribution of generated molecules a central aspect. this perspective gives an overview of current methodologies for chemical space exploration with an emphasis on deep neural network approaches. key aspects of generative models in- clude choice of molecular representation, the targeted chemical space, and the methodology for assessing and validating chemical space coverage.



judge its quality per se. for instance, for generic cs exploration it would be preferable that every molecule of the relevant cs has roughly the same chance of being generated or the bias towards certain molecules is at least reasonable (e.g., larger molecules are less likely to be generated than smaller ones). on the other hand, often cs is explored with certain goals in mind. just as in vitro and in vivo exploration of cs in lead opti- mization campaigns aims to optimize endpoints like potency or admet properties [8], computational cs exploration can be conducted with re- spect to certain goals focusing on molecules with favorable properties for endpoints of interest [9].



some of these aspects like validity and novelty can be easily quan- tified using statistical metrics. furthermore, computational metrics like the synthetic accessibility score [10] and the quantitative estimate of drug-likeness [11] can give indications how reasonable and practical proposed structures are. the degree to which a cs is representative can be assessed by determining distributions of structural and physicochem- ical quantities, while the biological relevance of a cs is characterized by the extent to which it is enriched with molecules possessing favorable properties like a target-specific activity. for gms targeting a focused cs, e.g., cs containing molecules with specific biological activities or syn- thetically accessible cs, traditional benchmark approaches are not ap- plicable as the cs to be covered by gms can be extremely large. thus, it should not be expected that a gm is able to recreate molecules from a hold-out test set. on the contrary, recreation of known molecules might be an indication that the cs covered is relatively small and overpopu- lated with molecules from already explored cs.



in a sample of n molecules one can expect to see ca. 37% duplicates. the training set size usually represents a tiny fraction of the targeted cs so that ideally the fraction of novel molecules exceeds 99%. low novelty can be a sign of overfitting, and low uniqueness can indicate a mode collapse. mode collapse describes a lack of diversity of gener- ated molecules and can be ascribed to a concentration of the probability distribution around a few molecules. while a gm should aim to maxi- mize these metrics, its potential to do so might be limited if the size of the targeted cs is small; for instance when exploring cs around specific scaffolds [69].



gms were used to sample one billion compounds each and the best re- sulting models achieved a coverage of 39%. following the argument above, a coverage of about 63% would be the theoretically best perfor- mance that could be expected assuming perfect coverage and identical probabilities for each molecule. given that the gms also generated a significant portion of molecules not covered by gdb-13 this indicated that the gms are indeed able to cover a significant part of the whole gdb-13.



analyzing latent space representations can yield insights into how similarity is perceived by a deep gm. for instance, in ref. [55] the rela- tionship between neighborhoods in latent space and structural similar- ity of exemplary compounds was investigated. a more recent approach used generative topographic mapping to map the latent space of an au- toencoder onto two dimensions [75], which the authors then used to construct an activity map of adenosine a2a receptors visualizing how these active compounds were distributed in latent space.



in ref. [76], input saliency maps of smiles were used to aid the interpretability of the generative process. input saliency maps assign a score to each token indicating its relevance for the next token to be generated. mapping the tokens to molecular structures then makes it possible to interpret them in a chemical context.



