this paper presents a factorial analysis on the tensile strength of a coir-based composite. three interested parameters in this study are fiber volume fraction, curing time and compression load applied during fabrication of the composite. the experimental setting is based on the full-factorial design of experiments, which amounts to a total of 18 tensile test cases. overall, the results from analysis of variance on the test data show that coir fiber volume fraction and interaction effect between curing time and coir fiber volume fraction are the prominent factors to the tensile strength of the composite. on the opposite end, the contribution from compression loading during fabrication of the material seems to be negligible.



recyclability and biodegradability [1]. in tropical countries such as malaysia, the rich supply of coconuts makes it a sustainable source for natural fibers to be used for composites. many parts of the coconut fruit have found their application in composites. for instance, the high strength and modulus properties of the coconut shell filler have enabled its utilization in new composites for a broad range of applications like building materials and household appliances [2]. in addition, composite using natural fiber from coconut husk (known as coir fiber) has been studied for potential aerospace applications [3].



similar to other materials, selection and use of coir fiber-reinforced epoxy composites depend on their mechanical properties. previous studies highlighted that these properties for natural fiber composites are influenced by several factors such as stress-strain behavior of the fiber and matrix phases, volume fraction and fiber distribution and orientation within the composite [2, 4]. in addition, the fabrication process parameters through which the composite is being produced could also affect these properties. the settings for these factors are generally decided in the early stages of the production process. thus it is essential to recognize the level of effects that they contribute to the composite beforehand.



this research study intends to analyze the level of influences that some of these factors have on the tensile properties of a coir fiber composite. in this case, the composite is made from the combination of coir fibers and epoxy resin, and it is fabricated using the compression molding method. parameters that are of great interest in this study include fiber volume fraction in the material, curing time and amount of compression load applied during the fabrication process.



the coir fibers used to form the composite material are purchased from commercial market and they come in the form of custom-made sheets with random fiber orientation. no treatment is applied on them during the fabrication of the test specimens. for information, the coir fibers used have been prepared for producing mattresses. in general industrial process, these fibers may have undergone the partial retting process that could change their physical properties [5]. this notion could be used to explain any deviation of properties from those established for natural coir fibers.



dictating the tensile strength of the coir fiber composite. in that regard, the factorial effects of the coir fiber volume, curing time and compression load have been analyzed. based on the anova result, the coir fiber volume fraction appears to be the most dominant factor in influencing the tensile strength of the resultant composite. in addition, the effects from curing time, as well as its combined effects with the setting of coir fiber volume fraction, are also significant and have to be considered in the fabrication process of the composite. on the opposite end, the effects of compression load seem to be comparatively insignificant. while a deeper study may need to be run to clearly quantify how insignificant is the effect from compression loading



