in [10], authors tried to answer the limitation of cpesc3 but failed to propose a complete cps architecture. a promising framework has been proposed in [11] where automated secure framework of community cloud would provide cheaper healthcare service with the end-goal of better health outcomes. but in their architecture, the issue of alerting the physicians in emergency has been left unanswered.



this high rate of alarm generation in independent threshold alarm system also creates false alarms. false alarm causes fatigue to the caregivers. since, cps in this healthcare scenario will consider different types of sensors an approach needs to be taken for reliable coexistence of heterogeneous sensors. in [20], the authors proposed a tru-alarm method based on battle ground situation, which can find out trustworthy alarms and increase the feasibility of cps. once the locations of objects causing alarms are estimated, an object-alarm graph is constructed and trustworthiness inferences are carried out based on link information in the graph. simulation results validated that their method can effectively filter out noises and false information and guarantee the accuracy of meaningful alarms. to determine the trustworthy alarms, an improved method can be used to detect and reduce the false alarms. as vital information is assessed to determine the state of the patient and multiple sensors may provide different data, trustworthiness analysis can be a useful tool.



a false alarm detection architecture for cps healthcare application has been proposed. it aims to combine the threshold alarm method with multiple classifiers in decision set. in addition, the proposed architecture aims to answer some unanswered questions such as completeness, false alarm detection and accurate alarm generation. the architecture proposes to utilize multiple classifiers and compare those with vital health data from patients for detecting false alarm of medical sensors. it proposes a framework that is expected to perform better in regards of accuracy, efficiency and smart alarm system. in future we plan to explore the security issue and implement prototype architecture in a healthcare scenario.



