the main goal of this work was to use rice straw(rs) in the production of environmentally sound composites using corn based adhesives(ca). treatments of rs with naoh and hot-water were undertaken to evaluate the effect of such treatments on the performance of produced composites. the influence of composite density, starch content and varieties of starch(cornstarch, cassava starch, potato starch) on flexural properties of composites was investigated. the microstructure of fractured surfaces was further observed. results showed that cornstarch based composites had higher flexural properties. composites made from hot-water treated straw and cornstarch had better interface and higher flexural properties, and flexural strength and flexural elastic modulus reached peak values at starch content of 10% and composite density of 0.7 g/cm3. the composites developed from this work may have potential application for ceiling panels and bulletin boards.



using straw and other agricultural residues for preparation of composite materials has become the focus of world. but the crushed materials(e.g. straw powder, rice husk powder, husk powder or extracted straw fiber) of agricultural residues are the main materials of the composites[9-11], and using discarded tires, formaldehyde resins, polymers as matrix for preparation of composite[12-13]. such composite materials have better water resistance and acoustic insulation properties, higher internal bond strength and flexibility and flexural strength, bigger fracture coefficient. but smashing agricultural residues and extracting fiber from straw waste lots of energy, and the matrix of the composites is difficult to degrade. this research used rice straw and cassava starch, corn starch, potato starch to prepare composite materials, and focused on the influence of composite density, starch content and varieties of starch on flexural strength and flexural elastic modulus. the microstructure of fractured surfaces was further observed.



rs was extensively washed with distilled water in order to remove impurities(mainly dust). this operation was performed several times at room temperature and under vigorous stirring. after successive washings, rs was dried in an air-circulated oven at 103. this material was stored in hermetic plastic containers in order to prevent microbial attack(i.e. fungi) before using it in followed treatments. washed rs without any further treatments was used as control and was labeled crs.



cornstarch adhesives was prepared by the dispersion of the cornstarch(cs) powder in distilled water at a cs-to-water ratio 1:10 under stirring at room temperature for 2 h with 1.2wt% sodium thiosulfate(na2s2o3.5h2o) on dry basis of cs for preventing deterioration. the resultant adhesives were then ready to be mixed with rs.



g/cm3. when density was 0.7 g/cm3, moisture content was appropriate, starch adhesive diffuses uniformly and could glue the rice straw completely, flexural strength and flexural elastic modulus reached the peak value. the flexural properties decreased with increasing of density above 0.7 g/cm3, this was due to more compact internal structure and more difficult starch adhesive diffusion.



cornstarch based composites had higher flexural properties. composites from hot-water treated straw and cornstarch had better interface and higher flexural properties, and flexural strength and flexural elastic modulus reached peak values at starch mass fraction of 10% and density of 0.7 g/cm3.



