fungal keratitis is a leading cause of serious ocular morbidity and blindness. it is worldwide in distribution, but is more common in the tropics and subtropical regions. it was reported that the incidence of fungal keratitis in egypt is increasing, correlating with the climatic changes(rises in minimum temperature and the maximum atmospheric humidity) in the region.



. in developing countries, microscopic evaluation is the most valuable and rapid diagnostic tool for detection of fungal elements in corneal scrapings. thus, there is a need to identify a staining method for fungal keratitis diagnosis that is rapid, easy to perform and has a high sensitivity in the clinical setting.



methylene blue(mb) is widely used in clinics as a dye and a biological staining agent. mb detects gonococci, early cancer cells, metastasized cancer cells in lymph nodes in earlystage breast cancer, and is also used to diagnose pre-cancerous pathological changes and early gastric cancer[9,10]. the efficacy of mb has been investigated for the diagnosis of fungal keratitis in one study, and has been found to be a fast and effective method for the early diagnosis of fungal keratitis. therefore we aimed in the current study to confirm the efficacy of mb staining for the rapid detection of fungal keratitis and to compare the positive rates, sensitivity and specificity with those of a 10% koh-based smear and calcofluor white(cw)



antifungal topical therapy with amphotericin b in concentrations of 5 mg/ml was started for all cases immediately on receiving a positive report of fungal filaments by microscopic examination of the corneal scraping. the product was prepared from the intravenous formulation(fungizone, bristolmyers squibb, new york, ny) diluted in distilled water. one hourly topical drops was applied for a week, then each two hours for three weeks and then continued on a tapering basis depending on the activity of keratitis till resolution of the ulcers. additional surgical procedures were undertaken for patients not responding to medical therapy and these procedures included therapeutic penetrating keratoplasty(pk), anterior chamber wash with amphotericin b or evisceration if needed.



