the clustering of a data array has two important practical applications: the design of distributed database systems and the design of web sites. these are instances of hard problems(sometimes identified as belonging to the class np-hard) where the answer is a permutation(an element in sn). links exist, for example, between mccormick et al. clustering problem and the traveling salesman problem. it is interest-{j| i< j<|x|, xj+1< xi< xj}. they studied heapsort and local insertion sort with respect to these measures. recently, other measures related to adaptive sorting algorithms have been introduced by carlsson, levcopoulos and petersson[7,37].



we would like the space of measures of presortedness to have some natural structure. for example, since disorder can be evaluated in many ways, given two measures m1 and m2 of presortedness, m(x)= m1(x)+ m2(x) is intuitively a measure of presortedness that incorporates both types of evaluation. however, m(x) may fail to qualify as a measure of presortedness. an easy example is to take m1= m2= inv.



in this section, we revise the relationship between ri-metrics and measures of disorder. this reviews the necessary and sufficient conditions for a measure of disorder to be extended to a ri-metric. if a measure of disorder can be extended to a ri-metric, it is called normal. examples of normal measures are m01, inv, mgrp, exc, ham, and rem. we also recall the necessary and sufficient conditions for a ri-metric to be used as a measure of presortedness. this results allow a method to naturally construct normal measures; namely, providing sets of sorting transformations. conversely, if we are given a normal measure, we can almost always identify a set of operations that defines the measure up to ranking.



in a markov chain is said to have period d if ps= 0 whenever s is not divisible by d. since pii= 1/(1+r) for all i, all nodes are aperiodic. furthermore, since we have a finite state markov chain, all states are recurrent 5 and all recurrent states are positive recurrent 6. this means that we have an irreducible ergodic markov chain and we can apply theorem 4.1 from ross[52, page 145].



generate defines a random walk on a finite group 7(sn) and, by theorem 5.3, the corresponding probability distribution is not concentrated on a subgroup 8 or a translate 9 of a subgroup. therefore, we can apply the results of aldous and diaconis to strengthen theorem 5.7.



monte carlo simulations using 10,000 random permutation with length in the range 20 to 400. their results showed that there is a simple and reasonably accurate relationship between|x| and the variance of rem(x). their empirical evidence indicated that the distribution of rem(x) is asymptotically normal. much of the recent work on this has been summarized by baik, deift and johansson who elaborated on the tracy-widom distribution and the gaussian unitary ensemble of random matrix theory. in fact, more accurate estimates of the constants involved in the limit for the distribution of e[rem(x)] are now known. the mathematical effort and the sophistication of the techniques for this problem are remarkable.



since analytical results on the distribution of measures are hard, it is desirable, at least, to characterize those ri-metrics that decompose into a sum of independent uniform distributions or other well known distributions. if we want to test correlation or agreement of more than two rankings(because the objects are ranked independently by boards of judges), the corresponding techniques must be developed[19,20,21]. random generation with bounded disorder may provide the answer for tabulating values of the distributions.



and mi are measures of disorder. by definition, m depends only on the relative order of the elements in x and since, for all i, mi(x) is minimized when x is sorted, and li are nonnegative, m(x) is minimized when x is sorted. therefore, m is a mod.



