the smart home is moving in the direction with the wireless remote control, multimedia control, high- speed data transmission, and its key technologies for the home network compatibility of family controllers and meet information transfer needs. at present, the transmission network use of the integrated wiring technology, limit the application of the system place a higher cost. wireless way to build a flexible and convenient smart home security monitoring system and become the hotspot of current research.



zigbee coordinator development platform is based on the arm920t core s3c2410x microprocessor. the core of the entire communication program. coordinator of the wireless transceiver module with the cc2430. short distance of one-to-many communication. the cc2430 has solidified the bottom of the zigbee protocol stack (the phy layer and mac layer). just with simple peripheral devices can constitute a coordinator of the transceiver module. gprs used to achieve the long-distance data transmission. this is an optional gprs microprocessor mc35i and peripheral circuits.



the power supply circuit in which the structural model, the system clock circuit, the system reset circuit, the flash / sdram memory interface circuit is the basic circuit of the s3c2410x microprocessor running. jtag interface, ethernet interface, serial port and the wireless transceiver module (cc2430 and its peripheral circuits constitute). is the coordination function of the interface circuit. the jtag standard is mainly used for chip internal testing and system simulation, debugging. standard jtag interface has four lines. and the connection is simple. max232 and rs232 serial port functions. used to coordinate and gprs devices to transfer data between. gprs uses the existing products on the market, the application comes with some small modifications, and so gprs automatically send and receive data. the wireless transceiver module is mainly used for the establishment and initialization of zigbee star network, and data between multiple zigbee end devices to send and receive. the system hardware design



sms module built-in sms protocol, set the sms, mms, in one of the gsm / gprs module. it uses the at command module control, control commands and data transfer via rs232 interface. its internal integrated 600 kb of flash memory space available for more than one upload the picture sending mms messages.



the system can image the way outsiders invasions, fires and other indoor anomalies automatically determine. its intelligence is mainly reflected: the system software on the state of the environment, self-study, so that it can adapt to background changes in the environment, critical state, which can automatically start the state tracking and monitoring to accurately determine the results of multiple images. background subtraction and interframe difference method, based on the movement threshold binding assay. the target detection process including: image preprocessing, quantization function, motion detection (or a small target motion tracking and detection), the abnormal situation of discrimination and processing.



smoke, the parameters of the gas, fire, theft alarm, home appliances appliances in the home environment, by combining traditional sensor alarm system and image monitoring system, the formation of a new type of smart home system. users can receive mms messages via cell phone or pc, according to the need for remote phone set, in order to achieve a flexible, convenient home security monitoring. to achieve multiple wireless networking of monitoring devices, remote control of home appliances, smart home remote monitoring to provide a practical method for intelligent home environment.



