cloud computing provides information resources for users in"cloud" through the internet. these information resources with a variety of different languages are distributed in web pages and the databases. the scheduling of multilingual information resources becomes complex, as multilingual information resources are heterogeneous and uneven in cloud computing. the need arises in scheduling of multilingual information resources in cloud computing for new mechanisms. this paper presents a four-tier architecture for multilingual information resources scheduling in cloud computing. it includes user accessing tier, technology supporting tier, resource scheduling tier and resources tier. we propose a threelayer scheduling model for multilingual information resources in cloud computing. the model includes some home managers, some local scheduling agents and a global scheduling agent. the model not only shows the autonomy of private cloud resources and is convenient for user to submit and supervise tasks, but also lightens the pressure of the global scheduling agent. the example shows that the proposed scheduling model could improve the performance of the scheduling of multilingual information resources in cloud computing.



now, multilingual information retrieval and management issues are increasingly attracting research attention[9,10]. but, the scheduling of multilingual information resource in cloud computing has not given more attention. the scheduling of multilingual information resource in cloud computing becomes complex, as resources with a variety of different languages distributed in different web pages and the databases are heterogeneous and uneven. in this paper, we present a four-tier architecture and a two-layer model for multilingual information resources scheduling in cloud computing.



the rest of this paper is organized as follows. in section 2, we give a four-tier architecture for multilingual information resources scheduling in cloud computing. a three-layer model for multilingual information resources scheduling in cloud computing is presented in section 3. in section 4, we give an example, which proves the effectiveness of the scheduling model given in this paper. the conclusions of the paper are given in section 5.



user accessing tier is a front-end component, which is responsible for providing a way for users to access information. the users can retrieve the information from cloud datacenter in"cloud" through the internet. the ways for users accessing the internet are pc terminal via wired network as well as mobile terminal such as mobile phone and pda via wireless network.



resources tier is a bottom component, which is responsible for providing resources for overall system operation. the resources include physical resources such as computing resources, store resources, network resources, etc. and information resources such as corpus, knowledge base, original information base, etc.



technology supporting tier, information integration in resource scheduling tier, and corpus, knowledge base in resource tier. we give a three-layer scheduling model for multilingual information resources in cloud computing. the model including home manager, local scheduling agent and a global scheduling agent, which not only shows the autonomy of private cloud resources, convenience for user to submit and supervise tasks, but also lightens the pressure of the global scheduling agent. the example shows that the proposed scheduling model could improve the performance of the scheduling of multilingual information resources in cloud computing. the effective scheduling algorithm for multilingual information resources in cloud computing is our further research.



