the generation of food production that meets the rising demand for food and ecosystem security is a big challenge. with the development of artificial intelligence(ai) models, there is a growing need to use them to achieve sustainable agriculture. the continuous enhancement of ai in agriculture, researchers have proposed many models in agriculture functions such as prediction,weed control, resource management, advance care of crops, and so on. this article evaluates on a systematic review of ai models in agriculture functions. it also reviews how ai models are used in identified sustainable objectives. through this extensive review, this paper discusses considerations and limitations for building the next generation of sustainable agriculture using ai.



ai is one of the emerging areas of research in recent generation. today ai is used to solve the problems particularly to reduce the use of the labor force, to enhance efficient utilization of resources and to facilitate the development of sustainable business. with the rapid technological advancement,people are more intend to developed these applications. with that, different ai approaches have been suggested to solve the existing problems in the agriculture to improve the productivity.



currently, labour intensive crop caring practices use vast amount of agricultural chemical inputs(fertilizers, herbicides, fungicides, and insecticides) cause to have high production cost and lead pollution matters as well. in general, it is estimated that more than 100 kg are applied per hectare in farm land. unfortunately, majority of the nitrate applied were either washout or loss in the air. the robotic diseasedetection systems were commonly designed in whole inclusive pattern to identify the results in infection and these results could be utilised to detect precise diseases and and apply fertilizes appropriately(schor and attwood-charles, 2017; grimstad and from, 2017). in addition, ml technique was used to measure plants with sensors to estimate plant growth direction and plant classification, ann to design performance-oriented riparian buffer strips for the filtering of nitrogen and measure plant growth status, dl to detect underdeveloped plants and to recognize the plant using image-based. therefore, it is important to recognize the ai applications that favor both disease management and to provide sufficient, safe, and nutritious food to the global population. particularly, there have been significant developments of ai towards the sustainability agriculture objective of achieving better health and nutrition for a growing population.



weeds destructively affect agricultural crop productions by contending with crop plants for resources, including soil moisture and nutrients. providing sufficient and healthy foods for ever growing population heavily depends on the ways we control weeds and apply fertilizers in efficient manner. for future work, the review opines that more robust weed recognition approaches could be extended with additional data capturing conditions(like illumination, grass density) and sampling techniques could be synthetized with techniques like synthetic minority over-sampling technique(smote) and adaptive synthetic sampling(adasyn).



natural resources using ai technologies lead to increased global crop yields. meeting the fourth objectiveconserving natural resources, is a daunting challenge. as we identified, it includes protection of soil health and water quality and maintain biodiversity of flora, fauna, and natural landscapes. the review sheds a light that ai technological developments taking consideration on these challenges while improving agri-food productivity with minimum effects to the environment. particularly, there have been significant developments of ai towards the sustainability agriculture objective of conserving natural resources. however, to improve overall crop water productivity, ai technology has to be advanced in irrigation technologies such as efficient low pressure center pivot irrigation and micro-irrigation and weather-based and soil moisture sensor-based irrigation scheduling. moreover, improving decision support tools integrating weather, soil and crop information will ensure progress towards the sustainable objectives of agriculture.



