the human-machine system holds the important position in every field of man and machine. it is also a key technology for man to operate one machine. voice-based identification is one of popular way to contact the user and device. it has been used widely in many areas with the development of hardware technologies and the improvement of mathematical algorithms. the article here elaborates the theory and algorithms which used in the system, at the same time shows the results of experiment.



speech recognition uses voice signals as input instead of traditional keyboard, mouse and touch screen. it is more convenient and faster. it is also a kind of technology makes the machine to adapt to people. with the development of hardware technologies and the improvement of mathematical algorithms, it becomes more and more consummate.



voice activity detection is a critical step in the pretreatment of the signal, only if the device determines the endpoint of the signal correctly can it deal with the voice by rule and line. we choose dual threshold method for voice activity detection. there are differences between two terms: short-term energy analysis and short-term zero rate algorithm analysis. for the n frame signal, xn (m) , the formula of short-term energy is as follow



by using the dual threshold method for voice activity detection, we should set two thresholds for short- term energy analysis and short-term zero rate algorithm analysis, one high and one low for each. the low one is sensitive for signal changes so it is easy to be overstepped, but the high one only can be overstepped by the signal which reaches to some intensity. the method is divided into four stages: mute, transition, voice and end. during the mute, if one of the energy or the zero rate over the low threshold, the flag will be changed. this indicates the process enters the transition, but now we cannot be sure whether there really is a voice signal or not, therefore if the numerical value down to below the low threshold, the current state goes back to the mute. but if any one of the parameter oversteps the high threshold, we can determine that it get into the voice part. at this part if tow parameters down to below the threshold at the same time the time is shorter than the time threshold we believe that this speech signal is noise. if not we label the endpoints and return.



we take the hidden markov models (hmm) to achieve a non-specific recognition system. hmm is a probability model for the statistical properties of the random process evolved by the markov chain. a complete hmm needs to be given some parameters are as follows: state number n, the number of observation symbols m and the aggregation, as well as the probability distribution a, b, p, where a is the state transition probability matrix; b is the observation symbol probability matrix; p is the initial state probabilities. typically, the following formulas are here to represent a particular model.



