on the other hand, we can consider two groups of attributes for learning material including explicit attributes and implicit(latent) attributes. explicit attributes are known such as subject and publisher for learning materials and can be extracted by experts, but implicit attributes that are latent can be inferred by historical ratings of learners. some researches tried to combine attributes(features) of users or items with historical rating for recommendation. robin reviewed several hybrid recommender methods developed to combine the external(we called explicit) features and historical rating data for higher prediction accuracy. according to the experiment results reported, it is believed that both features and the historical ratings have great values to estimate the prediction function for recommendation.



in order to generate recommendations with higher quality and accuracy and alleviating some problems in existing recommender algorithms such as sparsity in learning environment, this research combines explicit and implicit attributes of learners and materials in the unified model. this model has two modules. in the implicit attribute-based module, genetic algorithm is used for extracting implicit attributes of leaners from historical rating in the shape of weight vectors. in the explicit attribute-based module, preference matrix(pm) is introduced that can model the interest of learners based on explicit attributes of learning materials in a multidimensional space. the main contribution of this paper is improving the quality and



rest of this paper is organized as follows: in section 2, the previous related works on e-learning material recommender systems are discussed. section 3 introduces the overall system framework and describes the proposed mechanism step by step. experiment section applies the proposed algorithm for a dataset to evaluate and analyze the performance of method. finally, conclusion section provides the concluding remarks.



recommender systems have already been implemented in real e-commerce applications such as amazon and cdnow where they are used to recommend to online shoppers, products and services that they might otherwise never discover on their own. there have also been several pioneering research system prototypes, such as syskill and webert, fab, and grouplens. many recommendation systems in various fields such as movies, music, news, commerce and medicine have been developed but few in education field. with the appearance of e-learning, learning material(learning content or learning resource) recommendation is a new topic in recommendation systems.



most of recommendation systems are designed either based on content-based filtering or collaborative filtering. both types of systems have inherent strengths and weaknesses, where content-based approaches directly exploit the product information, and the collaboration filtering approaches utilize specific user rating information. in addition, to produce the accurate and effective recommendations, researchers proposed several different algorithms, some of which derive from the achievements of data mining. some of recommending algorithms are user-based collaborative filtering, item-based collaborative filtering, cluster-based collaborative filtering, dimension reduction based collaborative filtering, horting graph-theoretic collaborative filtering and bayesian network based recommendation. in the following of this section, we explain some researches about recommender systems in the area of e-learning in four categories.



hybrids: each recommendation strategy has its own strengths and weaknesses. hence, combining several recommendation strategies can be expected to provide better results than either strategy alone[28,29]. most hybrids work by combining several input data sources or several recommendation strategies. liang et al. implemented the combination of content-based filtering and collaborative filtering to make personalized recommendations for a courseware selection module. liu and shih designed a material recommendation system based on association



truly, rating of a user for an item represents the overall rating value on different attribute value of product. therefore, two users that have similar overall rating values for a specific item may place different emphases on its attributes. as a result, to have a good personalization in e-learning recommender systems, it is necessary to consider different attributes of materials.



thus, we can use the prediction models built based on the observed attributes or explicit attributes plus latent attributes or implicit attributes to improve the recommendation process for acquiring higher prediction accuracy. in this research, the explicit attributes were modeled using pm and also genetic algorithm is used to find the relationship between the overall rating and the underlying implicit attributes weight vector for each learner. more specifically, given the ratings data of a learner, ga computes his/her preference model in terms of implicit attributes weight.



where x is the decimal number of the binary code for each attribute weight. two matrixes of attributes weight wu=(w1, w1,..., wn)t and wi=(e1, e1,..., em)t that indicate attributes weight vectors for n users and m items respectively become the optimizing targets. its initial solution could be some random values gained by an off-line process. at the basis of initial population, new individuals produced in each iteration are evaluated by fitness function.



where fc(wu, wi) denotes the value of fitness function for chromosome c, ps is number of individuals in the population or population size and pc(wu, wi) denotes the probability of selecting chromosome c. because the sum of fitness in a population is constant, an individual with lower fitness)higher prediction accuracy) has larger probability to be chosen. we find that the universal sampling method scheme yields a good individual to be selected for the reproduction of the next population. we hope it would be helpful in improving the efficiency of our algorithm.



mutation operator is used to investigate some of the unvisited points in the search space, and also to avoid premature convergence of the entire feasible space caused by some super chromosomes. this operator makes random changes in one or more elements of the string. mutation is done with a small probability, called mutation probability or rate. according to mutation rate, randomly selecting some elements of individual, and changing its value, new individual can be gained. it is a local random searching method to keep diversity of population.



definition 2. the preference model of learner li is defined as a matrix with m rows in which m denotes the number of attributes of materials. each cell in this matrix is defined as a four-tuple(ka, nh, rr, level), where ka is the keyword of the levelth attribute accessed materials by learner li and level denotes the row number for this tuple.



ing for learner a. awi indicates attribute weight that was defined before. for reflecting the similarity between the rating vectors of two learners, the learner rating based similarity can be applied to overcome sparsity rating problem. inspired from pearson, this similarity can be defined as follows:



recommendation: explicit attribute based collaborative filtering(eab-cf) and implicit attribute based collaborative filtering(iab-cf). these two methods can be combined for final recommendation. a linear combination of eab-cf and iab-cf is used for recommendation(eb-ib-cf). therefore for rating prediction the following formula is used:



in order to check the performance of the proposed algorithm, a real-world dataset is applied in our simulations. mace1 dataset that is pan-european initiative to interconnect and disseminate digital information about architecture is used for experiment. this dataset is issued from mace project that is done from september 2006 to september 2010. this dataset uate decision support accuracy. for the evaluation of recommender system, they have been used by various researchers[12,14]. the precision is a measure of exactness and recall is a measure of completeness. several ways to evaluate precision and recall exists. when referring to recommender systems the recall can be defined as follows:



every generation. we only keep the 5% of the best individuals from each generation to obtain the next one(elitist selection). the genetic algorithm stops when there is an individual in the population with a fitness value lower than a constant c. we



in addition, there are three other parameters including: number of neighborhoods, weighting coefficient in the combination of two type of similarity in eba-cf(beta) and eab-cf and iab-cf(alpha) that must be adjust for better recommendation. according to previous experiments, eba-cf for b= 0.35 gives the best prediction accuracy.



one of the most important applications of recommendation systems in e-learning environment is personalization and recommendation of learning materials. however, since the repository of learning materials is very massive and these materials have several attributes, there are several drawbacks such as sparsity when applying the existing recommendation algorithms. to address these problems and have a good recommendation for learner, this paper presents a novel personalized recommender system that utilizes explicit and implicit attributes of materials in the unified model. the experiment results show that the proposed approach performs better than the traditional approaches. the main contribution of this paper is improving the quality of recommendations and addressing sparsity problem using genetic algorithm and a multidimensional information model.



