today, most of countries strive to provide electricity supply for its industries and inhabitants. while the demand for electricity and the prices of fossil fuels are growing and the nuclear electricity production is resisted in some countries, one of the ways to solve the problem is to increase production by renewable resources. hydroelectric power plants do not pollute air, devastate the countryside by opencast or underground mining or by transport of fuels and raw materials. they are waste-free, independent of raw materials import and highly safe. their flexible electricity production and ability to accumulate energy increases efficiency and reliability of power network [1].



the natural conditions for building hydraulic structures in the cr are not optimum. our streams do not have the needed heads and the sufficient quantity of water. this is the reason for low share of hydroelectric power stations on total electricity production in the cr. similarly to wind energy, there is little potential to be used as alternative energy source. the hydro power will always be only additional source, however, using more small-scale hydropower stations would be advantageous and beneficious because local resources in addition to the standard ones could be used. moreover, compared with the wind power, the hydraulic power is more reliable and less costly.



primarily thanks to subvention of purchasing prices of renewable resources, grants and low-interest loans, many shss have been built. these are hydroelectric plants with 10 mw max. installed capacity. further increase of the output of hydroelectric power plants may be achieved by modernization of the technology or building of new plants in new areas. most of so far unused areas have low heads, which would impede return on investments.



there are a lot of water treatment facilities using shss in the cr, however their volume of produced electricity does not go public. that is why there is no integrated statistic of gwh generated by shss. according to accessible data the amount of produced electricity from one shs is more than 90 mwh/year for an shs installation in a water reservoir and up to 2.5 gwh for shs installation in water treatment plant. there are tens of shss in a water supply structure.



production of electricity from renewable sources is supported in the czech republic. by law, power distributors have to connect every renewable energy source into the network. the price of electricity produced in such way is determined by the energy regulatory office [7]. the minimal purchase price is by law guaranteed for 15 years in advance with the possibility of an annual correction +- 5%.



