a direct hydrocarbon detection is performed by using multi-attributes based quantum neural networks with gas fields. the proposed multi-attributes based quantum neural networks for hydrocarbon detection use data clus- tering and local wave decomposition based seismic attenuation characteristics, relative wave impedance features of prestack seismic data as the selected multiple attributes for one tight sandstone gas reservoir and further employ principal component analysis combined with quantum neural networks for giving the distinguishing results of the weak responses of the gas reservoir, which is hard to detect by using the conventional technologies. for the seismic data from a tight sandstone gas reservoir in the sichuan basin, china, we found that multi- attributes based quantum neural networks can effectively capture the weak seismic responses features associ- ated with gas saturation in the gas reservoir. this study is hoped to be useful as an aid for hydrocarbon detections for the gas reservoir with the characteristics of the weak seismic responses by the complement of the multi- attributes based quantum neural networks.



inversion methods are developed to obtain many physical parameters such as longitudinal and transverse waves' velocity and density, poisson's ratio, and relative wave impedance for hydrocarbon detections (castagna and backus, 1993b; pan et al., 1994; tetyukhina et al., 2014; cao et al., 2021). although avo analysis has a rigorous mathematical foundation, there are many assumptions in practice applications, and the current successful application cases are basically clastic rock reservoirs with shallow burial.



the prestack seismic data from the gas field in one tight sandstone gas reservoir in the sichuan basin, china, is collected. the reservoir which is mainly the multi-phase multi-stacked delta plain and delta front domi- nated river sand body has the characteristics of strong heterogeneity, low porosity and permeability (li et al., 2016; lu et al., 2019). the physical properties difference between sandstone and mudstone in the work area is small. some sand bodies which belong to the hidden river sands are very thin. the seismic response is weak (tan et al., 2021), and gas detection in the reservoir especially for the non-bright spot channels is difficult.



different seismic attributes may reflect the different information of the seismic data related to the structure, stratigraphy, lithology and hy- drocarbons. for a specific gas reservoir, the seismic attributes should be selected carefully according to the sensitivity of different work areas and different reservoirs to the seismic attributes of the predicted objects. in seismic attributes, the relative wave impedance features may reflect the lithological changes. the local wave decomposition based seismic attenuation characteristics are related to the hydrocarbon contents. data clustering results of prestack seismic data are the sum of the appearances of sedimentary facies on a seismic section to a certain degree, and they represent the lithological assemblage, bedding, and sedimentary char- acteristics of the sediments that give rise to its reflections. therefore, for effectively distinguishing the weak responses of the gas reservoir, we mainly select the relative wave impedance features, the local wave decomposition based seismic attenuation characteristics and data clus- tering results of prestack seismic data as the featured seismic attributes



hydrocarbon detection using a multi-attributes based quantum neu- ral network for a tight sandstone gas reservoir in the sichuan basin, china is mainly studied in this paper. for hydrocarbon detections, the relative wave impedance features, the local wave decomposition based seismic attenuation characteristics and data clustering results of prestack seismic data are selected as the featured seismic attributes. for the local wave decomposition based seismic attenuation characteristics, the ceemd-based attenuation gradient estimation method and the wavelet- based cepstrum decomposition method are mainly used. combined with pca of the selected featured seismic attributes, the pso-assisted qgsnn is applied to the data acquired from the tight sandstone gas reservoir in the sichuan basis. application results show that the proposed method is capable for detecting the weak responses-exhibited gas area where the seismic attributes and the conventional bp methods give the poor gas- prone interpretations.



