an icing rate sensor based on infrared spectrum absorption is researched in this paper, which two infrared laser diodes are used in. two laser diodes are driven by pulse circuit, and the key technology of the icing rate sensor based on infrared spectrum absorption is put forward. the icing rate sensor is smaller cubage, easier to extend and more steadfast components than the traditional circumvolving filter project.



structural icing is one of the main climatic conditions leading to flight disaster for general aircraft. the formation of ice is very quickly, which can destroy aerodynamics of the wings and other surfaces resulting to decrease flight efficiency or ability to fly. icing can consume engine power, leading breakdowns of control panel, brakes and landing gear, and many other problems. therefore, the aircraft surface icing can lead to very serious flight accidents, especially for those aircrafts which are unable to fly over the icing conditions. the icing rate sensor is designed based on infrared spectrum absorption. the significant advantage of this sensor is highly precise, and that it can test rate of surface icing when a helicopter hovers.



alternating two-way signals are amplified by preamplifier circuit separately, and filtered. filtered electrical signals are converted into digital signals by the ad converter in the detection circuit. the digital signals are converted into analogue signals by da converter of the signal detection circuit, and analogue signals characterized by ice thickness are send to a higher level system or display device via the communication interface circuit of the signal detection circuit.



as mentioned earlier, the icing rate sensor based on infrared absorption needs high light intensity and spectral stability. in addition to light its own nature, the ambient temperature and the lamp-house drive current of light source are the greatest impacts on light intensity and spectral stability. therefore, it is a key technology of an infrared icing rate sensor to control light source intensity and spectral stability. the program intends to design high-precision constant current source drive circuit and temperature control circuit to guarantee access to high-performance light source.



