digital image watermarking has attracted the attention of many researchers over the past decade. the motivation behind this work is the achievement of informa- tion security, information concealment, authentication, and fingerprinting. several approaches to digital image watermarking have been proposed, one of which is the discrete wavelet transform (dwt). the dwt has become highly popular in the field of watermarking due to its ability to decompose available images into sub- bands in which watermarks can be embedded selectively. there are many pub- lished studies on this approach and its combination with other approaches, such as quadtrees, dct, and cdma approaches. a semi-blind algorithm proposed



quadtree decomposition is used in this paper as an analytical technique to sub- divide an image into blocks that are more homogeneous than the image itself. this technique reveals information about the structure of the image. we use this data structure to examine differences among watermarking methods such as dwt, dct, lsb, and cdma in relation to watermark insertion.



this paper is organized as follows: section 2 provides an overview of related theories. section 3 presents the subjective and objective performance evaluation. section 4 depicts the proposed system. in section 5, we present experimental results and a discussion of the proposed system. finally, section 6 concludes the paper.



here, a is the modulation index, and its proper choice will optimize the maximum amount of allowed distortion and minimum necessary watermark energy for reli- able detection. a may or may not be a function of image coefficients. accordingly, ss watermarking schemes can be categorized as signal adaptive or non-adaptive [5].



a natural gray-level image usually can be divided into differently sized regions with variable amounts of details and information. such segmentation of the image is useful for the efficient coding of image data. qt decomposition is a powerful technique that divides the image into 2-d homogeneous regions, thereby produc- ing the segmentation.



a quadtree representing a picture is a tree in which successively deeper levels represent successively finer subdivisions of picture areas. each node represents the quadrant of its parent. the tree is filled through the process of recursively sub- dividing an image matrix into four quadrants until a quadrant is one solid color. a quadtree is a tree with nodes that are either leaves or have four children. the chil- dren are ordered: 1, 2, 3, and 4.



in this application, each leaf node represents a block of pixels that are all 0 s or all 1 s. a region quadtree may also be used as a variable resolution representation of a data field. in this paper, the region quadtree is assumed.



point quadtree: the point quadtree is an adaptation of a binary tree used to represent two-dimensional point data. it shares the features of all quadtrees but is a true tree because the center of a subdivision is always on a point. the shape of the tree depends on the order in which the data are processed. the point quadtree is typically very efficient at comparing two-dimensional ordered data points, usually operating in o(log n) time.



of x and y respectively, and rxy is the covariance of x and y. c1 = (k1l)2 and c2 = (k2l)2 are two variables to stabilize the division with weak denominator, l is the dynamic range of the pixel-values (typically this is 2#bits per pixel 1), and k1 = 0.01 and k2 = 0.03. the resultant ssim index is a decimal value between



this matrix provides a quantitative performance representation for each classifier in terms of class recognition or detection. values along the main diagonal give the total number of correct classifications for each class. values other than those on the main diagonal represent classification errors.



in this work, we have presented quadtree decomposition as a subjective metric and objective metrics based on ssim, mse, pearson correlation and false positive and false negative. we tested its performance in the context of four distinct watermark techniques: cdma, dwt, dct, and lsb. quadtree is usually used in segmen- tation process; in this paper, we benefit of quadtree decomposition to recognize the method of image watermark. the results reveal differences between the water- marked image and the original image across the four techniques; this was con- firmed by the results of the quantitative evaluation. this research demonstrates the effectiveness of the quadtree as a detector of watermarked images and shows the differences in the performance of various techniques.



