most practical target tracking are usually maneuvering, while most target tracking algorithm are linear filter. more estimation error is introduced from linear filter. nowadays more and more researchers pay their attention in maneuvering target tracking algorithm. particle filter has been developed for estimation of nonlinear system states. this paper presents an improved particle filter, which can apply the maneuvering target tracking problem. in practice, the particle filter would take abundant computation for estimate the maneuvering target tracking. the chinagrid system use the agile and distributed federations to reduce the computing time, which achieve to fast resolution for particle filter computation of target tracing application. lastly the simulation proves it.



solve two basic tasks. one is the estimation refining procedure, which need to infer the accurate estimation target position from noise measurement data. the other is to predict the target position in next time that information used to form forecasting windows limiting the target in the future. [2] so the kernel problem of target tracing is to estimate the states of the moving target, such as position, velocity and acceleration. most target tracing algorithms belong to bayesian theoretic. kalman filter and particle filter are popular bayesian filters for target tracing based on their probabilistic nature. [3]



particle filter uses a mass of particles with the target status to approximate posterior distribution for the target, which main idea is from the monte carlo simulation theory. particle filter prefer much particle approximation method to directly estimation. however it can improve the tracing performance, its computation is very high. only using a large numbers of particles might the particle filter achieve better estimation results dealing with complex target tracking. therefore huge and highly efficient architecture is needed for particle filter.



the huge sharing of computing and storage resources can be proved by the grid technology, which uses the virtual method to arrange the compute mission to distributing machines. [5] so the problem in particle filter for maneuvering target tracing which is restricted by the capability of computer can be solved by taking the grid framework. this papers proposed a framework for particle filter in maneuvering target tracing, which take the chinagrid as the base. the simulation proves that this framework can work well for complex target tracking.



this paper build an improved particle filter based on chinagrid framework for maneuvering target tracing system. and the lastly simulation proves that our algorithm can deal with maneuvering target tracing problem. and the chinagrid system provides the computer resource for huge particle computer. this technology will help practice target tracing system.



