previously, we systematically explored the application of multi-task cnn models to predict different in vitro clearance endpoints from molec- ular image representations [23]. we confirmed that cnns were suc- cessful at capturing implicit chemical relationships contained in images using several increasingly challenging data splitting strategies. more- over, model benchmarking with conventional ml and dnn methods trained with structure-based representations, as well as graph convolu- tional neural networks (gcnn), revealed on par or increased accuracy of cnns with clear benefit of multi-task learning. our findings indicated that cnn models built from molecular images could successfully be used to learn multiple clearance parameters [23]. herein, we extend our re- search question to answer whether cnn models built from molecular im- ages, as well as methodologically similar gcnn models, could be used to explain chemical modifications associated with the intrinsic metabolic reactions. understanding mechanisms of drug metabolic transforma- tions has wide implications on the development of small molecule ther- apeutics including, but not limited to, drug activity in vivo (pharmaco- dynamics), distribution and elimination processes (pharmacokinetics), as well as safety liabilities which could be attributed to dosing (poten- tial accumulation effects), off-target pharmacology, or chemical reactiv- ity. we illustrate the potential of our interpretability models in practice where we attempt to reconcile the model-derived interpretations with the experimentally confirmed products of metabolism obtained through the respective clearance assays. our findings are presented in the fol- lowing.



detailed information regarding intrinsic clearance data used for cnn and gcnn model building, evaluation, and interpretability exploration is described elsewhere [23]. in brief, experimental data for human hep- atocyte intrinsic clearance (hh clint), human liver microsome intrinsic clearance (hlm clint), rat hepatocyte intrinsic clearance (rh clint), and dog hepatocyte intrinsic clearance (dh clint) were extracted and curated from astrazeneca internal sources. in total, 139,907 unique compounds were identified for model building and evaluation, with a varying number of available data points for different clearance parame- ters. for example, hlm clint and rh clint measurements, as most com- monly measured clearance parameters upon compound synthesis, were available for 101,913 and 79,043 compounds, respectively, whereas hh clint and dh clint (which are evaluated comparatively later) were only available for 21,616 and 6747 compounds, respectively. for the pur- pose of model evaluation and interpretability, same random stratified 80/20 training-test set splits were used for both cnn and gcnn models [23].



liver microsomes and hepatocytes can be applied to investigate po- tential oxidative (microsomes and hepatocytes) and conjugative (only hepatocytes) metabolic routes which may be observed in human and different animal species. identification of metabolic products (metabolic identities or metids) via in vitro systems plays a crucial role in validating the use of animal species for screening and synthesis planning, in or- der to protect metabolic hotspots that are directly relevant to man. on occasions, the samples prepared for intrinsic clearance measurements are submitted to the qualitative liquid chromatography-mass spectrom- etry (lc-ms) evaluation. for the analysis, both ultraviolet (uv) chro- matograms and mass spectra are acquired. the uv chromatograms are applied to quantify each peak given as the percentage (%) of the run.



seen chemistry. provided that none of the 185 molecules which qualified for the interpretability analysis were singletons, we could not demon- strate that the interpretations obtained through studied interpretability frameworks would correlate with their metid experiments. however, given that the models were predictive for singleton molecules, it can- not be entirely excluded that derived interpretability models would cor- rectly interpret novel chemistry as well.



0.16, respectively. experimentally obtained hh clint metid for com- pound a shows that 48% of the molecule remained unchanged (was not subjected to hh clint metabolism), whereas 41% were metaboli- cally transformed to plausible products. the remaining 11% could not be chemically characterized by the lc-ms procedure. major metabolites were derived through the successive transformation of oxidation and glucuronidation (22%), only desaturation (8%), only glucuronidation (6%), and a combination of both desaturation and glucuronidation (5%). both n- (nitrogens of indazole and pyridine) and o-glucuronidation (hy- droxyl group of carboxylic acid) reactions were detected, whereas the



the gcnns, mcts algorithm highlights indazole ring as the most con- tributing substructure to the prediction which, according to the avail- able metid, was conjugated via n-glucuronidation. carboxylic acid al- cohol, suggested by metid to undergo glucuronidation, has not been highlighted by the interpretability methods. however, lc-ms does not distinguish between the potential sites of transformation or whether o- or n-glucuronidation takes place. in this example, all three interpretabil- ity approaches were complementary to each other, with not a single



major contributing feature to the compound b metabolism. however, it cannot be entirely excluded that among the metabolites unidentified by lc-ms occurs a byproduct (or several) generated via these substruc- tures. for hlm clint, the bm scaffold of this compound was contained in another 29 compounds, 18 of which were part of the training set.



functional groups and aromatic rings was detected but not quantified by lc-ms. additionally, the transformation coupling oxidation and glu- tathione conjugation was noted as well. cam correctly highlights a large part of the tricyclic ring as the potential site of metabolism, which was confirmed by the metid to undergo oxidation, glucuronidation, and glu- tathione conjugation. on another hand, igs characterizes tricyclic ni- trogens with a low propensity for metabolic transformations, whereas the area around the tertiary amine of the tetrahydroisoquinoline ring is highlighted as a region of high metabolic propensity. in the latter,



piperidines. these are particularly vulnerable to oxidative metabolism (as indicated by the metid), which may lead to the formation of highly reactive and toxic iminium ions [41]. in addition, cam correctly high- lights the benzene ring (oxidation according to the metid), that is only in part detected by igs. for cam interpretation, an average pixel inten- sity is shown for the isobutyl group and the sp2 carbons of the michael acceptor, all undergoing oxidation. the oxidation of the sp2 carbons was



