information and communication technology (ict) systems are an increasingly important part of power systems. traditionally, it is primarily the office systems that have been regarded as ict sys- tems, but there are an increasing number of systems for automa- tion, control and protection that utilize ict and are tightly integrated with the power system. power systems with extensive ict and smart components are often termed smart grids. smart grids promise increased flexibility and functionality, both in nor- mal operation and for handling of failures and unwanted incidents in the grid, and are expected to be the future power system of choice, enabling both future demands and national and interna- tional strategic goals to be met [1].



system. this is done by presenting an overview of papers address- ing interdependencies and their effects on reliability in this system, based on a literature search in selected major archival journals during the last five years (see section 4.1 for details on the litera- ture search). we categorize the papers in terms of the type of inter- dependencies that they consider, and the methods they employ to analyse these interdependencies. by limiting the overview to the last five years we emphasize the current focus of the research community.



the paper is organized as follows. section 2 gives an introduc- tion to the combined power and ict system and defines interde- pendency categories in terms of failure types. section 3 discusses and classifies methods that are judged as useful for identifying and analysing interdependencies, based on methods for risk analy- sis and methods that have previously been applied to model criti- cal infrastructures. section 4 describes the literature study, and classifies the papers in terms of the interdependency and method categories that have been introduced. section 5 summarizes the paper in terms of our recommendations, before the conclusion is presented in section 6.



needed. additional advanced monitoring, control and protection methods are becoming more common, such as synchronised pha- sor measurements, adjustment of load flow through flexible ac transmission (facts) devices, and numerical and communication based protective gear. phasor measurement units (pmu) are con- nected to the control centre via phasor data concentrators (pdc) that collect the data. such data networks are often called wide area measurement systems (wams). future power systems will even include monitoring and control functions down to the consumer level, such as smart meters and load control.



automatic component control functions as described above handle system regulations on a short time scale, i.e. within seconds or minutes. at a higher level, the market for buying and selling power is instrumental for the regulation of the power system on longer time scales (i.e. hours or days). in the control centres, avail- able information from monitoring and component control func- tions, as well as market information, is used for short and long- term management using, e.g., power system state estimation (se) and energy management systems (ems).



disconnected from more general-purpose systems and networks, as used in the administrative ict systems of the power companies. at the same time, as the amount of ict is increasing in the power system, the nature of ict is also changing with the use of more standard software components and general-purpose protocols. increasingly, the ict components of the power system are con- nected to other ict systems, either for administrative purposes or for vendor support.



i.e. the systems are interdependent. in general, a power system is heavily affected by various dependencies that exist within the sys- tem itself, between the power system and ict, and between the power system and other critical infrastructures or its environment. the focus of this paper is on the power/ict interdependencies.



two systems due to a single common cause. cascading failure is a failure in one system that causes a failure in another system. esca- lating failure is a failure in one system that is worsened by the occurrence of a failure in another system, or by a failure that already has occurred in the other system. interdependencies caus- ing cascading and escalating failures are also named direct and indirect interdependencies, respectively, by some scholars [23].



general methods for identifying and analysing interdependen- cies in the combined power and ict system are described and clas- sified in the following. as we focus on the effect of interdependencies on reliability, we emphasize generally accepted methods used in reliability and risk analysis, but also include methods that have been used to model and simulate critical infras- tructures. most of the methods are not specifically designed for identifying or analysing interdependencies, but are capable of and useful for this.



follow a failure, and may be used for both qualitative and quanti- tative analyses (see e.g. [20]). additionally, power flow and com- munication network simulations are commonly used for calculating the resulting power and ict system state following a failure [29].



due to resource constraints, a full systematic review could not be performed. instead we selected three major archival journals and went through all materials published in 2010 or later. the selected journals were the international journal of critical infras- tructure protection, ieee transactions on smart grid and ieee transactions on power systems. by studying recent papers in major journals we identify a significant portion of high-quality research in this domain, and also emphasise current focus in the research community. the three journals were selected to include one journal targeted towards smart grid research, one journal that considers power system research without particular focus on the smart grid aspects, and one more general critical infrastructure journal. we acknowledge that by restricting our search to only three journals we cannot claim to be comprehensive, but we main- tain that this selection still gives a good overview of the focus of current research.



abstract. in total 48 papers were selected for more detailed analy- sis: six from the international journal of critical infrastructure pro- tection, thirty from the ieee transactions of smart grid and twelve from the ieee transactions on power systems. in this first stage, papers concerned with the relation between ict and power sys- tems were included, also when interdependencies were not partic- ularly mentioned in the title or abstract. however, papers clearly concerning the development of new or improved ict technology for use in power systems were excluded, unless its impact on power system reliability was also considered. when in doubt, the paper was included.



in stage 2, each of the papers selected based on title and abstract was read by at least one researcher. four researchers cooperated on reading the papers. papers clearly not meeting the selection criteria were excluded, but when in doubt the papers were read by one additional researcher in stage 3. a total of 22 papers were excluded in stage 2, leaving 26 papers for stage 3. five researchers took part in this stage. each paper was read by at least one additional researcher. papers that were considered borderline papers, and papers that were considered not to meet the selection criteria, were discussed in the full group before a decision on whether or not to include or exclude the paper was made. in the end, 14 papers were included in the study.



general approaches that include both ict and power aspects (1 paper): chen et al. [30] propose strategies for hierarchical construction of petri net models by different experts for various parts of the system. the combined petri net models attacks in the smart grid and may include multiple coordinated attackers as well as a combination of physical and cyber-attacks.



studying power system reliability impact of failures of specific ict functions or components (5 papers): both aminafar et al. [34] and panteli et al. [35] study impact of situational awareness on power system reliability, though with varying methods and scope. aminafar et al. [34] study the impact of wide-area mea- surement system (wams) malfunction, while panteli et al. [35] [39] model the combined power and ict system using the stochastic activity network (san) formalism, which is based on petri nets. the usefulness of the approach is demonstrated through modelling and analysing cases where the communica- tion network performance is reduced at the same time as a fail- ure has happened in the power network. beccuti et al. [40] extend the work of chiaradonna et al. [39], using the san for- malism primarily to model the power grid, while stochastic well-formed nets (swn) are used to model a denial of service (dos) attack in the communication network.



although chiaradonna et al. (p4) discuss the possibility that repair rates of control system components may increase due to a large blackout. none of the papers address common cause interdepen- dencies. one paper (p3) does not emphasize any of the interdepen- dency categories, but rather aims at including all types of attacks in the model.



in this paper, we have studied how recent research results pub- lished in three major archival journals identify and analyse inter- dependencies between the power and ict systems. as we did not aim to cover all research in this field, but limited the study to three journals, there are relevant research results that are not covered by our literature review. however, as we took a systematic approach to studying the literature, we claim that the results are able to say something about the state of the research field, as well as the main research focus.



as shown in section 4.2, the included papers vary in scope and methods used. as such, it seems that the current research on power and ict interdependencies is at a relatively early stage where a large number of approaches are suggested. the suggested approaches are evaluated using test cases, but none of them is evaluated in a real-life setting.



when addressing interdependencies between power networks and ict, there is a need for competence on both the power system and the ict system, as well as on methods for identifying and ana- lysing interdependencies. to ease interdisciplinary collaboration, it seems wise to use models that are as simple as possible. tradi- tional risk analysis methods, such as fault trees, reliability block diagrams and event tree analysis, have gained much of their suc- cess from their ease of use and understanding. in contrast, many of the approaches suggested in the papers are quite complex to understand and use, and may thus be a poor choice as a basis for interdisciplinary communication.



as both the power and ict systems are complex, simple models are however unlikely to cover all system aspects at a level of detail necessary to understand the reliability impact of the interdepen- dencies. this is likely to be difficult also for complex models. none of the papers presents models that are able to fully include the combined power and ict system and a wide array of threats. thus, there is a need to understand how models can be used together, and in particular how simple models can be used together with complex models in order to achieve both interdisciplinary under- standing and the necessary detail. in some of the papers it is explained how the work can be used as input to other analysis. one example is the cyber-physical system interface matrix sug- gested by lei et al. [36] that makes it possible to include ict fail- ures in more traditional power analyses.



none of the papers we have studied use empirical data to iden- tify or analyse interdependencies, although there have been rele- vant incidents that could be used as a basis for analysis. this may be due to confidentiality issues. however, failures, and also near misses, are an important source for learning and are likely to be useful in understanding how the power and ict systems depend on and influence each other.



interdependencies between the power and ict systems already have an impact on the reliability of the power system. with the ongoing transition towards a smarter grid, this will increase in the future. in this paper, we have presented the results of a litera- ture review of the current state of research on power and ict inter- dependencies and their impact on power system reliability. in particular, we have reviewed which interdependency types that are covered in existing work, as well as which methods that are used to identify and analyse interdependencies. we found that research on interdependencies in the combined power and ict sys- tem is at an early stage. cascading and escalating interdependen- cies are covered, in particular in terms of incidents in the ict system that causes or escalates failures in the power systems. the methods presented in the papers are however not yet able to provide an overview of interdependencies in the power system at large, and at the same time take into account a wide array of both intentional and accidental threats. methods for identification of interdependencies seem to be lacking. we recommend that future research addresses these limitations of the current methods, and puts more attention on identifying the needs of tsos and dsos for identifying interdependencies and understanding their impacts.



