in this paper, an implementation of a lbp (local binary pattern) based fast face recognition system on symbian platform is presented. first, face in picture taken from camera is detected using adaboost algorithm. second, the pre-processing of the face is done, including eye location, geometric normalization, illumination normalization. during the face preprocessing, a rapid eye location method named er (eyeball search) is proposed and implemented. last, the improved lbp is adopted for recognition. although the computational capability of the symbian platform is limited, the experimental results show good performance for recognition rate and time.



face recognition has been widely used in different fields. many face recognition algorithms have gained encouraging performance. recently, with the popularity of digital cameras in mobile devices increasing rapidly, an increasing attention is given to a new application field of face recognition on mobile phones [1].



the local binary pattern (lbp) [7] was originally proposed for texture description and has achieved promising result in texture classification. in [6], ahonen proposed a method of face recognition using lbp. firstly, the face image is divided into r non-overlapping blocks (or regions) of same size. secondly, every histogram of lbp codes are calculated over each block. thirdly, the r histograms are concatenated into a global histogram as the description of the face image. lastly, a nearest-neighbor classifier is used for face recognition by chi-square distance.



first, for each pixel the pattern of the biggest radius is calculated. for those pixels whose pattern is uniform pattern, a sub histogram is built. for those pixels whose pattern is non-uniform pattern, the pattern of smaller radius is further calculated. the process stops when the new pattern of the pixel is uniform pattern or



using hierarchical multiscale lbp for recognition is similar as shown above. first, the image is divided into r blocks of the same size. then the hierarchical multiscale lbp is calculated for each block. next, all the hierarchical multiscale lbps are concatenated into one histogram for recognition. last, the chi-square distance between histograms is used for classification.



this paper introduced an implementation a lbp based fast face recognition system on symbian platform in detail. the adaboost algorithm is used for face detection. during face preprocessing, a rapid eye location method is proposed and implemented. in the last, improved lbp is adopted for recognition. eventually, the system can process about 2.5 frames per second and its average recognition rate is up to 87.78 %.



