transmits the sensor readings to the base station (bs). due to the broadcasting characteristics of wsn, all neighbors of the transmitter will receive the messages transmitted by the transmitter, thus, the most effective way to reduce the energy consumption is to reduce the unnecessary transmissions. data aggregation is such a method to prolong the lifetime of wsn by reducing the redundant transmissions.



recently, many data aggregation schemes for wsn have been proposed. al-karaki et al. propose exact and approximate algorithms for data aggregation [1], aonishi et al. study the impact of aggregation efficiency on git routing [2], gatani et al. propose a robust and efficient data gathering method for wireless sensor networks [3], considine et al. propose an approximate aggregation techniques for sensor databases [4], villas et al. propose a scalable and dynamic data aggregation aware routing protocol for wireless sensor networks [5], heinzelman et al. proposed leach [6] for the network clustering and cluster head election; younis et al. proposed heed[7] in which the residual energy was taken into account cluster head election.



in these schemes, the cluster-based data aggregation [6] [7] usually consist of two phases, first phase is the inner-cluster aggregation and the second, fusion data transmitted to the base station. we know that the wsn has features such as the cluster is a relatively small area and sensors will have same or similar readings if they are close, but most of cluster-based schemes pay more attention to the second phase and all sensors will transmit their readings to aggregator in the first phase. in our scheme (lbda: location-based inner-cluster data aggregation), the mentioned features will be utilized to reducing the inner-cluster transmissions.



in our scheme, the cluster was divided into four regions and each node can calculates which region it located in using location information. for each region, cluster head knows how many nodes located in and selects some agent nodes for each region. also, the communication range of agent node should cover its region. only the nodes located in the same region and have different readings with agent node will transmit their data to cluster head and therefore reduce certain number of inner-cluster transmissions.



