electrochemical processes usually occur under condition of electric neutrality of a system as whole and its macroscopic parts separately. a set of electrochemical reactions may be quite complicated, but the deviations from neutrality usually have scale determined by debye length only, i.e. known types of chemical processes cannot result in appearance of macroscopic electric charge and electric currents.



one should underline that hydrogels (polymer networks) were investigated intensively during last few decades [1-3]. this polymer material is of great interest mainly due to its pronounceable reaction on slight variation of external conditions. hydrogels initially swelled in water up to very high degrees (1000 g/g and more) may change their volume sharply due to variation of temperature, ionic strengths of surrounding media, influence of electric current, etc.



interactions between different types of hydrogels are much less investigated that hydrogels themselves; one can found only separate reports on this subject in current literature [4,5]. besides, cited articles [4,5] are devoted to contact interactions of hydrogels. now we report about sufficiently new phenomena, which demonstrate possibility of electrochemical interactions between specimens placed at quite long distance from each other.



it is easy to see that obtained curve is non-monotonic one: additional swelling of paa gel sufficiently depends on the distance l. here we should underline that typically swelling ratio has maximum just in pure water (in comparison with other solvents). in particular, adding of salt or organic compounds leads to contraction of the specimen with releasing of water in surrounding solution. in other words, obtaining much higher swelling ratio is surprising fact as it is.



as well as in the case of classic swelling of polyelectrolyte hydrogel [11], this field plays a double role. first, it acts on charged particles concentrated near the surface of the specimen resulting in additional swelling. second, the same action promote decomposing of =nh+2 groups and may tear out hydrogen ions, i.e. magnitude of the field restrict electric charge of both specimens. obviously, this factor restrict total amount of ions involved in reaction (2) also.



low-molecular ions are separated between hydrogel pair in this reaction (3); besides, low-molecular salt is removed from solution into gel pair volume, i.e. anomalous ion exchange actually takes place. normally reaction (3) cannot take place at all, but in the case of long-distance interactions between hydrogels it became quite understandable. indeed, reaction (3) is a total of two different processes, which take place in different specimens.



the most obvious applications of observed phenomenon lie practically in the same field that for ion exchange (water purification, enrichment technologies, etc). nevertheless, anomalous ion exchange has some sufficient preferences. first, the ionic exchange system based on phenomenon of long-distance interactions between hydrogels is easy renewable. indeed, it is enough to apply mechanical stress for releasing concentrated salt solution. second, anomalous ion exchanging gives possibility to get out arbitrary salt from solution, etc.



thus, one can say that interactions between acid and protonized polymer hydrogels demonstrate an example of chemical process, which results in appearance of macroscopic electric charge. generally, this charge may be considered as a chemical signal, which can propagate for a quite long distance and used for artificial neuron networks development in future. other applications of observed phenomena are connected with anomalous ion exchange, for example for deep purification of water solutions from low-molecular salts.



