from the for us institute for health metrics and evaluation ( in addition, economic costs are es- timated to reach the order of several trillion dollars for the usa alone [11]. while effective vaccinations are now available, there are still a



considerable number of infected people worldwide. moreover, effective medications for treating severe cases are still scarce. remdesivir, a drug originally developed against the ebola virus, is currently the only ap- proved covid-19 drug in the european union, and evidence suggests that it has little effect on the overall survival of covid-19 patients [5]. several studies have revealed general risk factors for a poor dis- ease outcome, such as age, male gender, and low platelet count [20,42,46,65]. in addition, machine learning (ml) models have been published to predict mortality risk for individual patients, primarily based on data from intensive care units and electronic health records from the us and uk [3,6,19,31,48,53,57] as well as a few other coun- tries [33,39]. notably the 4c mortality score developed by ali et al.,



the final model was further explored with respect to the impact of most relevant predictors using shapley additive explanations - shap [38]. briefly, shap is an approach from cooperative game-theory to de- compose the overall prediction of the model into a sum of individual feature contributions (see details in 4.4). in total, the final model com- prised 160 features. a complete list can be found in supplementary file 1.



firstly, one of the mechanisms identified by our approach is related to three proteins involved in the innate immune system (i.e., ddx58, mavs, and ifih1), and more specifically in the detection and response to viruses. these proteins are involved in both indications. for example, mavs interacts with the rna helicase rig-i/mda-5 after the dsrna of the virus is recognized, leading to the initiation of the antiviral signaling cascade [69]. related with this process is the second shared mechanism, which corresponds to the activation of the inflammasome and the subse- quent triggering of caspase activation through cytokine secretion. this mechanism has been strongly linked with both ad [21] and pd [61] as well as covid-19 [44]. in the context of neurodegeneration, the ac- tivation of the inflammasome leads to the secretion of inflammatory cytokines and cell death through pyroptosis, to which both ad and pd are associated via tangle and plaque formation and death of dopamine neurons, respectively [4]. similarly, in the context of covid-19, the in-



lastly, il-6 and il-10 are among two of the interleukins secreted after inflammasome activation, one of the shared mechanisms between these pathologies, and their increased expression has been shown to be predictive of covid-19 severity [14]. furthermore, the interaction between two other proteins (i.e., ddit3 and bcl2l11) involved in the regulation of apoptosis is also suggested as a common mechanism across these indications [18,26].



tyk2 has been patented as drug target in ad (cn102112879b, china, [27]). in addition, genetic variants in tyk2 have recently been associated to covid-19 disease severity [9]. moreover, we found several kinase inhibitors active against sars-cov-2 in a cellular screen for anti-cytopathic effect (anti-cpe) in two different cellular environments: caco2 [17] and vero-e6 [67]. the relative results of those screening have been made public on chembl ( ebi.ac.uk/chembl/document_report_card/chembl4303101/, https:// respectively.



3% pfa in pbs, and the plates sealed and disinfected to inactivate sars-cov-2. quantification of viral inhibition (based upon caco-2 cell viability relative to controls) was performed using high content imaging (perkinelmer, operetta cls). for what concerns the assay on vero-e6 cells, we used basically the same protocol, but the time we waited for readout was longer than 48 h (96 h) due to the different infection kinetic on these cells.



in this work, we first developed a highly predictive ml model for predicting covid-19 mortality on an individual patient basis using deep observational data from leoss, primarily covering the inpatient situa- tion in germany (95% of patients). to our knowledge, this is the first ml based mortality model based on such (notionally) representative ger- man data. notably, ml models predicting alternative endpoints using leoss have been published recently [30,64].



our ml model demonstrates similar prediction performance to the well-known 4c mortality score, which has been developed based on rep- resentative data from the uk [3]. however, a direct comparison between both models is not possible, because the 4c model is formulated as a classifier predicting all-cause in-hospital mortality, whereas our model is formulated as a time-to-event model predicting all-cause time depen- dent mortality risk after covid-19 diagnosis. our model, thus, considers censoring of survival times after patients have left hospital or other med- ical facilities. our mortality model was built on a set of patients, which is thought to be primarily representative for german hospitals. whether there are unknown selection biases, remains an open question and they were not under our control. moreover, it is unclear whether our model would be predictive for patients in other countries.



ates act multiplicatively on (survival) time. it is used if the proportional hazards assumption of the cox model is not satisfied. aft models allow to directly estimate (the effect of covariates on) expected failure times, where the time until failure is the duration of survival.



[55]. based on such data, stukalov et al. [55], tested both compounds in the a549-ace2 cell line and reported increased virus growth after treat- ment. other authors recently reported sorafenib to be a potent sting inhibitor effectively stopping virus growth in thp1 cells and thus sug-



gested to pay more attention to covid-19 treatment strategies that ad- dress the dysregulation of cytokines [13]. since the used cell lines in both cases were different from ours, results are not directly comparable. hence, we see a need for further tests with regorafenib and sorafenib in other cell systems.



