in recent years, many-objective optimization problems have been widely used. however, with the increase of the number of objectives, the difficulty of solving increases exponentially, and the imbalance between convergence and diversity becomes more serious. in view of the above problems, this paper combines the idea of three-way decision, redesigns the environment selection strategy, and proposes a many-objective optimization algorithm based on three-way decision. firstly, the distance from the individual to the ideal point is used as an index to measure individual convergence, the minimum distance from the individual to other solutions is used as an indicator to measure individual diversity, and the individuals with good convergence and good diversity are selected separately by combining the thresholds of the three-way decision; and secondly, a dynamic threshold acquisition method is designed to further improve the performance of the algorithm; finally, it is proved that the algorithm can effectively balance convergence and diversity through tests of different data sets, so as to verify the feasibility and effectiveness of the algorithm strategies to select good-quality individuals. grea combines pareto domination with grid sorting to select individuals with good convergence and uses grid crowding distance to select individuals with good diversity. nsga-iii algorithm uses a non-dominant sorting strategy and reference point strategy. however, with the increase in the number of iterations, the number of nondominant solutions in the population will gradually increase. however, the reference point strategy only considers the diversity of the population. therefore, common environmental selection methods will lead to population convergence and diversity will be out of balance. aiming at how to better balance individual convergence and diversity choice in environment selection, the three-way decision provides a possible idea.



the three-way decision(twd) theory is a decisionmaking model developed on the basis of rough set theory proposed by yiyu yao, which is more in line with human cognition and efficient. it believes that there is enough information to judge whether things are good or bad, to make decisions about acceptance or rejection. for some problems that do not have enough information to make decisions, you can put things into the boundary domain and delay the judgment of things, which is called delayed decision-making. when the evidence is sufficient and complete, make an acceptance or rejection strategy. in environmental selection, the distance from an individual to an ideal point is used as an index to measure individual convergence, and the minimum distance from an individual to other solutions is used as an index to measure individual diversity. the decision to accept an individual with good convergence and diversity is made, while the decision to reject an individual with poor convergence and diversity is made. delayed decisions are made for individuals with good convergence and poor diversity or with good diversity and poor convergence.



optimization algorithms based on pareto domination enhance selection pressure by modifying the pareto domination relation. sato expanded or contracted the dominant area of individuals by modifying the objective value with customized parameters, thus changing the dominant relationship between individuals. sun selected inverted generational distance solutions with good convergence and diversity based on the igd index, proposed a new dominant relationship, and developed an adaptive niche technology based on the perspectives of the candidate solutions, to improve the accuracy of igd sampling reference points. among algorithms based on pareto domination, most moea shows poor universality for problems with different pareto domination. therefore, the algorithm should have good applicability in the process of solving. tian proposed an adaptive strategy to dynamically adjust the dominance relationship according to the current generation number. the improvement of this algorithm ensures good applicability in solving pareto frontier problems to a certain extent. while balancing diversity and convergence, how to ensure the scalability of the algorithm is also a problem that needs to be solved. grea uses grid ranking, crowding distance and coordinate point distance to strengthen the selection pressure of the best direction, while maintaining a wide and even distribution of solutions to avoid local overcrowding. at the same time, grea guides the algorithm to search in different directions, revealing the role of grid partition parameters.



according to the evaluation index, the distribution uniformity, diversity and convergence of the candidate solutions can be weighed to compare the advantages and disadvantages of the candidate solutions, to increase the selection pressure of the algorithm. monte carlo simulation is used in hype to approximate accurate hypervolume values. the ranking of the solution caused by the overcapacity indication, the algorithm can make a trade-off between the accuracy of the estimate and the available computing resources. igd is considered to be a reliable performance indicator for quantifying convergence and diversity of many-objective evolutionary algorithms. igd was used to improve the accuracy of the solution, and the reference point set was adjusted according to the index contribution of the candidate solution to enhance the universality of understanding. hausdorff distance is a tool to study the distance between objects in different fields, but in multi-objective optimization algorithms, hausdorff distance does not fit the single outlier of the candidate



pareto based environment selection strategies, focusing on convergence and diversity respectively. spea is proposed to find or approximate pareto optimal set of multi-objective optimization problems. zitzler proposed spea2, which added two new mechanisms to improve its searching ability, one is a more effective crossover mechanism, and the other is an archiving mechanism to maintain the diversity of solutions in the objective space and variable space. selection strategies, including mating selection and environmental selection, are key factors in the design of manyobjective evolutionary algorithm. in maoea-css, the algorithm takes into account the quality of each selected parent and the effectiveness of the selected parent combination as well as the performance of the population as a whole. at the same time, new measures of distance convergence and angle differentiation are proposed to solve the dimension problem in multi-objective optimization problems. the convergence index of the computational efficiency of the algorithm selects descendant individuals one by one to increase the selection pressure toward the pareto optimal frontier.



this chapter details the many-objective evolutionary algorithm based on three-way decision(maoea-twd). the idea of three-way decision is adopted to balance convergence and diversity in the solution process. then, a dynamic threshold acquisition method of three-way decisions is proposed to enhance the performance of the algorithm. the basic steps of the algorithm are described in 3.1. dynamic threshold acquisition methods are described in detail in 3.2. time complexity analysis are described in detail in 3.3.



in this section, the time complexity of the proposed maoeatwd algorithm is analyzed. the main steps of the algorithm include population initialization, population selection, crossover and mutation operations, fast non-dominated sorting, population convergence and diversity calculation, and linear threshold threeway decision selection strategy. assuming that population of size is n, the objective dimension is m. so, this algorithm to select



in this chapter, we consider the instance problem dtlz test set and six questions from the wfg test set, dtlzi(i= 1, 2,...,7) and wfgi(i= 1, 2,...,6) for testing. dtlz problem pareto frontier features are concave, linear, degenerate, bias, etc. wfg problem pareto frontier features are impartibility, discrete, convex etc.



in this paper, we consider thirteen instance problems dtlzi(i= 1, 2,...,7), wfg(i= 1, 2,...,6) and set five different objective quantities(m= 4, 6, 8, 10, 15) to compare the maoea-twd algorithm with the classical algorithms grea, rvea, maoeard, efrrr, nsga-iii. get 65 test examples.



aiming at the problem of convergence and diversity conflict caused by the increase of objectives in the many-objective optimization problem, this paper proposes a many-objective evolutionary algorithm based on three-way decision(maoea-twd), which integrates the three-way decision ideas into the environmental selection, and then selects individuals with strong convergence and rich diversity in the population. at the same time, the three dynamic thresholds of decision are combined to improve the performance of the many-objective optimization algorithm. the experimental results show that compared with the commonly used many-objective optimization algorithm, the maoea-twd algorithm proposed in this paper has better performance and can effectively balance the convergence and diversity of populations.



this work was supported by the national natural science foundation of china(grant no. 61806138); the central financial guidance for local science and technology development fund(grant no. ydzjsx2021a038); china university industry-universityresearch innovation fundfuture network innovation research and application project(2021fna04014); and taiyuan university of science and technology joint training demonstration base for graduate students(jd2022003).



