social influence and influence diffusion have been extensively studied in social networks. however, most existing works on influence diffusion focus on static networks. in this paper, we study the problem of maximizing in- fluence diffusion in dynamic social networks, i.e. networks that change over time. we propose the following algorithms under the linear threshold (lt) and independent cascade (ic) models: (a) the dm algorithm which is an extension of mati algorithm and solves the influence maximization (im) problem in dynamic networks, (b) the dm-c algorithm which is a latter version of dm and solves the im problem using k-core decomposition and the core number information, (c) the dm-t algorithm which is another version of dm, that uses k-truss decomposition and the truss number information in order to solve the im problem. experimental results show that our proposed algorithms increase diffusion performance by 2 times compared with several state of the art algorithms and achieve comparable results in diffusion with the greedy algorithm. also, the proposed algorithms are 8.5 times faster in computational time compared with previous methods.



product so as to trigger a large cascade of further adoptions via social influence. fundamentally, we need to understand the influence diffusion by answering questions such as: how to select the seed users so that the total number of triggered users who adopt the product can be maximized (a.k.a. influence maximization) [1,9,11,19,20,21].



chen et al. [3] propose pmia (prefix excluding maximum influence arborescence) to find seed vertices focusing on the paths with high in- formation diffusion ratio. chen et al. [4] also suggested degree discount based on node degree where the nodes, which are adjacent to the selected node, are given penalty. this means that, when node v is selected as a seed node and u is its neighbor, it is possible that v prop- agates information to u, so selecting nodes other than u as seed nodes is better for information diffusion. cai et al. [2] proposed holistic influ- ence maximization problem as a complementary to influence maximi- zation problem. song et al. [18] proposed bi-clkt model that exploits contrastive learning to learn from large amounts of unlabelled data, transforming knowledge tracking problem into a graph form.



tedge(.) value increases from k to k + 1, a triangle is formed with either e or theorem 3. if an edge e is inserted into g, then for every other edge whose with at least one other edge whose tedge(.) value also increases from k to k +



using email data from a large european research institution. the e-mails represent communication only between institution members and not with the rest of the world. a directed edge (u, v, t) means that person u sent an email to person v at time t [24].



this dataset contains the temporal network of contacts between the children and teachers. in case of multiple active contacts in a given interval, multiple lines start with the same value of t which is measured in seconds [25]. this dataset contains the temporal network of contacts between patients (29), patients and health- care workers (hcws) and among hcws (49) in a hospital ward in lyon, france. in case of multiple active contacts in a given interval, multiple lines start with the same value of t which is measured in seconds [25].



collegemsg this dataset is comprised of private messages sent on an online social network at the university of california, irvine. users could search the network for others and then initiate conversation based on profile information. an edge (u, v, t) means that user u sent a private message to user v at time t [24].



methods for static networks. based on the experiments performed for comparing with previous methods, the proposed methods perform bet- ter than the state of the art methods in terms of diffusion, except for mc greedy which achieves better diffusion. as compared to mc greedy, our methods are 8.5 times faster. in future work, we plan to investigate the case of partially observed dynamic graphs. in addition, we plan to study the influence maximization problem in dynamic networks using models other than lt and ic.



