criminological studies have shown that crime is not uniformly distributed among victims, arrestees and places, with repeat crimes playing a fundamental role [5]. in fact, about half of all crimes in the united states are committed by repeat arrest- ees [19]. moreover, some reports [4] have suggested a high degree of overlap between victim and arrestee populations, and research has already demonstrated that victims of per- sonal or property crimes and of gun violence experience ele- vated crime risks within months of an instigating incident [8,16]. thus, it is reasonable to expect the same effect to exist



the immediate motivation for our study is to inform an ongo- ing collaborative effort between the chicago police department and our research team at the illinois institute of technology. in this initiative, we have successfully developed and deployed prediction algorithms that estimate the risk of future violence for persons with extensive criminal records. we anticipate that our prediction algorithms will be enhanced by exploiting the probabilistic relationship, if it exists, that would be implied by the aforementioned interpersonal near-repeat effect. thus, the present work not only informs our fundamental understanding of crime behavior, but is also expected to have practical implica- tions for the prediction of crime, which is a rapidly emerging field [18]. we next review basic concepts of the near-repeat effect and social networks so as to place our work in context.



rengert [20] investigated repeat effects in shootings in philadelphia, pa, using a modification of a standard knox test [12]. short et al. [22] showed that repeat effects exist among burglaries in long beach, ca, and further showed that these effects decrease with distance in space and time.



social networks have recently been used to investigate the influence that an individual has on his peers [16,17]. there are many reasons to suspect the spreading of repeat effects in a criminal social network. first, many violent crimes are dri- ven by emotions created by social relationships and thus occur between persons who know one another [9]. second, condi- tions favoring the participation in crime incidents are spread through peer influence [7]. third, physical objects such as drugs or weapons are usually dispersed through interpersonal connections, implying that the illegal selling and use of these objects also occur through these connections [6].



in this study each arrestee in a dataset defines a node hav- ing a unique label within the social network. for purposes of anonymization, we refer to each arrestee using a unique inter- nal record (ir) number. when two or more subjects are arrested as part of the same incident, their respective nodes become connected in the social network. the edge connecting this pair of nodes forms on the day the incident occurred; thus, the social network is constantly evolving. the network is an undirected graph, as there is an inherent symmetry between co-arrestees: if ir1 is arrested with ir2, then ir2 is arrested with ir1. for simplicity in this initial investigation, the edges are unweighted (two subjects are either connected or not, and no connection strength is assigned to the edge that connects them). although our network is dynamic, unweighted, and undirected, the analysis to follow can readily be adapted to other types of networks.



although we will separately analyze the repeat behavior of violent and non-violent crimes, we use a single, common social network for all arrestees. we measure the separation between two subjects in the social network using the geodesic distance between their nodes, i.e., the minimum number of edges that must be traversed to move between the nodes. it should be 0.003. it should be noted that one cannot infer conclusions about the precise value of s for which dn0 occurs (which may not even be unique); the test can only reject the null hypothesis and does not provide insight as to the time frame of elevated repeat risk. however, finding a s for which



in the traditional spatial case, the point density ~k is usually chosen as the average number of points per unit area. doing so gives the researcher a meaningful and convenient way to quantify the spatial clustering relative to that expected by a poisson process. however, as explained earlier, there is no rea- son to believe our data follow a poisson process; however, analogous to the spatial case, we can still define ~k as a rate esti- mated as n divided by the total number of subjects divided by the total number of weeks in the study.



simultaneity. if independent events are allowed to occur simul- taneously, then the time intervals between events will not be exponentially distributed [21]. nevertheless, statistical testing of our observed distributions can be done using monte carlo simulations to estimate a null distribution.



we calculated both statistics using our observed distributions, and in order to compare the statistics to those under the null hypothesis, we performed monte carlo simulations in which the dates of the subject-date 2-tuples are randomly permuted. reshuffling the date data is a common strategy in this situation when the null distribution is unknown. originally applied in besag and diggle [3], this strategy was also implemented in ratcliffe and rengert [20] to evaluate near-repeat shooting patterns in the city of philadelphia, pa.



since the o-ring statistic is, as explained previously, a mea- sure of instantaneous effect, it provides insight concerning the time scales of repeat incidents in our chicago datasets. for instance, the o-ring statistic is elevated for our violent dataset during roughly the first 25 weeks for n 1, indicating (possibly for the reasons outlined in the introduction) an increased chance of a violent repeat crime occurring within about six months of an initial violent crime for subjects directly con- nected in the network. during this time, we observe 58% more repeat incidents than expected by chance. the k statistic reaches a maximum separation from its confidence envelope during this time period before it begins to approach and finally penetrates the envelope at about 90 weeks. thus the total num- ber of violent repeat crimes separated by less than 90 weeks is more than what would be expected by chance alone.



ure). during these time frames, we see 10.47% more crimes than expected for n 1, 4.91% for n 2, 3.06% for n 3, and 2.96% for n 4. the k statistics show repeat effects at n 3 and n 4 while the o-ring statistics do not. this is



this project was supported by award no. 2011-ij-cx-k014, awarded by the national institute of justice, office of justice programs, u.s. department of justice. the opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this publica- tion are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the department of justice.



