the core objective of this research is to describe the behavior of the distribution using the mle method to es- timate its parameters, as well as to determine the optimal artificial neural network method by comparing it to the maximum likelihood estimation method and applying it to real data for breast cancer patients to determine survival, risk, and other survival study functions of the log-logistic distribution. the parameters were defined in the input layer of the artificial neural network developed for the purpose of survival analysis and reliability function, hazard rate function, probability density function, reserved hazard rate function, mills ratio, odd function and chr values were obtained in the output layer. the findings show that risk function increases with the increase in the time of infection and then decreases for a group of breast cancer patients under study, which corresponds to the theoretical properties of this according to the practical conclusions. the examination of survival analysis reveals that practical conclusions correspond to the theoretical properties of log-logistic dis- tribution. artificial neural networks have proven to be one of the ideal tools that can be used to predict various vital parameters, especially survival of cancer patients, with their high predictive capabilities.



tistical methods and mathematical tools. ambrogi et al. [11] focused on the research of precise hazard functions of survival data as a statistical analysis. in the study, a multilayer perceptron is recommended as an addition of glms (generalized linear models) with multinomial errors using a nonlinear estimator within the structure of discrete-time distri- butions and competing risks. as per standard practice, weight reduction



is adopted to modulate model complexity. for complexity control, a genetic algorithm is taken into account that allows each parameter of the model to be regulated independently. to exemplify the importance and strengths of the methodology, an implementation is presented on analyses of 1793 women with primary breast cancer without axillary lymph node involvement. shafiq et al. [12] used two separate tech- niques, ann modelling and maximum likelihood estimation (mle), to establish a real application to estimate covid-19 mortality rates in italy. the numerical findings were compared to the predictions derived from the ann model formed with 9 neurons in the hidden layer. the r value for ann model was 0.99836, and the greatest deviance was



-0.14%. the findings of the investigation showed the great reliability of the two statistical models constructed. bhambhvani et al. [13] examined the predictability of survival with machine learning in bladder cancer patients. in the research, the performance of ann, a kind of machine learning algorithm, was evaluated with the performance of multivariate



cox proportional hazards models in predicting 5-year genetic disorder survival and overall longevity. anns were trained and tested by dividing the dataset in a ratio of 80/20. considering the inherent constraints of administrative datasets, machine learning can help to analyze the complex data they contain more effectively. as a result, it has been seen that machine learning algorithms can be a tool that can be used in improving the capacity to forecast the prognosis of breast carcinoma.



cological studies, research in the domain of survival analysis has exploded in recent years. one goal of this research is to investigate the effectiveness of competing survival function estimators after selecting the probability density function (pdf) that perfectly describes the sur- vival times of breast carcinoma women. the current study will employ the ll distribution to model survival data. based on our careful review of abovementioned studies, we believe that no investigation has been conducted on metric analysis of the probability survival model via mle and artificial ann. hence, the fundamental goal of this research is to investigate, optimize and predict lifetime model dependability using two different methodologies, ann modelling and mle. this research attempts to fill a significant gap in the existing literature.



in fields like as medicine biology, social sciences, econometrics, and engineering, survival analysis is now widely used [20]. whenever it concerns to events that can happen over a long period of time (years), the time of occurrence becomes critical information, and the field that investigates its model is known as survival evaluation [17,21]. the period between a certain starting point (birth, commencement of treatment) and a "terminal" event (death, treatment failure), where "terminal" denotes that following events are not taken into account even if they could theoretically occur (i.e., recurrent failures), is referred to as survival time (t). the survival function (sf) is the fundamental quantity the largest and smallest possibilities of an occurrence. it can also be used to simulate any other variable that changes over time [22]. let t r.v represents the survival time, which is nothing but the time-to-event, then generally h (t), is mathematically characterized as:



