the grid integrated renewable energy sources are becoming a common area of interest for power generation in the recent times. the design and development of efficient interfacing technologies to interconnect renewable energy sources with grid is catching a lot of attention among the researchers these days. the interfacing unit becomes crucial as renewable energy sources when directly connected to grid, can inject harmonic components that may deteriorate the quality of power. this paper proposes a mechanism to use shunt active filter as an interface between renewable energy sources and grid with a modified and efficient control scheme. the shunt active filter with this modified controller controls the real power supplied by the grid (source) in addition to its usual functions such as reactive power compensation, power factor correction and harmonic elimination. the non-linear load is diode bridge rectifier feeding resistive load and the unbalanced load also introduced to verify the controller performance. the simulation of the proposed system under both balanced and unbalanced load conditions have been done and the obtained results prove the effectiveness of using a shunt active filter as the interfacing unit for grid integrated renewable energy system.



the different types of interfacing units are used for grid-renewable energy source interconnection as reported in literatures, describes about commonly used topologies such separately connected systems, micro- grids, multi-port converter and custom power devices [9, 10]. the issues such as starting transients, energy conversion efficiency and power quality make the use of custom power interface like shunt active filter and statcom as better choice. the shunt active filters as interfacing units is a latest topology reported in [11- 12].



also desired fraction which determines how much real power is supplied by the source. difference between load current and reference source current gives the reference filter current. this reference filter current and actual filter current are given to a hysteresis controller to get the pulses for the inverter.



