many approaches have been proposed in the literature to solve the power scheduling problem. current approaches can be catego- rized into two main groups [8]: semi-automatic schedulers [11,19,5] and automatic schedulers [17,15,1] schedulers. in the semi-automatic schedulers, the consumers inject their desired preferences (e.g., desired temperature, appliances start time pref- erences, etc.) during the scheduling, contrarily to the automatic schedulers where there is no human intervention. in our work, we will be focusing on six scheduling approaches, that vary in their scheduler, optimization problem type, appliances types and objectives.



in [15], the authors formulated an optimization model for households power scheduling, aiming at reducing the electricity costs and the peak load of the grid. to do so, the authors integrated the incentive and inconvenience concepts. the incentive is offered to the users during peak times to encourage them to reduce their consumption, while the inconvenience seeks to reduce the differ- ence between the baseline and the optimal appliances schedule. the objective function is defined as follows:



restricted goal: another limitation of all the existing approaches is that they do not cope with the three objectives (operational, ecological, and economical) of a successful dsm. in almost all the approaches [11,19,15,1,5,17], the goal was mainly to reduce the electricity costs (economical aspect). in [11,19], the peak load reduction (operational aspect) is addressed aiming at reducing the peak hours in the power grid. however, none of the approaches considers the gas emission reduction (ecological aspect).



into account the ecological, economical and operational parame- ters). several approaches have been proposed in the literature to provide appropriate associations [13,14]. our approach is based on [14], where the authors provided a dedicated clustering algo- rithm aiming at gathering the components that have mutual ben- efits. to do so, they proposed a digital ecosystem de cooperative model for sg management, that consists of two main modules:



(1) the alliances builder and (2) the seller2buyer matcher. the alli- ances builder provides an appropriate clustering algorithm, aiming at gathering all the de heterogeneous components, having similar needs and preferences. once done, the seller2buyer matcher is applied inside each cluster and between clusters, targeting a better collaboration inside the sg. note that, their needs and preferences are expressed via a three-dimensional objective function that takes into account the operational aspect by reducing the transmission



as mentioned before, the input of this module is a set of seller-to- buyer associations, each composed of a seller and a buyer. note that, each seller or buyer might belong to one or several associations. while sellers and buyers of the same association have to exchange power, each one of them has its own preferences to be respected so to establish a successful cooperative sg. hence, the first step towards each association scheduling is to find the best balance or what we call the compromise, between the preferences of the related seller and buyer. let us consider the first association



note that, the penalty is a positive weighting factor, which represents the waiting time flexibility of the component. if the penalty is zero, this means that the component does not penalize the delay between its desired and operational schedule. the high- est is the penalty, the most the component is delay time constraining.



2) the sg components randomly located within this area. the power gap (g) of any sg component nr: 10 mw 6g(nr) 6316 mw. note that, the power cost per kw is set to 11.6 cents based on the us electricity prices 3 and the conventional power generator gas emissions is set to 0.26 kgco2/kwh.4 the prototype includes the



in this test, two different scenarios were considered: (1) a non- cooperative scheduling, where each association is selfish in that it only considers its desired schedule, and (2) a cooperative schedul- ing based on our proposed multi-objective scheduling. to remain coherent, we will consider the scheduling of the seller-to-buyer associations of our same previous illustration. note that, the out- put of the preference-based compromise builder will be used here to calculate the comfort of the components by calculating the gap between the resulting schedule and the compromise desired schedule.



in this paper, we proposed mocsf, a multi-objective coopera- tive scheduling framework providing a multi-type scheduling for the power generation, storage and consumption, while taking into account the ecological, economical and operational costs in a power system. mocsf consists of two main modules: the preference-based compromise builder, providing the best balance between the desired schedulers of the sellers and the buyers given as an input, and the multi-objective scheduler, providing seller-to- buyer associations scheduling aiming at ensuring the economical, ecological and operational satisfactions. experiments results showed the potential of our modules in providing efficient preference-based compromises able to reduce the gap with the ini- tial components preferences and in minimizing the three- dimensional costs. currently, we are working on implementing a privacy-by-design [9] grid control allowing to protect the compo- nents privacy whilst preserving the advanced control and monitor- ing functionalities of the power systems. further, it is interesting to apply strategy-proof techniques, in order to avoid cheating in the desired schedules,



perukrishnen vytelingum, thomas d. voice, sarvapali d. ramchurn, alex rogers, nicholas r. jennings, agent-based micro-storage management for the smart grid, in: proceedings of the 9th international conference on autonomous agents and multiagent systems: volume 1-volume 1.



