using the nodes as the players and interactions between them as the edges. the focus of this paper is to apply the social net- work analysis techniques such as clustering coefficients and centrality measurements to quantify the belongingness of an individual player within the team along with their individual performances. as a result, the quality of the players as a team member reflected in team formation which is very important for team sports. based on that characterization the key players (in a role based approach) can be selected for a team formation.



cricket is a bat-and-ball game played between two teams, consisting eleven players in the both team, on a cricket field. one team is the batting team, attempts to score as many runs as possible, while their opponents are the bowling team, which give fielding and bowling and try to take as many as wickets and restrict the runs of the batting team. in short term cricket, the length of each innings ranges from 20 overs of six bowling deliveries per side (t-20 cricket) to 50 over deliveries per side (one day cricket) and in case of test cricket, there is a maxi- mum of four innings played over five days, and per day max- imum 90 overs can be played.



the rest of the paper is organized as follows. in section 2, the related works are discussed. the proposed approach for team formation is discussed in section 3. this section high- lights small world characteristics of t-20 cricket network. dif- ferent centrality measures and clustering coefficient technique from the view point of cricket network are also discussed. in section 4, the effectiveness of the proposed approach is evalu- ated and compared with ipl t-20 session 2016. in section 5 a brief discussion is made comparing other best team formation approaches with proposed approach. finally, the paper con- cludes in section 6.



it is important for the cricket network to be a small world net- work [1], as our idea is to use the centrality measures and clus- tering coefficient to detect the key players in the network. however, most of the nodes are not directly connected in a small world, but the distance (i.e., number of hops) between two nodes is significantly less and the nodes connecting other nodes play significant role in the network.



clustering coefficient of a node (player) in the network signi- fies characteristics of that node (player) forming local cluster that is numbers of nodes (players) those are influenced by that particular node (player). in this context, the dense local cluster signifies that node (player) has great influence to other nodes (players). in social networks, especially in small world net- works, generally all nodes are highly connected and the cluster- ing coefficient is also quite high valued than the average clustering coefficient of random network. the local clustering coefficient of a node is also defined as the number of complete graph (clique) that can be formed using the neighbor of that node. this property was first introduced by watts and stro- gatz [1] for defining small world coefficient. the clustering coefficient varies between 0 (no clustering) and 1 (maximum clustering) [20].



among all centrality measures degree distribution is the sim- plest one. degree of a node in a network is determined by the total number of outgoing and ingoing edges from that node. in case of directed graph we have two types of degree distribution namely out-degree and in-degree distribution for each node. although in case of undirected graph there is no such classification. when analysing the weighted networks, degree has generally expressed as sum of nodes. for calculat- ing the total degree distribution of a node in a directed graph, all the incoming and outgoing edges should be added. the in-



it is interesting that team royal challenger bengaluru have most players in the role of batsman from our proposed pool of players. however, none of their bowlers are from this pool. in the real scenario, the team royal challenger bengaluru per- formed very well and they were the first qualifier for the final of ipl season 2016, however their comparatively poor bowling section was a drawback of their performance. now the other three teams that include maximum number of players from our proposed best teams are rising pune supergiant, sunrisers hyderabad and gujarat lions. from these four teams except rising pune supergiant, other teams are top three teams of ipl 2016.



