classification (mahesh et al., 2017; joseph raj et al., 2019) is a low-cost method but in this method, cocoon characteristics are considered, and not possible to analyze the pupa characteristics. the x-ray method is a promising method that can be used to get the shape characteristics of the pupa without cutting the cocoon.



the remainder of the paper is organized as follows. section 2 dis- cusses the materials and methods which include sample collection, image pre-processing techniques, feature extraction, and classification method. the classification results are presented in section 3 and it is dis- cussed in detail in section 4. the major conclusions are given in section 5.



methods that are used for the dimension measurement methods include ellipse fitting and minimum rectangular fit method which helps in the width and height estimation of regularly shaped objects. in the ellipse fit method, an ellipse is inscribed within the object contour and used a minor axis for width estimation and a major axis for height estimation. in the minimum rectangle fit method, a minimum area rect- angle is fitted around the object, and then use the width of the rectangle for the width of the object and the height of the rectangle for the height of the object. these two methods fail in some cases. hence a new method was proposed in this study.



recognition, machine learning, etc., (xu et al., 2019). different dimension- ality reduction methods such as principal component analysis, linear discriminant analysis, truncated singular value decomposition, t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-sne), and multidimen- sional scaling (mds) were used and the results were compared.



in ensemble learning, a single problem is solved based on the train- ing of multiple learners. a set of hypotheses are constructed and they are combined to get a solution for the problem. this consists of base learners or weak learners. in ensemble methods, the performance of the weak learners (base learners) is boosted. base learners are devel- oped from the training data by base learning algorithms such as decision-tree, logistic regression, etc. (binson et al., 2021a, 2021b, 2021c; schapire, 2013; wang et al., 2021).



the proposed model for the classification of the pupa based on gen- der was designed using lda + adaboost with logistic regression as the weak learner. hyperparameter tuning is done using the grid search method. the final model contains 100 estimators at which boosting is terminated. the weight applied to the boosting iterations is 0.0005. stagewise additive modeling using a multi-class exponential loss func- tion (samme) is used as the boosting algorithm. the proposed model is tested with the remaining 20% of data kept for the external validation purpose. external validation is performed to view the performance of the model. the data used for the external validation is obtained with the same acquisition condition as the main dataset. the number of im- ages used for external validation is 232 images of fc1(111 males and 121 females) and 245 images of fc2(137 males and 108 females).



the pupa features without destructing the cocoon. the proposed width calculation method provides a better width compared to the minimum area rectangular fitting method and ellipse fitting method. the height computation was also better by considering the extreme points of the contour than the ellipse fitting and rectangular fitting method. feature extraction also plays a major role in classifier performance.



research by cai et al. reported accuracy of 93.31% with the lda classifi- cation model (cai et al., 2014). in this model, the author used shapes describing features such as ellipse major axis, ellipse minor axis, the ratio of the major axis to minor axis, eccentricity, concave-convex char- acteristics, roundness, rectangularity, and complexity. the sample size used for this work was a total of 1071 of four hybrid varieties with around 531 female and 540 male cocoons.



the present research was carried out with 1156 fc1 and 1226 fc2 samples which helped in a better understanding of the features of the pupa. other methods used for pupa gender classification were nir spec- troscopy (tao et al., 2018a, 2018b; zhu et al., 2018; lin et al., 2019; qiu et al., 2021), hyper spectral imaging (hsi) (tao et al., 2018a, 2018b; tao et al., 2019a, 2019b), and the optical penetration method (sumriddetchkajorn and kamtongdee, 2012; sumriddetchkajorn et al.,



application lda as the dimensionality reduction method enhanced the efficiency and performance of the classifier. the proposed model with 10-fold cross-validation in the training data provided a mean accuracy of 96.3% for both fc1 and fc2 variety. in external validation, the proposed model obtained an accuracy of 95.3% for fc1 and 95.1% for fc2.



