in contrast, in ref. [4] we have introduced the ccmf technology in which has improved the signal quality and ues internet experience in- side high-speed railways environment. the achieved results have shown great improvement after deploying the ccmf technology in comparison to other technologies. the ccmfs is implemented on trains and other large-spatial-dimensions vehicles where those ccmfs are connected to



however, to solve the above issue there are a couple of possible so- lutions that can be discussed here. the first solution is by adjusting the transmission power [19]. the approach states that when the train enters the overlapped area between the serving enb and the target enb, the serving enb increases its transmission power to delay the ho process. using such an approach helps to avoid premature hos until the train becomes closer to the target enb. hence, the target enb starts increasing its transmission power while in turn, the serving enb starts decreasing its transmission power in order to let the ho process take its place smoothly.



will be dropped, thus, the mf ues connections will be dropped too. that is clearly due to the lack of a sufficient number of the prb to accom- modate the coming mf and its ues. it is to be mentioned that there is always a possibility for the train passengers to be connected individually to the t denb via the direct links. those ues will be considered as new ues, thus, they can establish a connection with any close by bs (mf or t denb). the cac in this case checks whether the mf coverage in the same carriage is still available or not. if the mf coverage is available, then the mf is the first choice to connect the ue to; otherwise, t denb is the second option to be connected to. however, this connection quality depends on three important factors; the vpl, path loss, and the speed of the train. that means the connection might not last long due to the previous three factors that can be could cause issues.



dropped calls/packets is high too because of the positive correlation between the two. dropping calls probability is a key performance indi- cator that is used by many service providers to measure the system qos and the efficiency of the ho procedure. there are many other factors that play important role in increasing the number of dropped calls and these factors can be summarised by the vpl inside train carriages, path- loss, and shadowing. in fact, the shadowing issue is caused by the obstacle between the transmitter and the receiver where this obstacle absorbs the power. that is also known as penetration loss which is common in vehicular and indoor environments. on the other hand, the path-loss issue is caused by the dissipation of power that is radiated by the transmitter together with the effects of the propagation channel. however, the used path-loss model in our hsts environment scenario is the microcell non-line-of-sight (nlos) path-loss model that is given by:



after the 500 m until it reaches its maximum at 1000 m. that occurs because of the bh link variation when the installed mf inside the hsts environment moves closer to the edge of the serving macrocell. as a result, the proposed ho scheme takes a place to hand over the mf from the s denb to the t denb which is accompanied by a ues group ho in order to main the mf and its ues connection.



look for fast and cheap means of transportation. hsts are considered to be one of the main means of transportation in which they can serve many users and save their money and time. providing internet connec- tion inside train carriages is the future of public transportation and future networks. therefore, the vehicular network is seen to be a new type of wireless network that made an appearance along with the development of both wireless technologies and the automotive industry. however, the vehicular network itself comes with implications and de- pendencies like any other technology. therefore, providing internet connection inside train carriages via the ccmf has been seen to be a promising solution despite the challenges accompany this solution due



