in order to avoid the problems of existing methods, a numerical simulation method for two-dimensional airflow over complex terrains is developed in this paper for the engineering use of flight dynamics. based on the potential flow theories, the effects of terrains on the wind field are considered by a serial of two-dimensional vortexes, whose strengths are solved by combining with the ground boundary conditions. numerical examples are studied by the proposed method, and the method is also evaluated by comparing the results with ones from the existing method. the result shows that the twodimensional profile of complex terrains could be described by a cubic spline curve precisely. the computation procedure proposed in this paper is very simple and efficient, and it could provide a result of wind field with considerable accuracy. therefore, this method could be used for flight principle evaluation and flight simulators.



similarly to the solving approach of vortex lattice method in aerodynamics, the curve that describes the terrain is divided into a number of straight line elements, and the number is n. a two-dimensional vortex is arranged at the quarter point of each element. choose the three-quarter point of the element as the colocation point. at this point the actual boundary condition is implemented. therefore, the effect of the terrains on the wind field could be represented by the sum of induce velocities of all the vortexes at any arbitrary point in the wind field. use the uniform free stream to represent the wind field without terrains, the stream function is,



in reference, the airflow over a single mountain is simulated by the ideal flow around a cylinder. one of the streamline has been chosen as the shape of the terrains, a factor s is used to get different mountain shapes. and reference simulates the airflow over multiple mountains by superposition of the ideal flow around multiple cylinders. because of the inherent property of the method, the kind of terrain shapes that could be modelled is limited. moreover, all the parameters need manual adjustment, in order to get a much more approximate result of the mountain shape.



the flow around a cylinder could be solved by superposing two fundamental solutions of potential flow, which are the doublet and the uniform free stream. write the speed of uniform free stream as v, which is along the x axis. the number of doublets is l, coordinate of ith doublet is(xi, yi), and the radius of the relative cylinder is ri. therefore, the stream function of the wind field is,



based on the aerodynamic potential flow theories, a numerical simulation method for two-dimensional airflow over complex terrains is developed in this paper. the effects of terrains on the wind field are considered by a serial of two-dimensional vortexes, and the vortex strengths are solved by combining with the ground boundary conditions. numerical examples are studied by the proposed method, and the method is also evaluated by comparing the results with ones from the existing method. conclusions are summarized below.



