as de ned in, beside lcfrss, join to a series of mildly context sensitive formalism classes among which there is e.g. the class of multicomponent tree adjoining grammars(mctags) in their set local variant of admitted adjunction(cf.) all generating the same class of string languages, which is known to be a substitution closed full afl. 1 mainly inspired by the linguistic work presented in, in a revised type of an mg has been proposed whose departure from the version in can be seen as twofold: the revised type of an mg neither employs any kind of head movement nor covert phrasal movement, and an additional restriction is imposed on the move operator as to which maximal projection may move overtly. deviating from the operation move as originally de ned in, a constituent has necessarily to belong to the transitive closure of the complement relation or to be a speci er of such a constituent in order to be movable. closely in keeping with some further



the rank of g, denoted by rank(g), is the number maxfn(f) j f 2 f g. the language derivable by g, the set l(g), is called a multiple context free language(mcfl). note that l(g), because d(s)= 1.



de nition 2.3[14,15] an mcfg g in the sense of de nition 2.2 such that for each f 2 f condition(f3) holds in addition to(f1) and(f2) is a called linear context free rewriting system(lcfrs). in this case l(g) is a linear context free rewriting language(lcfrl).



de nition 2.5 an mcfg1;2(lcfrs1;2) is an mcfg(lcfrs) g in the sense of de nition 2.2(de nition 2.3) such that rank(g) 2, and such that d1(f)= 1 for each f 2 f with n(f)= 2. in this case the language derivable by g is an mcfl1;2(lcfrl1;2).



for each x 2 n, the head of x(in), denoted by head(x), is the(unique) leaf of with x/ head(x) such that each y 2 n on the path from x to head(x) with y 6= x projects over its sibling, i.e. y< sibling(y). 8 the head of is the head of's root. is said to be a head(or simple) if n consists of exactly one node, otherwise is said to be a non head(or complex).



hn;/; i is a subtree of hn;/; i,<=< n n and label= label n. thus, 2 exp(feat). such an is a maximal projection(in) if's root is a node x 2 n such that x is the root of, or such that sibling(x)< x. maxproj() is the set of all maximal projections in.



of and, respectively. if spec for some; 2 maxproj() then is a speci er of(in). spec is the re exive transitive closure of spec. spec()



de nition 4.2 for= hn;/;;<; label i 2 exp(feat) with n= tn for some t 2 in and some tree domain n, and for r 2 in,() denotes the expression shifting to r, i.e. the expression hn(r);/(r);(r);<(r); label(r) i over feat with n(r)= rn such that the function i(r) from n onto n(r) with i(tx)= rx for all x 2 n is an isomorphism from to()r. 9



de nition 4.3 a minimalist grammar(mg) is a ve tuple of the form h:syn; syn; lex;; ci, where lex is a lexicon(over feat), i.e. a nite set of simple expressions over feat each of the form hn;/;;<; label i with n= f g and label() 2(select[ licensors) base licensees phon sem, and where is the operator set consisting of the structure building functions merge and move de ned w.r.t. feat as in(me) and(mo) below, respectively.



de nition 4.4 a strict minimalist grammar(smg) is a ve tuple of the form h:syn; syn; lex;; ci, where lex is a nite set of expressions over feat each of the form hn;/;;<; label i with n= f g and label() is in select(select[ licensors) base licensees phon sem, and where is the operator set consisting of the structure building functions merge and moves de ned w.r.t. feat as in(me) above and(smo) below, respectively.



a method of transforming an mg as de ned in into an mcfg is presented in. as demonstrated in, this method can be adapted to transform an(s)mg as de ned in into an mcfg1;2. but note that this adaptation is not of trivial kind, since in the original mg de nition move was de ned as in(mo) above, but without condition(iii), i.e. a maximal projection could move completely independently of its position within an expression. also, the handling of derivable tuples by means of the rewriting rules and functions has to be changed rather signi cantly in order to arrive at an mcfg as desired. 11



throughout this section, g= hn; o; f; r; si denotes an mcfg1;2 in the sense of de nition 2.5. in order to de ne an mg gmg= h:syn; syn; lex;; ci in the sense of de nition 4.3 such that l(gmg)= l(g), we suppose w.l.o.g. g to be an lcfrs1;2 in mff(cf. proposition 3.2).



11 the respective considerations in are even somewhat more involved than it would be necessary as to our concerns here: there, a corresponding transformation is given w.r.t. a type of an(s)mg which, in contrast to the de nition in, still allows(overt) head movement and covert phrasal movement to take place. the plain case of transforming an mg in the proper sense of into an mcfg1 2 is considered in.



case 3. a! f() for some a 2 n and f 2 f. then'(f)= dg(a) and n(f)= 0. lh(f)= 0 for 1 h'(f), i.e. f()= h(f10);:::;(f'(f)0)i, since f is a constant in h i'(f). the following entry belong lex:



in order to prove the only if part, assume that 2 l(g)= lg(s) for some 2. by proposition 6.3 there is some 0 2 cl(gmg) with category feature s such that 0 corresponds to hs; i. then, because it holds that dg(s)= 1,= merge( c; 0) is de ned and complete, and is the phonetic yield of.



mcfl1 2's includes all regular sets and is closed under substitution. thus, by theorem 1.6[10, p. 129] it remains to con rm that the class of all mcfl1 2's is closed under intersection with regular sets. but exactly this is done implicitly within the proof which seki et al. give verifying their theorem 3.9.



