to facilitate indicator creation, we introduce an ice index ranking system, evaluating 24 aspects grouped into three dimensions: localization, specialization, and collaboration. these dimensions further categorize the 24 aspects into seven level-2 indicators, providing insights into global chinese language education. after a thorough literature review and considering data availability, these indicators rank ice in 153 countries.



the field of international education for various languages has received increasing attention from governments, language policy makers, educators, researchers, and stakeholders worldwide. prominent examples include english, french, spanish, japanese, and portuguese [1]. among the six official languages recognized by the united nations, chinese language education has experienced remarkable growth, with its presence observed in over 150 countries. approximately 80 countries have integrated chinese into their national education systems, and more than 200 million individuals are learning chinese as a foreign language. notably, over 4000 educational institutions worldwide offer chinese language courses as part of their curriculum [2]. this has something to do with the fact that chinese is increasingly being seen as a hypercentral language that is crucial to the material success of individuals and the economic development of nation-states. (wen xu, 2023)however, comprehensive studies examining international chinese education (ice) on a global scale have been rather limited in scope and number.



a comprehensive examination of ice has been conducted in 115 countries and selected regions, including prominent nations such as thailand, the united states, south korea, malaysia, japan, russia, the united kingdom, australia, france, and germany (b [3]. these studies have delved into various aspects, ranging from microscopic issues such as chinese language acquisition, teaching materials, teachers, and pedagogy, to mesoscopic investigations concerning the establishment of confucius institutes and the development of teaching resources. nevertheless, the existing body of research predominantly focuses on localized contexts, lacking a global and macroscopic perspective that enables the assessment of different countries using a standardized set of indicators.



this paper presents a comprehensive analysis of ice development by collecting extensive datasets from 153 related countries. our objective is to gain a comprehensive understanding of the status of ice worldwide and contribute to the ongoing examination and discussion in this field. to achieve this, we introduce a novel ice index ranking method that utilizes three categories of 24 indicators. this data-driven approach,



the structure of the rest of the paper is as follows: section 2 provides a review of relevant literature pertaining to the assessment of ice and the ranking problem. in section 3, we introduce the design of our ice ranking system, dataset and methodology. the ranking results are pre- sented in section 4. furthermore, in section 5, we conduct a correlation analysis to provide an explanation for our ranking results. finally, sec- tion 6 concludes the paper, summarizing our key findings and implications.



gil [5] examined the current global standing of chinese as a foreign language from two perspectives: the number of students learning chi- nese and the number of universities and schools offering chinese-related programs in the us, uk, new zealand, australia, south korea, thailand, and japan. xiao (y [6]. studies chinese education in the united states by giving an overview of the national security language initiative (nsli) programs and confucius institute projects, the number of schools and organizations involved and the enrollments of students in these pro- grams. although quantitative analysis is used in these studies, the data displayed is far from exhaustive. in addition, they both focused on one ucation system, the situation of chinese language teachers and the sit- uation of chinese language teaching resources. based on the assessment framework proposed in ref. [9], which comprises 10 primary indicators and 52 secondary indicators, wu [10] employs a hierarchical analysis method to develop an index system for assessing confucius institutes by analyzing the importance of each index. wang and han [4] present a



comparing and ranking items based on various indicators is a widespread challenge as people seek to extract valuable information and make comparisons in search and recommendation systems (j [12]. for instance, when ranking universities, multiple criteria are employed to assess their academic performance, including the quality of education, faculty expertise, research productivity, and individual performance [13], each criterion consists of several indicators. however, devising the indicators and determining a consensus ranking from them without a thorough knowledge of the various detailed indicators and their relative importance in the final ranking remains an open issue.



ra, or ranking aggregation, a procedure that merges multiple ranked lists into a more persuasive and consolidated ranking (x. [14], provides a candidate approach for addressing the ranking problem. the field of ra originated from the social choice theory (d [15]. and has found extensive applications across various domains, including infor- mation retrieval [16], marketing [17], bioinformatics [18], and uni-



to address this issue, several approaches have been applied to calculate the weights of indicators based on their intrinsic attributes, including coefficient of variation method (cvm), entropy weight method (ewm), criteria importance through intercriteria correlation (critic), and principal component analysis (pca). these approaches provide methodologies to calculate indicator weights and address the issue of limited domain knowledge in ranking systems. by incorporating these techniques, the importance and impact of different indicators can be appropriately accounted for in the overall ranking process.



where, wk is the weight of k-th indicator. then pem calculates the nonnegative rating vector r from a, where ri indicates the strength or final score of ii. however, not all the aggregate dominance matrix a is solvable for the problem at hand. therefore, in practice, the perron



this paper focuses on utilizing weighted ra methods for ice index ranking, which is an unsupervised problem due to the lack of consensus on indicator definitions and a ground-truth ranking for ice. unlike conventional ra operations in social election, the input data for ice consists of raw values for all indicators, rather than a pre-determined ranked list from experts or voters. considering what was mentioned earlier, several challenges and practical considerations need to be addressed in this context. these challenges include the following: development of ice within a country but also its development in collaboration with resources from china. for instance, when measuring the development of ice in a country, indicators should include factors such as the availability of domestic textbooks and the number of universities offering chinese majors, as well as the pro- portion of these universities in relation to the total number of uni- versities in the country. to ensure comprehensiveness, the number of students majoring in chinese and the number of local learners in each country are selected as indicators of the scale of learners. however, since the latter already includes the former, only the latter is chosen to represent this aspect.



for multi-level of measurement: pem apply the preference matrix rather than raw values can get rid of the influence from different measurements and different order of magnitude. and the informa- tion lost during converting raw values to preference matrix can be partly compensated by automatic weighting method which can extract the distribution pattern of level-3 indicators and weight the indicators with higher discrimination more. what is more, proper preprocessing also helps.



concept of cultural distance proposed by geert hofstede [41]. cul- tural distance is described in six dimensions namely individualism, power distance, masculinity, uncertainty avoidance, long-term orientation, and indulgence. each dimension represents a prefer- ence of country and is expressed on a scale from approximately 0 to 100.



the policy changed rapidly. as a compromise, we use some indirect proxies such as business volume of engineering project (eng - busi- ness volume) and cooperative people exchange (eng-worker, coop- worker). the data is from the china statistical yearbook [42] too. what is more, the government efficiency and expenditure of educa-



another significant positive factor to all indicators is the number of outbound tourists to china. by contrast, the education expenditure does not show significant high correlation coefficient. geographical distance is negatively correlated to localization and collaboration but has no significant influence on specialization while government effectiveness exactly shows different trends which is positive correlated to localiza- tion and collaboration. surprisingly, cultural distances has not signifi- cant influence on any of three indexes.



development of ice in some countries. for instance, we should attach great importance and attention to some countries, like mexico, chile, and argentina with great potential for development, which are rela- tively backward in the development of ice, but have a good impression of china [44]. more importantly, on one hand, china should continue to strengthen its economic and trade relations with these countries to help improve their national economies and further expand the demand for ice. on the other hand, china should provide more resources and pay more attention to helping these countries vigorously develop ice, which will contribute to their rapid development in a two-pronged way.



this paper proposed a comprehensive ice ranking system with clearly defined 3-level indicators and attempts the combination of four weighting methods with pem to build the rankings in ice. result shows cvm is the most representative method and according to the ranking result we detected 6 different types of countries by k-means algorithm. besides, we applied a correlation analysis with external dataset to explain the results to ensure the reliability of the rankings. results show that the u.s., u.k., and thailand rank in the top three in ice index, followed by australia, russia, germany, south korea, france, canada, and japan are also in the top ten rankings.



given that hong kong, macau, and taiwan invest much less in ice than mainland china, even most of the data we collected focuses on the situation related to mainland china, it should also reflect the overall development and promotion of ice in the whole greater china region. we also pay attention to the relationship between data completeness and ice ranking of different countries. in general, there is a positive relationship between the data completeness of most countries and their ice ranking, i.e., the better the ice ranking, the higher the data (71.79 %) have higher data completeness, their ice ranking is relatively backward, mainly due to inferior performance in collaboration. there is much room for improvement in indicators such as the number of ice teachers sent from china, teachers sent to china for training, and learners enrolled in confucius institutes. conversely, countries such as morocco (38.46 %), mexico (38.46 %), serbia (38.46 %), and tanzania (38.46 %) have lower data completeness, but their relatively high rankings are due to outstanding performance in collaboration. in addition, mexico, serbia, and tanzania excel in indicators such as guarantee and system under localization, reflecting a higher level of ice and greater potential for development.



