we study the computational complexity of finding a line that bisects simultaneously two sets in the two-dimensional plane, called the pancake problem, using the oracle turing machine model of ko. we also study the basic problem of bisecting a set at a given direction. our main results are:(1) the complexity of bisecting a nice(thick) polynomial-time approximable set at a given direction can be characterized by the counting class#p;(2) the complexity of bisecting simultaneously two linearly separable nice(thick) polynomial-time approximable sets can be characterized by the counting class#p; and(3) for either of these two problems, without the thickness condition and the linear separability condition(for the two-set case), it is arbitrarily hard to compute the bisector(even if it is unique).



the pancake theorem leads to a computational problem, called the pancake problem, of finding the line, called the bisector(or pancake/ham sandwich cut in literature), that simultaneously bisects two given regions. in this paper, we study the computational complexity of the pancake problem. it has been well studied for the cases where the sets in question are polygons(see, e.g.,[12,1]), or are composed of a finite number of points(in this case, the measure is the number of points instead of the area; see, e.g.,[8,9,4]). here, we consider the general cases where the sets may be subsets of the plane r2 of more complicated shapes.



we give, in section 2, a brief summary of the basic computational model of the turing machine-based complexity theory of real functions, as well as the exact definition of the above discrete complexity classes. for more careful discussion of the theory, see ko and chou and ko; for the discrete complexity classes related to#p, see, for example, du and ko and green et al..



in other words, theorem 3.3 shows that the complexity of computing the bisector at a given angle of a p-approximable bounded set with a positive thickness around the bisector is between p#p and p#p1(more precisely, p#p1, since to compute an approximation to the area of s', the#p1 oracle will only be queried once; for details, see chou and ko). whether p#p= p#p1 is still an open question in discrete complexity theory.



mathematically, the pancake theorem follows the intermediate value theorem and the borsuk-ulam theorem(see, e.g., fulton). for the sake of self-containness, we show how the intermediate value theorem implies the borsuk-ulam theorem and how the borsuk-ulam theorem implies the pancake theorem on the two-dimensional plane(see, e.g., fulton).



now we consider the pancake theorem. again the computability problem has an affirmative answer and we omit its proof. our results below show that in general it is arbitrarily hard to compute the common bisector of two papproximable sets even if(1) each of these sets has a positive thickness around any bisector; and(2) there is exactly one common bisector. however, if the two sets are linearly separable, the complexity of the problem is characterized by counting classes#p and#p1.



