an ontology is very important in describing and sharing knowledge of a domain. this paper proposes a method to automatically generate domain ontologies from chinese encyclopedias on the web. first, we use the terms appears in category systems of encyclopedias as concepts and resolute synonyms, then derive an original taxonomy from chinese- wikipedia and hudong-baike; for other concepts not in the original taxonomy, we use a set-theory like method to form a directed graph and generate a tree from the graph via maximum-spanning-tree algorithm, and merge the tree into the taxonomy. then, we use titles of normal articles as instances and populate them via category labels in them. the attributes of concepts and instances are generated from special structures such as infobox modules. we learn a plant ontology successfully and the later experiments show that the learnt ontology has well precision and high coverage.



to build ontologies manually is very expensive, it needs many domain experts and programmers work together for a long time. moreover, the manual process is tedious and error-prone, and the built ontologies suffer from low coverage and fast aging. there are only a few manually built ontologies; the most famous three are wordnet [fellbaum, 1998], cyc [lenat, 1995] and gene ontology [goc, 2000]. in chinese, hownet [dong and dong, 2006] provides a knowledge database, but it only has less than 100,000 words and is not free; to the best of our knowledge, there are no large chinese ontologies published for free yet.



)automatically, which is called ontology learning. according to the coverage of the ontology, ontology learning can be divided into general ontology learning and domain ontology learning. when distinguishing by the source from which the ontologies are learnt, there are ontology learning based on structured data, semi- structured data and unstructured data; more concretely, semi-structured data including h. this paper focuses on learning ontologies from chinese encyclopedias. with the development of web 2.0, there are more and more collaborative semi-structured data published on the internet, the most famous one is wikipedia [wales, 2005], which contains more than 3.8 million english articles and 400 thousand chinese articles. in chinese, there are other two larger online encyclopedias, namely baidu-baike and hudong-baike, both of which contain more than 3 million articles.



text based learning, which learns ontology from unstructured text directly. text-to-onto [maedche and staab, 2000] is an earlier ontology learning system which learns ontologies from text. tshamsfard and barforoush [tshamsfard and barforoush, 2004] proposed an automatic ontology building approach which started from a small ontology kernel and constructed the ontology through text understanding automatically. lee et al. [lee et al., 2006] presented a novel episode-based ontology construction mechanism to extract domain ontology from unstructured text document. in general, these methods relied heavily on nlp techniques, structured knowledge such as dictionaries, and sometimes human interaction.



in order to use the three encyclopedias, we should download them first. the chinese-wikipedia provides a repository for end users to download it directly; however, we have to write crawlers by ourselves for the other two encyclopedias as they only available via html pages. totally, we get 4,009,755 articles from baidu- baike, 2,780,675 articles from hudong-baike and 377,635 articles from chinese-wikipedia.



both hudong-baike and chinese-wikipedia have good category hierarchies, thus an original taxonomy can be deduced from them. however, there are scattered categories. moreover, all the categories in baidu- baike are not well organized. in order to merge these categories into the original taxonomy, we first use the set-theory like method to calculate the belonging degree of them and thus form a directed graph g = (v, e), with weight function , v stands for the set of categories. the weight function is defined as:



the infobox modules are good resource for attribute extraction; however, only about ten percent of articles have infobox modules. fortunately, later experiment shows that about eighty percent of plant articles have infobox modules. the infobox modules are usually defined by special html tags and are easily to parse.



