people. however, a significant portion of the global population lacks access to basic energy services. in developing countries, distributed renewable energy systems have emerged as a successful solution for meeting the electricity demand[3,4]. these systems, based on renewable energy sources, have proved particularly beneficial in remote rural communities where grid electrification is challenging and costly. the idea of a renewable energy-based system, which is a microgrid encompassing various loads and generators in a confined region, is undergoing transformation because of increased effectiveness, minimal



in these systems, excess energy generated during off-peak hours is used to charge the ess. when the ess is fully charged, any remaining excess energy(called surplus energy) is typically wasted in dump load that can be utilized in cooking, water heating, or baking. recently, electric vehicles(evs) have played a crucial role in microgrid systems as emerging energy consumers, offering potential solutions to address system challenges. hence, evs can be utilized as a promising consumer of surplus energy(se) in future iress. as a result, the goal of this study is, firstly, to develop the optimal ires model to electrify the chosen study area. secondly, effective utilization of se in standalone ires for enhancing energy utilization and reducing the cost of energy by deploying evs as a dump load.



several researchers have conducted studies on the optimal sizing problems of ires from various perspectives. hassan used solar photovoltaic(pv)/lead acid(la) battery-based system to meet the electricity needs of an iraqi household in grid-connected and off-grid modes. results reveal that in grid-connected and off-grid modes, 4,600 kwh/year and 1,468 kwh/year amount of se is transferred to the grid and dump load, respectively. mokhtara et al. optimized wind turbine(wt)/pv/diesel generator(dg)/la/lithium-ion(li-ion) batterybased off-grid system and found that the demand-side management at 100% renewable fraction reduces se transferred to dump load by 29%. patel and singal conducted a study on an optimal system comprising 0.25 kwp of solar pv, 1 kw of wt, a biomass generator(bmg), a biogas generator(bgg), and a 360 ah la battery. they found that this system transmitted 14,124 kwh, 14,238 kwh, and 18,748 kwh amount of se to the dump load at energy index ratio levels of 85%, 90%, and 95%, respectively. faizan et al. found that the spv/wt/ dg/la-based optimal system dumps 13,975 kwh/year amount of se. javed et al. discovered that the optimal solar/wind/dg/la/pump hydro storage(phs) injected 25,450 kwh/year amount of se to dump load.



recently integration of electric vehicles(evs) in power systems has gained significant attention. in the present literature, several authors have incorporated evs in their systems and analyzed their impacts on systems performance. tao et al. created a plug-in hybrid ev(phev)/pv/wt/microturbine(mt)/fuel cell(fc)/nickel-metal hy-



zeynali et al. investigated the integrated operation of a wind farm and phev fleets in a day-ahead wholesale market, taking into account the influence of battery degradation on oc under a smart charging scheme. alsharif et al. designed a microgrid comprising evs, pv, wt, the grid, and batteries, aiming to minimize the coe while maximizing energy reliability and the renewable fraction. bogdanov et al.



the cost of storage, particularly batteries, is a significant concern in ires due to the imbalance between renewable generation and demand. surplus renewable generation often needs to be discarded to maintain system stability. the increased fraction of renewable energy and lower generation cost can further exacerbate this issue.



several authors have considered evs as part of the main load in ires. such integration of evs increases the overall cost and size of the system. however, there is a lack of research on the charging of evs in 100% renewable energy-based stand-alone ires, suggesting a gap in the current literature.



amc of ires components viz: spv panels, bgg, pc-cc, and cs facility are considered as 2.5%, 2.5%, 2.5%, and 2% of their initial capital cost, respectively. whereas, amc of the mhp plant and rod unit are taken as 7500 inr/kw and 15 inr/m3, respectively.



variables. thus, based on the provided upper and lower limit values of the optimized variable in search space, the optimization algorithm will give the optimum value of that particular component. the bgg generates electricity at its rated capacity throughout the project lifetime. the mhp plant, on the other hand, is expected to generate electricity at its rated capacity for more than 75% of the year.



during ev charging. additionally, to maximize se utilization and enhance ev penetration, ev standby batteries are utilized to store remaining hourly available se. standby batteries are allocated to evs involved in trip chains like schools and work/offices, where the trip times cannot be changed.



performance analysis shows that the ic strategy is best for microgrid ev charging. it uses se to charge a significant number of evs at the lowest coe than other methods. overall, the findings support the suitability of the ic strategy for efficient and sustainable ev charging in microgrid systems.



framework with diverse bes devices. the developed system has been optimized using the novel chimp optimization algorithm(choa). electric vehicles(evs) are used as dump load to consume surplus energy(se). finally, the optimal ires and evs under different charging strategies were analyzed for greenhouse gas(ghg) emission reduction. the following are the findings of the study:



