to achieve organisational goals, it is desirable to know the norms and specifics of resources such as labour, goods, finances, etc. these aspects enable decision-makers to frame their objectives for getting maximum profit via utilising limited services and resources. one of their objectives is inventory. literature on inventory theory has been continuously modified to reflect the most practical characteristics of existing inventory systems.



two important factors play a major role in inventory. firstly, the supply chain of almost every company faces the problem of holding stocks of obsolete or deteriorating goods. for, some goods gradually lose their potential usefulness over time; some deteriorate directly as they are stored; some experience physical depletion over time through desertion; and some deteriorate through direct spoilage. therefore, the best inventory management strategy for this class of products is to minimise the loss caused by deterioration. secondly, the change in de- mand rates affects their inventory policy.



manna and chaudhuri [8] developed a model in which the deteri- oration rate of the ramped demand goods was time-dependent and the finite production rate is proportional to the demand rate. panda, sen- apati, and basu [9] discussed a single-level inventory model for a seasonal item since the demand rate of seasonal products corresponds to the characteristics of a ramped demand rate. skouri, konstantaras, papachristos, and ganas [10] developed the model introduced by covert and philip, with the ramped demand rate and the weibull dis- tribution deterioration rate, partial backlog. skouri, manna, kon- stantaras, and chaudhuri [11] supplemented the work discussed in



ref. [8] by taking into account the demand rate without bottlenecks, which stabilizes after the production stop time; and the demand rate with bottlenecks, which stabilizes after the production stop time. moreover, they further modified their model by considering the de- mand rate as a time function [1].



recently, in contrast to the work above, ahmed, al-khamis, and benkherouf [12], for the first time, considered a general deterioration rate. sanni and chukwu [13] developed an eoq inventory model for items with a three-parameter weibull distribution of deterioration [1]. amutha and chandrasekaran [14] advanced the eoq model with quadratic demand and time-dependent carrying cost of inventory. sri- vastava and singh [15] built on the inventory model with linear demand by varying the deterioration rates and partial backlogs.



demand for healthcare industries. shaikh, a.a., and others [18] described an inventory model with addition facility for deteriorating goods with a ramp-type demand and a trade credit policy. sharma and kaushik [19] studied the inventory with ramp-type demand and offers with delayed payments. palanivelu and chandrasekaran [20] delivered the replenishment strategy for giffen goods with time-dependent de- mand. supakar, p., and mahato, s. k. [21], developed the deteriorating inventory models with and without an advanced payment scheme, and they considered the ramp-type function for the demand rate.



here is how the rest of the article is structured: the assumptions and symbols as well as the description and formulation of model-i, both without the shortage and with the shortage are presented in section 2. it also includes some numerical examples to provide further insights. section 3 presents a sensitivity analysis for the model parameters. the results thereof are presented in section 4. section 5 finally draws a conclusion of the study.



