plants diseases have a detrimental effect on the quality but also on the quantity of agricultural production. how- ever, the prediction of these diseases is proving the effect on crop quality and on reducing the risk of production losses. indeed, the detection of plant diseases -either with a naked eye or using traditional methods- is largely a cumbersome process in terms of time, availability and results with a high-risk error. the present work introduces a depth study of various cnn architectures with different optimization algorithms carried out for olive disease detection using classification techniques that recommend the best model for constructing an effective disease de- tector. this study presents a dataset of 5571 olive leaf images collected manually on real conditions from different regions of morocco, that also includes healthy class to detect olive diseases. further, one of the goals of this re- search was to study the correlation effects between cnn architectures and optimization algorithms evaluated by the accuracy and other performance metrics. the highest rate in trained models was 100 %, while the highest rate in experiments without data augmentation was 92,59 %. another subject of this study is the influence of the optimization algorithms on neuronal network performance. as a result of the experiments carried out, the mobilenet architecture using rmsprop algorithms outperformed the others combinations in terms of perfor- mance and efficiency of disease detector.



the structure of the remainder of this paper is organized as follows. firstly, section 2 presents materials and methods introduced by the background and related works then describes the simulation workflow processed. secondly, sections 3 and 4 covers the experimental setup de- tailed by the result of simulations and discussions. finally, section 4 states some conclusions and some perspectives opening for future work.



from 1989 to nowadays, various technological feats in the engineer- ing of neural networks have been demonstrated (pedrycz, 2020). these innovations can be ordered in the form of improved classification and regularization constraints. in a sense of continuous performance en- hancement of its intelligent systems and according to the elaboration of the use cases.



of stroke appear in the period of late winter or early spring. it is charac- terized by a rapid and significant wilting of the twigs, secondary and main branches with a brown bark that tends towards purple developing from tip to base. these leafy organs have leaves that curl towards their underside and whose greenish color degrades to turn light brown, which makes them completely dry(singh et al., 2020).



diseases. the disease patterns of olive vary with the season and with other factors such as the humidity, temperature and radiance. for exam- ple, rainy weather is conducive to the generation and spread of germs, thereby resulting in the expansion and diffusion of the disease spots on affected leaves. taking that into consideration, images are collected under various weather conditions for more comprehensive applica- tions. finally, all diseased images in the dataset are annotated manually by experts.



the data preprocessing tasks begins by spanning the data points. secondly, an achievement of a split on the data using 80 of the images for training and 20 for testing. in addition improvement approaches were applied for the upgrade of the distribution of pixels over an expan- sive range of intensities, direct discrepancy stretching was applied on the images.



image annotation is a vital step in which the objective is to label the positions and classes of object spots in the diseased images. in this stage, an algorithm that provides a frame selection function is developed in python. with this algorithm and together with the knowledge provided by experts in agriculture, the diseased areas of an image can be selected and assigned to the corresponding classes (pantazi et al., 2020). annota- tions are provided as images in the same size as the originals, stored in jpg or jiff format. a black colored pixel indicates the background, while all other colors are used to uniquely identify the leaves of the plants in



classification is a function that need the use of machine learning al- gorithms that learn how to assign a marker to different classes from the problem sphere. an easy illustration example to understand is classify- ing emails spam. multi-class classification cites to those classification functions and characteristics that have further than two class markers.



came via data augmentation. the overfitting problem occurs when it is random noise or errors are described, rather than the underlying rela- tionship, see cap et al. (2020). with more images after expansion via data augmentation techniques, the model can learn as many irrelevant



classification of olive diseases. so this leads us to deduce that except from the quality and the quantity of image also serves to ameliorate the performance as well as the types of classes used. also the roc curves clearly show that the mobilenet model associated with the rmsprop optimization algorithm offered the best results. in addition, the auc ob- tained confirm the performance of this combination and more details will be provided in the following discussion.



