it is important to research and find out opinion leader in time of increased huge number of micro blog users around our world and daily life. our governments in different countries around the world have found that it is a vital fact to analysis and control message spreading in micro blog and other social network. for the reason that opinion leaders always play vital role in information spreading in micro blog and it is necessary to detect opinion leaders precisely. in this article, we has constructed a sina micro blog apis based micro blog crawling and analysis tool. furthermore, a novel mapreduce based micro blog crawler and node betweenness approximation computation method was proposed better accuracy and less running time to detect core opinion leaders in micro blog graphs.



the rest of this article will be organized as follows: section ii gives a detailed introduction on the related research work on complex network for betweenness computing, node centrality and parallel computing, including introduction of three important centralities for social network analysis in important opinion leader detection. section iii will presents detail information of our sina apis based crawler. in section iv will we will present the parallel design details of parallel sina micro blog crawler .and in section v, we developed an effective betweenness approximation algorithm for large scale graph and evaluated it in experiments on real sina micro blog user social network dataset. section vi concluded the paper.



on the other hand, researchers used mpi[9] and hadoop[10] to develop parallel program to promote algorithm running efficiency. programming method and theory of mpi is often difficult for program developers and existing methods and algorithms does not construct node betweenness approximation algorithm for the whole social network especially in large scale graph in mapreduce apis.it is necessary to construct that in mapreduce api to cut down computation complexity.



approximation computation method was proposed in large scale social graph for some emergency case in our daily life such as rainstorm. and it is proved that our algorithm gained better accuracy in less cost of commutating time. it is useful to detect some important opinion leaders in social network in large scale graph and in parallel data mining.



