there are total of 11.2 million disabled persons, of whom 0.8 million are children, 5.2 million are working adults and 5.2 million are above their pension age according to 2010/2011 disability prevalence estimation data in great britain (disability factsheet, 2011) [1]. this has caused high demand on some form of transport mechanism and thus wheelchairs continue to play a vital role. common mobility assistive techniques and recent advances in curb and stair climbing devices are described in this paper. a proposal for a high step stair-



there are several types of stair climbing wheelchair and the mechanical design in these three different categories are varies from one another. it can be classified into three categories; crawler type [2-6], wheeled type [7-9] and legged type [10].the approaches adopted in crawler types are non-slip rubber track based on a single and dual section track mechanisms. the control strategy used is fuzzy logic control as an optimal estimation algorithm to estimate the proportion of various factors that affect the track tension. however, it is hard to turn in narrow and small aisle due to its huge structure and the high pressure that exerted at the edge of each stairs can cause stairs damage. stability control is not considered to the extensive level in a wheeled type and some of them are just based on the inverse kinematic derivation for motion planning. nakajima has introduced a legged mechanism in 2011 with simulation and experiment validation [11]. it uses supporting polygon to maintain the level of the wheelchair body on at least three points while performing stair climbing. however this mechanism does not seem practical to be used in a place where it has more than two steps and high stairs slope.



the humanoid model using the anthropometric data is approximated and designed [16]. in this work, the humanoid model is developed as a rigid body with 1.5 m in height and weight of approximately 71 kg. there are many types of stairs that have been used, and because they are inherently hazardous, the design must follow standard dimensions and structure to allow safe product manoeuvrability and feasibility (canadian centre for occupational safety and health, 2010) [17]. straight stairway with a slope of 500 was tested in this work and have a height of 8 inch, tread of 12.6 inch and width of 30 inch.



a stair climbing wheelchair has been successfully developed in vn using a standard sized wheelchair. a humanoid model with approximate weight of 71kg and standard sized stairs have been adopted. a fuzzy control approach has been implemented to perform stair climbing task in an automatic mode wheelchair system. the results presented proved that the flc works well in controlling highly interchangeable systems which incorporated front and rear motors to perform stair climbing task. it has been demonstrated that the control system is able to perform effectively in order to ensure user comfort and smoothness of the manoeuvring tasks. future work will look at the stairs descending process, optimization of the control scaling parameters and linear motion.



sugahara, y., ohta, a., hashimoto, k., sunazuka, h., kawase, m., tanaka, c., hun-ok, l. & takanishi, a. (2005). walking up and down stairs carrying a human by a biped locomotor with parallel mechanism, proceeding of ieee/rsj international conference on intelligent robots and systems, 1489-1494.



