of car-manufacturers employ the vanet framework to incorporate more and more comfort and security applications of vanet. due to high mobility of nodes, executing efficient data transmission in vanet needs appropriate communication protocol. vanet nodes traverse a fixed number of internet gateways at high speed to forward data and then get disconnected from the network as they fall out of the wireless coverage range. link reliability model is used to compute and predict the optimum probability of future status(formation and disruption of links among nodes) in wireless link.



yi et al. investigated security-aware ad hoc routing(sar) protocol using trust values and relationships. the work yielded some results having varying percentages of message packets transmitted by unauthorized and malicious nodes, indicating flaws in the security aspects of ad-hoc network communication.



sanzgiri et al. introduced authenticated routing protocol for ad hoc networks(aran). aran was viewed as a mechanism to resolve the security issues based on cryptographic public-key certificates. aran is as efficient as aodv in maintaining and discovering the route but aran uses larger packets which results overall higher routing overhead.



shurman et al. proposed a novel mechanism where the source node was appended with computational capabilities to verify the authenticity of the node initiating the rrep messages. the node could now detect so many possible paths to the destination and compute the safest route to the destination. the method, though novel, resulted in routing delays extending from a few nanoseconds to several orders of magnitude. he studied only one node attack to be in the route but not considered group attack.



dokurer et al. resolved group attack problem with a solution to ignore the first route, in order to counter the black hole attack under the assumption that the first rrep message might be from a malicious node. though widely agreed upon, this method ignored the possibility of the second rrep message being received from a malicious node. thus, the method was susceptible to black hole attacks, lacking a mechanism to identify and delete attacker node from the network.



the vehicular ad hoc network suffers from all-weather attacks, which can come from any node that is in the radio range of any node in the network. the attacks mainly include passive eavesdropping and leakage of secret information, gray hole, black hole, worm hole, and denial of service. the focus of this research paper is to detect and prevent black hole attack.



the freeway mobility model is adopted to simulate vehicle movements on a highway. this model can simulate a bidirectional multi-lane highway that gets the highway route from an input map. the proposed algorithm is implemented and tested on nctuns and the results are compared with aodv, dsr and baodv(aodv with black hole attack) using various simulation parameters.



