to annotate compounds based on their clinical trial stage, we utilised the information captured within chembl. for each compound regis- tered in chembl, an additional annotation is made based on whether the compound has been a clinical candidate and if so, at which stage. as a result, chembl assigns phase numbers 0 - 4 where 0 indicates a compound being researched in the preclinical stage, 1 to 3 indicate the compound being tested in clinical trial phases i - iii, and 4 indicates the compound has been approved by fda and/or ema. in our analysis, we make use of this chembl data to identify compounds, with associated patents, that have been moved from the preclinical to the clinical setup within the drug discovery pipeline.



overview of the information collected from the patent corpora for each disease. next, we retrospectively analyse the patent corpora unveiling leading organisations in drug research and discovery (r&d) for individ- ual diseases. following this, we investigated case studies for selected tar- gets based on biological networks and examined their patenting trend. lastly, we illustrate the usefulness of patent documents in identifying drug repurposing opportunities.



in this section, we investigate the patent corpora of each disease and provide a statistical overview of the information collected within the patent corpora. this summary will provide insights into the scope of patenting activity within the disease area, denoting whether the patents are filed for pharmacological relevance or for formulation purposes. we will also examine and compare the number of patent documents that have been approved versus those still in the application pipeline.



next, we analysed the patenting activity for each disease to deter- mine the major pharmaceutical companies and academic institutions that have made significant contributions to the r&d of potential drugs in the field. to do so, we leveraged the high-level patent owner classifi- cation (i.e., organisation, acquired, and individuals) and grouped patent owners based on the number of applications they have filed. then, we reviewed the top patent owners and deduced their historic patenting activity in the field. we examined rd and ad separately to understand better the patent landscaping related to each disease.



many factors contribute to the successful discovery of small molecule drugs for specific therapies. one of the essential factors is the mode of action (moa) of the drug in the human body, which refers to the ef- fect a drug has on a biological protein (also known as a target) that is relevant to mechanisms involved within diseased conditions. with the help of patent documents, we can investigate the target-based moa claims within patent applications based on their effect in certain indi- cation areas or on their importance over time from success achieved in clinical trials. additionally, identifying potential disease targets, their prevalence, and their role in affected patient populations can be useful in developing new intellectual property. in this section, we will focus only on trends in the prioritisation of targets in patent literature over the years, while the therapeutic usage of targets has been previously described [28].



[52] and atopic dermatitis. it inhibits the spleen tyrosine kinase (syk) (us-10,072,034-b2), which has recently been identified as a key modu- lator of tauopathy, a disorder involving the accumulation of tau [53]. this discovery opens up the potential for the drug to be used to treat neurodegenerative diseases. similar to rare diseases, we found a few compounds derived from the cancer domain. sotorasib is a compound that inhibits a specific kras mutant, kras g12c and demonstrates anti- cancerous properties (us-10,519,146-b2) [54]. several researchers have identified several kras mutants that play a role in brain and spinal- related haemorrhage [55]. this presents an opportunity to test the com- pound on multiple kras mutations and optimise it to create a mutant- specific or general-purpose compound. in summary, it is evident through the above examples that the mining of patent documents from a com- pound perspective can provide insights into how compounds that have been repurposed for multiple disorders beyond the scope of their origi- nal patents.



sive and informative patent cohort to understand the research in the field of small molecule drugs. this landscape not only aligns with sci- entific literature but also allows for competitive intelligence analysis in pharmaceutical r&d. overall, this patent landscaping approach from a drug discovery perspective highlights the importance of analysing patents and their usefulness in making decisions for future drug devel- opment efforts. the possibility of tracking patenting activities from pub- licly available resources might help define strategies for target ranking within a therapeutic focus. our methodology will contribute towards



