for optimization and control problems using automatic differentiation [5]. recently, researchers have attempted to use dnns in numerous sectors, including education [6], media [7], power [8], and healthcare [9]. however, there are several problems in various fields for which there is no analytical approach. since certain constants are believed to be fixed, even problems with analytical solutions have them. the



systems and has a vast repository of packages covering a wide range of applications. python also has features that make developing and doc- umenting massive, well-structured program structures easier. python is not appropriate for running extended computational computations since it is an interpreted language. however, calls to precompiled library routines are often used in the code for such computations. many of these routines are available directly from python using the pytorch [15],



for the treatment of walls, inflows, and outflows, specific boundaries may be needed. for example, in the temporal dimension, an initial state is a dirichlet boundary condition. the approach used for other con- ventional approaches such as finite difference or finite elements differs slightly. however, the basic principle remains the same: discretize the computational domain into small regions where the solution is assumed and bring them back together to retrieve the global solution. therefore, loss functions (as many as pdes and different boundary conditions), challenging complex problems. we see that pinns more sharply resolve discontinuities at the cost of adding oscillations, which leads to a net reduction in error. we can use this result to hypothesize that pinns will improve the solution when the discontinuity is more significant. we verify our hypothesis by plotting the error ratio against discontinuity width in 0 < t < 2 and demonstrating that more significant disconti- nuities lead to lower error ratios. in the solutions obtained with lax friedrich, ftbs, and lax wendroff, an anomalous oscillation is present



