india is an agrarian country, and a major part of its economy de- pends on the agricultural sector. the share of agriculture in the indian gross domestic product (gdp) and total exports are 16% and 10%, re- spectively (himani, 2014). about 75% population of india depends on the agricultural sector either directly or indirectly (himani, 2014). therefore, disease-free good quality crop production is essential for the growth of the country's economy.



convolutional neural networks (cnns) and convolutional autoencoders (caes) are two deep learning techniques used in many computer vision applications due to their effectiveness on image data. both these techniques use convolution operation to extract various spa- tial and temporal features from image data. cnns are used to classify input images to their respective classes, whereas caes are used to re- duce the dimensionality of an image efficiently.



this paper proposes a novel hybrid model for automatic plant dis- ease detection based on cae and cnn with fewer training parameters as compared to other state-of-the-art systems present in the literature. although there are various techniques present in the literature used for automatic plant disease detection, but a hybrid system of cae combined with a cnn has not been proposed until now in any existing research work to the best of our knowledge. dimensionality reduction using cae in the proposed model results in reduction of number of training parameters of the model. in order to test the proposed hybrid model, it is applied to detect bacterial spot disease in peach plant, which is caused by a bacterium named xanthomonas campestris. this model can be used to detect other plant diseases, as well.



the rest of the paper is divided into four sections. section 2 discuss several state-of-the-art systems for automatic plant disease detection present in the literature. in section 3, the material and methods used to design proposed hybrid model is described. the results obtained by the model to detect bacterial spot disease in peach plants are pre- sented in section 4 of the paper. in the end, section 5 concludes the paper.



padding is used to expand the input matrix by appending the layers of zeroes to the input matrix's border. thus, the input matrix area is in- creased on which the convolution operation has to be performed, which ensures that the size of the input matrix does not decrease after convo- lution operation. it also ensures that the elements present on the edges and corners are also utilized by adding multiple padding layers. there are two types of padding: valid padding and same padding. in valid receives from its preceding layer. it computes a single output value based on some statistics from its neighborhood. some of these statistics are max pooling, average pooling, etc. max pooling picks the maximum value from its neighborhood, and average pooling computes the aver- age value in its neighborhood.



where xdi is the input for the ith layer of decoder network, xdi+1is the output of the ith layer of the decoder network, wdi is the weight vector for the ith layer of the decoder network, bdi is the bias for the ith layer of the decoder network, and fdiis the activation function for the ith layer of the decoder network. the difference between the original data xo and the reconstructed data xr is known as reconstruction loss. the autoencoder is trained using backpropagation algorithm to minimize the reconstruction loss. mean squared error (mse) and binary cross-



there are different types of autoencoders, such as undercomplete autoencoder, deep autoencoder, convolutional autoencoder, etc. a cnn based autoencoder is known as convolutional autoencoder (cae). it uses convolutional and down sampling (pooling) layers for encoding the input image to its compressed domain representation. similarly, up sampling and convolutional layers are used to reconstruct the original image using its compressed domain representation. since this research work deals with plant leaf images, so cae has been used to obtain the compressed domain representation before classification, for automatic plant disease detection based on cae and cnn has not been proposed in any research work present in the literature. this model uses two deep learning techniques: cae and cnn. first, the cae network has been trained to reduce the dimensionality of the input leaf images. the dimensionality reduction of the leaf images has been done such that the important features of the leaf images are not lost. this has been ensured by applying the upper limit on reconstruc- tion loss of cae. after reducing the dimensionality of leaf images, the output of the encoder network of cae, (i.e., compressed domain



where xo is the original leaf image, xr is the leaf image reconstructed by the cae network, n is the total number of leaf images taken into consid- eration, pmaximum is the maximum pixel intensity in the input leaf images i.e., 255, and pminimum is the minimum pixel intensity in the input leaf images, i.e., 0.



the experiments performed in this research work uses the jupyter notebook, which is an integrated development environment (ide) for python programming language. one can also use other programming languages such as matlab, r, etc., to implement the proposed hybrid model. the train_test_split function of sklearn (pedregosa et al., 2011) application programming interface (api) of python has been used to form the training and testing dataset. to create and train the model, the keras api has been used.



the proposed model has two prominent use cases. first, it can be trained and used for automatic plant disease detection on low- computational power systems with less training time and prediction time. second, the proposed model can also be trained and used on smartphones. running a deep learning model in mobile applications instead of sending the leaf images of plants to the cloud/server reduces the latency and provides data privacy to farmers.



