race among countries to get supremacy in quantum technology. it is the technology that will reduce the computing time from years to hours or even minutes. the power of quantum computing will be a great support for the scientific community. however, it raises serious threats to cybersecurity. theoretically, all the cryptog- raphy algorithms are vulnerable to attack. the practical quantum computers, when available with millions of qubits capacity, will be able to break nearly all modern public-key cryptographic systems. before the quantum



tools, techniques, and deployment strategies to protect the ict infrastructure. this paper discusses in detail the global effort for the design, development, and standardization of various quantum-safe cryptography algorithms along with the performance analysis of some of the potential quantum-safe algorithms. most quantum-safe al- gorithms need more cpu cycles, higher runtime memory, and a large key size. the objective of the paper is to analyze the feasibility of the various quantum-safe cryptography algorithms.



cryptography is one of the most important pillars of cybersecurity. cryptography is an art of rendering techniques and the science of securing the information, where the information can be interpreted only by the sender and intended recipient. most modern cryptography algo- rithms are based on complex mathematical functions. the design of cryptographic algorithms is based on assumptions of computational difficulty. these are asymmetrical problems, such as integer factoriza- tion: multiplying two integers is straightforward, but factoring a 1000- digit integer is difficult.



the paper is divided into eight sections. section 2 gives general in- formation about cryptography followed by section 3 introducing quantum computers. section 4 discusses the post-quantum encryption problem. many countries and professional organizations are putting effort to standardize the quantum-safe algorithms which are discussed in section 5. the national institute of standards and technology (nist) has initiated an intensive process to standardize the post-quantum encryption algorithm. some of the potential quantum-safe algorithms which are announced by the nist in 3rd round of the selection process have been discussed in section 6 along with the performance analysis of the algorithms based on the open quantum safe (oqs) project imple- mentation. the overall observation, implementation feasibility, and migration challenges are discussed in section 7 followed by a concluding remark in section 8.



today, information security without cryptography is unimaginable thought. cryptography is used in various ways to protect the confiden- tiality and integrity of the information. information security hardware and software products implement cryptography in many creative ways with the sole purpose of providing security. cryptographic algorithms



symmetric cryptography algorithms: in symmetric cryptography algorithms, the sender and receiver use the same key to encrypt and decrypt the data. symmetric key algorithms are very efficient and easy to implement. however, key management in symmetric cryp- tography is a challenging issue. the key must be shared among the two parties before initiating the communication. symmetric ciphers are mainly susceptible to chosen-plaintext attack, known-plaintext attack, linear cryptanalysis, and differential cryptanalysis.



asymmetric cryptography algorithm: in an asymmetric cryptog- raphy algorithm, the sender and receiver use a pair of keys. one of the keys is kept secret i.e., called a private key and the other key is made public called the public key. an asymmetric cryptography al- gorithm is also known as a public-key algorithm. the sender encrypts the data using the public key and the receiver decrypts the data using



cryptography does not only secure the data but is also used for confidentiality, authentication, integrity, and accessibility. there are various implementations of cryptography algorithms in our daily life. for example, the use of ssl/tls to provide secure internet browsing, digital signature for authentication and validation, electronic money transactions, secure data storage, etc. [26,55,58].



there is continuous growth in computational power and accordingly, the cryptography algorithms are also modified to maintain the strength. most of the cryptography algorithms used today are resilient against a classical computer. a quantum computer is new computation technol- ogy that is completely different than a classical computer. a quantum computer is much faster than a classical computer.



quantum computing is the next revolutionary technology. it is the technology that will have the ability to reduce the computing time from years to hours or even minutes. the power of quantum computing will be a great support for the scientific community. however, it raises serious cybersecurity threats. most of the existing cryptography algo- rithms are theoretically vulnerable to quantum computing. a practical quantum computer with sufficient numbers of qubits will be able to break all the modern public-key cryptographic systems [16].



a qubit (or quantum bit) is the quantum-mechanical analogue of a classical bit. in classical computers information is encoded in a bit, where each bit can be either zero or one. in quantum computing, the information is encoded in qubits. the state of the qubits is written as |



third generation: third generation will be true quantum su- premacy as the exponential growth and development will bring down the hardware cost. the quantum computer will be afford- able and easily accessible to the mass. the third-generation quantum computer will bring the viable solution across a wide variety of non-commercial applications and it will outperform the classical computer and applications.



the core strength of the rsa algorithm is based on prime factor- ization as a method of one-way encryption. the sender uses an encryption key which is generated using the multiplication of two randomly generated large prime numbers. the receiver can decrypt the message, only if knows the exact prime factor. the problem is easy to solve in one direction but difficult to compute in another direction.



most widely used cryptographic algorithm such as rsa, elliptic curve cryptography (ecc), and diffie-hellman. these algorithms play a vital role in data protection and privacy. any possibility to break these al- gorithms is a serious threat and could be devastating [15,21,73]. it will be a direct threat to the information and communication security of individuals, government, and business organizations.



the european telecommunications standards institute (etsi): the european telecommunications standards institute (etsi) has a cyber quantum-safe cryptography (qsc) group, actively working on post-quantum-safe algorithms. the qsc working groups aim to recommend a quantum-safe cryptographic algorithm and its implementation. the focus is on architectural consideration for specific applications, implementation capabil- ities, performance, etc. the group has published cost-effective migration strategies to post-quantum cryptography and some of the challenges and recommendations. etsi is also organizing workshops on post-quantum cryptography since 2013.



federal office for information security (bsi): in order to be prepared for future risk, the german federal office for informa- tion security, bsi has also released technical guidelines that recommend algorithms, and key lengths and make specific rec- ommendations for merkle-based signature schemes and xmss. the focus is the development of quantum-safe public-key cryp- tography algorithms. in 2020 the bsi also developed the initial recommendations for the migration to post-quantum cryptography.



scientists and research organizations are working very hard to develop and standardize quantum-safe cryptographic algorithms. however, not much information is available in the public domain except for the work done by nist. the nist process to solicit, evaluate, and standardize the quantum-resistant cryptographic algorithms is very meticulous, and detailed information is published. hence, decided to do a comparative analysis of 7 finalists and 8 alternate quantum-resistant algorithms announced by the nist during the 3rd round in the year 2020. the objective of the analysis is to assess the implementation



bike (bit flipping key encapsulation) is a code-based key encapsulation mechanism. it is based on quasi-cyclic moderate density parity-check (qc-mdpc) codes that can be decoded using bit flipping decoding techniques [68]. bike can satisfy the nist security level 1 and 3.



rainbow algorithms belong to the family of multivariate public-key cryptosystems. it is designed by jintai ding and dieter schmidt in 2004. the algorithm is based on the oil-vinegar signature scheme invented by jacques patarin. the algorithm is based on the fact that solving a set of random multivariate quadratic systems is an np-hard problem [20,72]. the algorithm can be used for digital signature and its parameters can be set to achieve nist security levels 1, 3, and 5.



merkle signature. it combines a one-time signature with the merkle tree. the hash-based signature (hbs) is a collection of many one-time signature (ots) schemes. hbs uses a tree data structure to combine many ots in an efficient manner. to sign a message, an hbs chooses a single ots from its collection and uses it to sign the message [29]. the critical issue is that the hbs must never choose the same ots twice, or else security is compromised. hash-based quantum-safe cryptographic algorithms are:



the higher cpu cycle and memory usage is constrained to the ict systems and devices. the resource constraints can be resolved for the systems like a laptop, desktop, or high-end server up to some extent. however, it is a challenging issue for small devices like smartphones, sensor networks, smart-grid, iot, smart devices, smart homes, etc.



potential pqc algorithms. it is difficult to prove the hardness of the algorithm at scale. for example, lattice-based cryptography which is one of the popular techniques used for designing quantum-safe al- gorithms does manage to scale well but achieves average-case hardness. there is a trade-off between hardness and scalability. either can be achieved, but not both.



alagic g, apon d, cooper d, dang q, dang t, kelsey j, lichtinger j, miller c, moody d, peralta r, perlne r, robinson a, smith-tone d, liu y-k. status report on the third round of the nist post-quantum cryptography standardization process. nist publications; 2022.



