in order to solve the problem, some non-deterministic search methods such as random search or simulated annealing can be applied. by taking into account ter- rain elevations, these non-deterministic search methods could perform better than traditional deterministic approach. in an effort to tackle the problem, some prior work based on evolutionary algorithm has been conducted (akbarzadeh et al., 2010; kosar and ersoy, 2012; akbarzadeh et al., 2013; song et al., 2012; gueney et al., 2012).



however, there are still some disadvantages in using conventional evolutionary approaches. due to the fact that all sensors are homogeneous, the chromosomes that encode sensor positions are actually interchangeable, and conventional cross- over schemes such as uniform crossover (yoon and kim, 2013; karaboga et al., 2014; brar and virk, 2014; tripathi et al., 2011; romoozi and ebrahimpour- komleh, 2012) would cause some redundancy as well as over-concentration in certain specific geographical area. we notice that after a few iterations the same sensor positions or geometrically close sensor positions would be encoded in different parts in chromosome by different individuals, and the conventional crossover scheme such as uniform crossover may produce offspring with redun- dant or geometrically close sensors. such a crossover is thus less effective and may delay the optimization process in sensor deployment optimization.



there are little work in sensor deployment optimization with evolutionary approaches, and most prior work conducted with such paradigms (romoozi and ebrahimpour-komleh, 2012; akbarzadeh et al., 2010; brar and virk, 2014; karaboga et al., 2014; tripathi et al., 2011) simply used evolutionary algorithms as a black box approach without taking into account the problem of homogeneous gene representation. hence, we propose a parsing crossover scheme that reduces redundancy and eases geographical concentration pattern to facilitate the search. the proposed parsing crossover method demonstrates better performances than those of uniform crossover under different terrain irregularities.



the remainder of the paper is organized as follows. the problem statement is presented in the next section, followed by a presentation of the proposed method. the experimental protocol and results are then summarized, concluding the paper with discussions and perspectives.



although there are some common notions on critical issues such as coverage (ahmed et al., 2005; boukerche and fei, 2007; kumar et al., 2006; zhou et al., 2007), there are few comprehensive frameworks that have been done for sensor deployment optimization. in most cases, sensor deployment optimization is regarded as an overly complex problem, thus generic heuristic algorithms are often used for the optimization task (bhondekar et al., 2009; seo et al., 2008). a more comprehensive framework was proposed in akbarzadeh et al. (2010). still, we believe that are some important concepts that are yet to be clearly defined or outlined.



where a and b are parameters that define exact sensor detection behaviors. a point of interest is regarded as covered if it is covered by at least of sensors deployed. if there are n sensors deployed, instead of just one single sensor, then the coverage of a point pj can be defined as (ko et al., 2011):



where pj is a point, 1 6 j 6 m, in a region of interest r. this definition applies for both binary and probabilistic coverages. given n sensors to be deployed in a terrain, and m points in a region of interest, the global coverage c s can be defined as the sum of coverage of all points of interest, which in turns is a function of all sensors deployed, {s1; s2; .. . ; sn}:



where pj is a point, 1 6 j 6 m, in a region of interest r. again, the same definition works for under both binary and probabilistic coverage settings. apparently, the global coverage c s is a function of terrain elevations pj;z; 1 6 j 6 m of all points of interest in region r and sensor positions si;x; si;y and sensor elevations si;z; 1 6 i 6 n. for simplicity, we denote the series of pj;z as pj;z and the sensor positions and elevations as si;x; si;y; si;z, respectively:



we are mainly motivated by three purposes to propose this parsing crossover method for sensor deployment : (a) make sure that offspring would not have redundant gene-pairs; (b) if both parents have a certain gene-pair, then make sure that their offspring would inherit it; (c) under the condition that both (a) and (b) are satisfied, make sure that more distant sensor positions, i.e., sensor positions that are less similar to existent sensor positions, have higher chance to be inherited.



in order to verify the validity of the proposed method, we carried out a number of experiments on terrains with different irregularities. note that we are simply unable to test all terrain types for two reasons: (a) millions of types of terrain exist, and even categorization may not be feasible; (b) currently there is simply no measure on terrain irregularities and we cannot quantify it given any terrain. hence, we work another way around, first we define a standard deviation of terrain elevation as irregularity, and then we generate artificial terrains using different standard deviation and test different search algorithms.



to introduce asymmetry in the experiment, sensors would be placed one meter above the ground instead of on the ground. we tested several methods, including traditional deterministic pattern (bai et al., 2006; hefeeda and ahmadi, 2009), random search, simulated annealing, genetic algorithm with uniform crossover, one point crossover, two point crossover, and the proposed parsing crossover.



10 50 generations to be comparable with other methods. crossover rate is 0.9 for uniform crossover. mutation rate is 0.05, and the disturbance in case of a mutation is a gaussian distribution with standard deviation rr = 10 m. for sim-



sensor deployment in a 3d environment is a non-trivial task, as it is basically a np-hard non-convex optimization problem. in order to solve the problem, non- deterministic optimization methods such as random search, simulated annealing or evolutionary algorithm (akbarzadeh et al., 2010) can be applied. by taking into account terrain elevations, these non-deterministic optimization methods could perform better than traditional deterministic approach.



however, due to the fact that all sensors are homogeneous, the evolutionary algorithm will encounter some problems. the chromosomes that encode sensor positions are actually interchangeable, and conventional crossover schemes such as uniform crossover would cause some redundancy as well as over-concentration in certain specific geographical area. we notice that after a few iterations the same sensor positions or geometrically close sensor positions would be encoded in different parts in chromosome by different individuals, and the conventional crossover scheme such as uniform crossover may produce offspring with redun- dant or geometrically close sensors. such a crossover is thus less effective and may delay the optimization process in sensor deployment optimization.



hence, we proposed a parsing crossover scheme for genetic algorithm. the experimental simulation confirms that the proposed crossover scheme performs better than traditional uniform crossover, one-point crossover and two-point crossover schemes. however, although the proposed scheme outperforms all other compared methodologies in highly irregular terrain, we acknowledge that there may still be some room to further improve the crossover scheme and to make it more robust regardless of irregularity in optimization space.



despite the fact that the proposed method does perform better than most conventional schemes, our parsing crossover relies on the mechanism of genetic algorithm - a population-based optimization. hence, in circumstances where genetic algorithm fails, we are uncertain whether our parsing crossover scheme can be a full remedy. in our simulation, we do not observe any instances of general genetic algorithm failure. however, this is an issue that we may need to pay more attention in the future.



