this work extends propositional dynamic logic(pdl) with parallel composition operator and four atomic programs which formalize the storing and recovering of elements in data structures. a generalization of kripke semantics is proposed that instead of using set of possible states it uses structured sets of possible states. this new semantics allows for representing data structures and using the five new operator one is capable of reasoning about the manipulation of these data structures. the use of the new language(prspdl) is illustrated with some examples. we present sound and complete set of axiom schemata and inference rules to prove all the valid formulas for a restricted fragment called rsp dlo.



another weakness pdl suffers is the lack of operators for the treatment of parallelism and concurrence of programs. there are many extensions of pdl to deal with this kind of operators[19,18,2,3,12,16,1,6]. the aim of all these logics is to reasoning about parallel or concurrent programs.



the paper is structured as follows. section 2 presents the basics on syntax and semantics of the prspdl language. section 3, presents some programs written in prspdl language and provide some motivations. section 4 presents axioms and rules as well as soundness for the restricted system, rspdl0, obtained from prspdl by excluding the iteration, parallel composition and the test operators. section 5 presents a completeness result for rspdl0. finally, section 6 contains some discussion about our contribution and some future works.



by applying the prspdl operators to these basic programs we can define some new useful operators. for instance, we can define the operators in[4,5] which are used in diagrammatic reasoning based on allegories. we also leave this matter for further investigation.



in this section, we restrict the language presented in section 2 to a fragment called rspdl0. in this fragment, we do not allow the use of the operators of test(?), iteration() and parallel composition(). we intend to use the work reported in this fragment as a basis for the investigation of the whole language.



