in spontaneous networked organizations, or any dynamic open organizations, autonomous agents must interact among themselves to achieve their goals. agents usually interact, with which they have no experience, due to the scale and dynamism in these organizations. each agent must, therefore, achieve certain qualities of interests in order to be capable of amalgamating fast. in light of this, we construct qualities of interest for a spontaneous networked organization. theoretical aspects will be described including social harmony, coherence and spontaneity and their effect on the interaction process among agents inside such a collaborative organization. this study helps to improve the social capital of any networked organization.



amalgamate computational resources dynamically across organizational boundaries. an ad hoc organization of networked organizations may form to rally around a specific problem suggested by an agent. a model of such an ad hoc organization was introduced in [1] as spontaneous networked organizations (sno). we aim to further define sno in this paper by exploring qualities that help elaborate nature of a sno.



this article captures general qualities of the sno. this amounts to transforming what was intended to be a traditional organization into a spontaneous more elaborative one. we have developed a set of lightweight qualities of interest among agents inside the sno. this method works by capturing types of interaction and their effect on the social capital inside sno. the remainder of this article is structured as follows. section 2 presents our methods for generating prototypical sno. section 3 evaluates the spontaneously generated connections by presenting the way of computing the three qualities of interest. further description of these parameterizations is in section 4. we finally present related work in section 5, and conclude in section 6.



environment, which we define as a bayesian game. with each communication, agents update their information partition to be more consistent with one another and to closer approximation of actual state of the bayesian game. sno assumes agents or the leader of the organization operates with incomplete information about the environment. since decisions are made locally, exchanges of information produce locally consistent partitions



as known in any social networks, agents perform actions, which in order produce different types of connections. these actions have more impact on a broad range virtually than in the real life. this is because these spontaneous actions that the agents perform are not usually linked in the organization with a sorted type of structure, such as hierarchy, holarchy or others. in light of this, a sno becomes the best fit to describe such style of organizations. further attributes contributing to this type of organization are characterized by describing salient qualities of interest in order to measure the quality of interactions and their effect on the social capital of the organization.



there are many simplified features that have been used in order to study the structure of existing organizations [9][10]. nevertheless, these proposed features lack the presentational power of representing the sno. therefore, we propose three important qualities of interest in order to measure the structure of the sno, in this section. these properties are social harmony, cohesion, and spontaneity.



for a sno, social harmony is an important attribute. social balance exists when relationships among a group in a social network are congenial [7]. heider in [7] presented a theory that suggests certain combinations of relationships are harmonious whereas others are not. for example, two pairs of friends who may have a pair of enemies produce an imbalance.



actions of an organization are largely in response to interactions with sources outside the organizations that are external stimuli (i.e., reactions denoted with ) where the organization attempts to achieve its goals with actions. however, a proportion of actions are strictly generated from internal decision making relying on internal interactions (i.e., internal actions denoted with ).



the use of these properties is beneficial to refine study the sno. however, each one of them has different characteristics that have to be identified in order to be measured inside the organization. the structure of the organization may change depending on the different percentage they have that differ from 0 to 1, on which it has a huge impact. we discuss more about these measurements in the following section.



thus, leadership affects more than the social harmony among the agent to further impacts the cohesion of the organization. spontaneity indicates that separate agents may have implicit communications with one another indirectly based on shared affinities or interest. in various ways, these parameters help to measure the social capital discussed next.



social capital (sc) in the network can be defined as the cooperative nature of agents who belong to myriad networked organizations who operate independently yet in unison from their organizational origins when they perform actions together. in other words, it can be characterized as the collocated or virtual collaboration to produce successful outcomes and successful connections [2]. there are two major perspectives on sc in networks. in the macroscopic perspective, sc for the entire network is considered. in this view individuals do not incrementally add to the system or withdraw units of sc. instead, the foci are on the system principles like norms and conventions that provide resources for overall social welfare. in contrast, the microscopic perspective, adopted here, explores how individuals can gain access to resources by their positions and connections in the network.



can be seen inside the organization where the member has more than one interest to share. however, if any of those members has a connection with any other members of another organization, this connection will immediately be considered as explicit affinities, as proposed by [11]. these types of connections have studies various social networks structures. even though bonding and bridging must exist together or not at all, bonding, however, refers to homogeneous clusters while bridging refers to heterogeneous clusters. bonding helps to enlarge the organization to have more focus of the attentions and to oversimplify the efforts. conversely, bridging helps the organization to further extension of the organization to be able to reach more others in order to take advantage of on jointly valuable collaboration.



in open environments, such as the environments envisioned for sno, agents are integrated dynamically across their organizational and geographical boundaries, to justify each other needs. thus, sno model should adapt dynamically to changing circumstances by improving the social harmony, coherence and spontaneity to encounter both agents and organization goal. in light of this, the paper has been argued that the agents amalgamate better in the sno while in traditional organizations lack the potential power to adopt some of these properties of interaction. in particular, such agents must be able to assess these measurements with their peers, so that they will maintain a sense of continuity toward the goal of their organization.



