in many proposed architectures for quantum computing the physics of the system prevent qubits from being individually controlled. in such systems universal computation may be possible via bulk manipulation of the system. here, we describe a method to execute globally controlled quantum information processing which admits a fault tolerant quantum error correction scheme. our scheme nominally uses three species of addressable two-level systems which are arranged in a one dimensional array in a specific periodic arrangement. we show that the scheme possesses a fault tolerant error threshold.



denotes controlled phase operations applied uniformly between neighbours. below we shall assume that the spin chain is subject to temporal errors(which we assume to be independent pauli errors), and we construct a hierarchy of logical meta-qubit encodings, such that on the highest level we effectively will have a meta-ising model where the associated meta-zz, meta-h and meta-cz, operations possess greatly reduced error rates. we then can implement quantum computation on this metacellular automaton using either of the approaches of[22,8]. we will argue that the resulting model possesses a fault tolerant threshold, however we will here not give specific estimates for the magnitude of the threshold, limiting ourselves to providing a proof of existence.



in, we considered a setup where the ends of the chain were assumed to addressable separately from the bulk of the chain due to having only a single nearest neighbour. unfortunately it is not appropriate to use end systems as an entropy sink since the rate at which errors occur in the chain is a function of the chain length, while having fixed the entropy sinks to be at the end of the chain, it is only possible to remove entropy from the system at a constant rate. in what follows we will consider a, b and c to be separate physical species.



we will consider all errors which occur to be random pauli operators. we are justified in taking this approach as any operation on the system can be written as a sum of pauli operators, weighted by complex coefficients, and the identity. additionally, the application of an error detection procedure generally projects the encoded qubit onto either an uncorrupted state or onto one which has a pauli group operator error present. here, for simplicity, we will focus on the effect of single qubit errors, although more general errors can be treated in the same way.



we first turn our attention to how one level of error correction can be performed, before moving on to discuss how this scheme can be concatenated to arbitrarily high levels. as we will see, many of the operations are performed in the same manner at both the base level, and at higher levels. there are, however, a number of important differences.



hamiltonian, providing that both spins i and i+ 1 lie within the subchain. the coupling between the end spin and the first spin of the next species, however, will be averaged out to zero, since the x gate anticommutes with the coupling term in the hamiltonian. this allows the decoupling of species a and c and the coupling between b and c to be controlled separately.



while not all codes are the same, the class of stabiliser codes does have some common properties. in any stabiliser encoding, pauli operators on the logical qubits can be implemented through some combination of local pauli gates on each of the underlying qubits. it is possible to implement each of these local gates in the same manner as local gates were achieved in.



many stabiliser codes also allow for clifford group operations to be applied in the same kind of transversal manner. the steane code is particularly helpful in this context, as it is possible to apply a hadamard gate to the logical qubit by applying hadamard gates transversally to the underlying qubits. fortunately, and somewhat surprisingly, this corresponds to a single global pulse.



this form of the operator clearly shows that a cz can be performed using only local rotations on c spins, together with the a-c and c-b ising interactions. as the species c spins are isolated, it is trivial to perform local rotations upon them. using this procedure for each pair of spins in the encoding, it is possible to perform transversal cz gates between species a and b.



as we cannot introduce fresh ancillae, it is necessary to reuse the qubits within the chain. to achieve this, it is necessary to periodically reset the ancillary qubits. when this occurs, care must be taken not to destroy information at higher levels of encoding. as qubits will generally be delocalised at higher levels when it becomes necessary to reset qubits, we must have a reset procedure which depends on concatenation level.



we have now demonstrated how error correction can be performed within the chain, and how logic gates can be performed on encoded qubits without propagating errors within those encodings. this is, however, not enough to show that fault-tolerent computation is possible. to show that fault tolerant computation is in fact possible, it is necessary to show that there exists an error rate below which any errors can be suppressed arbitrarily by concatenation of the error correction code. this does not have to be the case, since concatenating codes may introduce errors at a higher rate than they are suppressed by the concatenation, in which case the error rate would balloon. as we will see, however, a threshold does exist below which errors can be suppressed by concatenation of the code.



