this brings us to the notion of quasi-continuity in domain theory. quasicontinuous dcpos are often considered by domain theorists(e.g.[7,6,15,11,10]) as they enjoy many properties that the smaller class of continuous dcpos possesses. thus a natural first question is to ask for some of the necessary and sufficient conditions of yoneda complete quasi-metric spaces for which their posets of formal balls are quasi-continuous dcpos.



in this paper, we propose a definition of quasi-continuous yoneda complete quasimetric spaces. we give a positive answer to the above questions by showing that this notion generalizes that of the continuous yoneda complete quasi-metric spaces. furthermore, we have that the poset of formal balls of a quasi-continuous yoneda complete quasi-metric space is a quasi-continuous dcpo. we also obtain the converse, albeit in the presence of some other condition.



we outline the paper as follows. in section 2, we provide the relevant definitions and also some basic results related to the hyperspaces of quasi-metric spaces. we then study some properties of the formal balls of quasi-continuous yoneda complete quasi-metric spaces in section 3 and obtain our first main result, which characterizes quasi-continuous yoneda complete quasi-metric spaces using certain quasi-continuous dcpos of formal balls. we then proceed to consider the notion of the hyperspace of finitely-generated subsets of a quasi-metric space in section 4 and show that it can characterize quasi-continuous yoneda complete quasi-metric space, which is the second of our main results. this new characterization extends[11, proposition 4.5]. finally, we conclude in section 5.



in this section, we gather some notions of hemi-metric and quasi-metric spaces which are essential for the discussion in the paper. we point the reader to for basic topology, for order theory and[1,6,8] for domain theory. for a more in-depth discussion on hemiand quasi-metric spaces, the reader may also refer to.



following proposition 2.13, any complete metric space and the sorgenfrey line are quasi-continuous as quasi-metric spaces as they are already continuous. for an example of quasi-continuous yoneda complete quasi-metric space which is not continuous, we can simply retrieve it from the quasi-continuous posets.



so far we have given examples of quasi-continuous yoneda complete quasi-metric spaces using continuous yoneda complete quasi-metric spaces and quasi-continuous dcpos. we shall see in example 2.16 that the class of quasi-continuous yoneda complete quasi-metric spaces which is not continuous is strictly larger than that of quasi-continuous dcpos which are not continuous.



in[18, lemma and definition 3.2(4)], waszkiewicz considered the notion of interpolative mappings and he obtained as a corollary to lemma 3.2 that wd is interpolative when(x, d) is a continuous yoneda complete quasi-metric space. using the close relationship between the quasi-continuity of yoneda complete quasi-metric spaces and the quasi-continuity of their formal balls as shown in theorem 3.25, we obtain the following analogous result for quasi-continuous yoneda complete quasimetric space(x, d) where(pf(x),sd) is standard and(x, d) has a particular property.



