ness of strawberry fruits in laboratory has been performed (zhang et al., 2016), while it is still challenging to identify the ripeness of the straw- berry fruits in field, not even at early ripe stage. therefore, this study was aimed to estimate the ripeness of the strawberry fruits under infield and laboratory conditions using hyperspectral imaging combined with deep learning. specifically, in this study, we carried out the strawberry fruit's ripeness estimation at two different ripening stages (early ripe and ripe) using hsi under both field and laboratory conditions. the



in general, the classifier will perform better when the margin with the larger value. for training an svm model is a process of finding the optimize hyperplane based on the training dataset. in the optimization, svm adopts a structural minimum principle for avoiding the over- fitting problems. svm classifier, in numerous research, has been dem- onstrated with superior performance on hsi classification (fauvel et al., 2007). the samples were split into training and test dataset with a ratio of 70:30 for respective field and laboratory conditions. as a result, there were 43 early ripe and 41 ripe strawberries in training dataset for field condition. while there were 17 early ripe and 19 ripe strawberries in test dataset collected in field. similarly, there were 39 early ripe and 45 ripe strawberries in training dataset for laboratory condition. while there were 21 early ripe and 15 ripe strawberries in test dataset col- lected under laboratory.



in summary, results from this study firstly validated the divergency in average spectral wavelengths. based on that, feature wavelengths were selected from images to overcome the redundant imaging data problem, and employed in spatial feature analysis, of which the accu- racy was demonstrated 98.6% based on validate dataset. it indicated that the ripeness of strawberry between the early ripe and ripe stage in the field is distinguishable using the hyperspectral imagery according to conventional standard. while there are still some limitations that need to be addressed in this study. first, the strawberry fruits hidden under the leaves cannot be identified by the hyperspectral imagery.



dataset. the results of this study indicated the potential of using porta- ble hsi system to estimate the strawberry ripeness real-timely, which could provide support for precision strawberry harvesting infield. while analyzing the infield hyperspectral images is still challenging, we believe that a larger dataset for sample preparation and effective sample preprocessing before analysis will help estimate the ripeness. in future study, more samples images will be collected with wider var- iations of external and internal quality of strawberry fruits at different ripeness stage.



this research was supported by national natural science foundation of china (nos. 31701325, 31671632). this work was also funded by china scholarship council (no. 201709135004), post-doctor fund of jiangsu province. zongmei gao would like to acknowledge china schol- arship council for supporting her study at washington state university. the team acknowledges help of tai'an xinlv farm in completion of this study experiments.



