one of the most significant advantages of the ieee 802.11 standard is the fair access to the medium. however sharing the transmission channel makes the networks vulnerable to several attacks such as jamming, black holes, and greedy behavior (mac layer misbehavior) [12].



our paper is organized as follows. the second section is dedicated to presenting the architecture of the ieee 802.11 with all its layers. an overview of the research works related to the ieee 802.11 mac layer misbehavior is shown in the third section. the fourth section proposes our detection scheme of the ieee 802.11 mac layer misbehavior (greedy node). in the fifth section, the authors evaluate the perfor- mance of their approach using the ns2 simulator. conclusions and perspectives are presented in the last section.



the ieee 802.11 mac layer defines the access method carrier sense multiple access/collision avoidance (csma/ ca) working as follows. before transmitting, a node first lis- tens to the shared medium (such as listening for wireless signals in a wireless network) to determine whether another node is transmitting or not. if the channel is free for a dcf inter- frame space (difs) time, then the station transmits a frame which is acknowledged after a short inter-frame space (sifs) interval time with an ack frame.



other authors [17] also proposed an extension to the 802.11 standard that ensures a uniformly distributed random backoff through the protocol of coin flipping by telephone. the main idea is to let both the sender and receiver agree on a random value of backoff through a public exchange using an engage- ment method inspired by the protocol of applying flipping coins over the telephone. however, it is still unable to detect collision between sender and receiver.



the authors in [19] proposed a modeling of an 802.11 net- work with mac layer misbehavior attacks. they consider n nodes in a network, with the presence of l greedy nodes mod- ifying the backoff timer. the misbehaving nodes choose a ran- {b, c, d, e, f}. the purpose is to identify which among this set of stations is a greedy one. therefore, this detection scheme is implemented at every station to designate the cheater station through the supervision of the average reception throughput and the mean inter-packets time by control charts. the control is performed automatically for every node belonging to this set



the detection thresholds and the tolerance interval depend on the number of nodes; therefore, each receiver updates these parameters for each number of transmitters. in our work we tested the detection scheme in an ideal environment which depends on the number of nodes with constant bit rate traffic. the statistical process control is a useful and strong tool for supervising and detecting strong derivations in any type of environment (realistic or theoretical). thus, the purpose is the separation of the extraordinary from the ordinary situations.



