intelligent traffic monitoring systems have been widely used in traffic scenarios such as highways, urban roads, tunnels and bridges. and their widespread applications are benefit from the integration and development of various technologies inevitably, such as pattern recog- nition, video image processing and network communication [1,2]. meanwhile, intelligent traffic monitoring systems also suffer from many significant challenges in extremely complex traffic monitoring scenarios as well as special weather conditions.



regularities, which has great effects on prediction accuracy. further- more, the analysis methods based on road traffic accidents are retro- spective and cannot respond promptly to the unforeseen road incidents. therefore, this study proposes a real-time road vehicle risk analysis method based on camera inverse perspective transformation that con- siders complex traffic scenarios. firstly, camera calibration is performed and then the camera-to-road inverse perspective transformation is uti- lized to obtain the actual position information of vehicles by projecting the image plane onto the road surface. finally, vehicle speed measure- ment and real-time risk assessment are achieved by calculating the average of instantaneous velocities across multiple frames. this method determines the vehicle risk value by analyzing the relative speeds and distances between vehicles. by aggregating the vehicle risk values, real-



distributed on highways [23]. in order to complete the camera cali- bration in section 2.3, the broken and solid lines on the road need to be detected accurately. the solid lines are white and the broken lines are blue or gray (i.e., the color of the road surface). with this distribution



parameters obtained from the test focal length. if the value of d de- creases when the focal length is increased, the focal length continues to increase, otherwise it decreases; if the value of d decreases when the focal length is decreased, the focal length continues to decrease, other- wise it increases. adjust the focal length value until the d value is minimum, then the camera calibration is completed.



the three fundamental elements of traffic are traffic flow rate (q), vehicle speed (v), and traffic density (k). traffic flow rate is defined as the number of traffic entities passing through a specific location or section of a road within a designated time period. vehicle speed is typically divided into spot speed and section speed. spot speed refers to the instantaneous speed of vehicles passing through a specific location. section speed refers to the ratio of the distance traveled by a vehicle to the total time taken to travel that distance. section speed is a compre- hensive performance indicator used to evaluate the level of traffic congestion on a road and estimate travel delay. traffic density refers to the number of vehicles per unit length of road at a specific moment, indicating the level of traffic density on a road.



the vehicle speed is measured by calculating the average value of the instantaneous speed between multiple frames, as described in section 3. at the same time, in order to verify the accuracy of the speed mea- surement, the experimental vehicle passes through three different lanes of the urban main road monitoring scene three times, all driving at 60 km/h. in total, nine experiments are conducted to get the average value of the vehicle in different lanes and compare it with the vehicle driving speed.



from the diagram, it can be observed that by aggregating the vehicle risk values based on road segments, we can obtain a risk assessment result for each segment, which reflects the road safety situation. for example, when there is an abandoned object on the road, drivers usually take measures to avoid potential risks and safety hazards. one common practice is to lower the vehicle speed through emergency braking, among other methods, to avoid collisions with the abandoned objects. this is reflected in the spatio-temporal trajectory of vehicles and the statistical graph of vehicle risks. near the segment with abandoned objects, the road risk will significantly increase. real-time monitoring of changes in road risk conditions and predicting future traffic situations can be achieved.



trunk road and highway scenes. the vehicle target is detected and tracked by deep learning yolo detection algorithm and optical flow tracking algorithm. based on the set of tracked trajectories, a set of vanishing points in the road direction is obtained to accurately obtain the sign lines on the road. then based on the detected vanishing points and the sign lines on the road, the camera calibration in traffic scenes is accomplished via exploratory focal length. finally, the vehicle speed is measured by calculating the average instantaneous speed between multiple frames. the calibration error is 1.17 % and the speed



measurement error is 6 % in different monitoring scenes (city main roads and highways), which can be well applied to actual traffic scenes to achieve vehicle speed measurement in video images and lay the foundation for traffic control and event monitoring. a vehicle risk assessment calculation method is proposed based on vehicle detection and speed measurement. through simulations, it has been verified that this method can reflect the real-time road safety situation. the real-time monitoring and prediction capability can assist traffic management authorities in formulating more scientific and effective traffic



management strategies, thereby reducing the occurrence rate of road accidents. however, during the experiment, it is found that the effective field of view of a single camera is generally within 200 m. in order to achieve complete risk monitoring coverage of a section of road, it is necessary to connect the vehicle trajectories across cameras to achieve safety risk assessment of the entire road.



