vector and radius, respectively; (1) implies that the weights between the first- and second-layer units are all unity. the third layer consists of the units, each generating the output as an weighted linear sum of all the m node-activations in the second layer, i.e.



a crucial step for training the rbf-based networks is therefore the choice of the number of the rbfs m and the assignment of the centroid vectors ci. for this aim, data clustering algorithm such as k-means [3] or learning vector quantization (lvq) [4] is commonly employed. in both the k-means and lvq, the initial m prototypes are arbitrarily chosen from the training dataset given and then iteratively refined, until a certain condition of convergence is met; such an iterative refinement is carried out in an unsupervised manner in the k-means, whereas the refinement is done in a supervised mode in the lvq. hence, the m prototypes obtained upon convergence will be used as the center loca- tions. a recent work [5] proposes a version of the standard k-means algorithm for the improvement over heavily-tailed samples or outliers within the data. orthogonal least squares (ols) [6,7] method is another well-known approach used for the determination of the center locations, based upon orthogonal transformation of the training data. in the last two decades, the methods by means of evolutionary computation, such as those based upon particle swarm optimization (pso) [8] have been gorithm in the above will generate the cluster means, by default, for all the levels of hierarchy. therefore, a total of the ncl cluster means ob- tained at level l will be assigned as the respective centroid vectors of an rbf network. as the level of hierarchy increases, the number of the cluster means so generated will become smaller, since the algorithm is agglomerative in nature. in other words, it is considered that, with an increasing level of the hierarchy, the data representation will become coarser and thus is considered to yield a poorer performance. hence, in practice, choosing a level of hierarchy to obtain cluster means, each eventually assigned as the corresponding centroid vector of an rbf ti in (1), will be dependent upon a trade-off between the performance and the number of the rbfs accommodated within the network.



