our goal is to derive an approximation of models of no transport and availability in blood vessels in terms of ctmc with levels. ctmc with levels are ctmcs whose states are characterised by the concentration of each species expressed in discrete levels. the motivation for this is the additional analysis available, e.g. testing of robustness under different degrees of stochasticity. moreover, an approximation of pdes in terms of such semantics ensures that we can use bio-pepa, which is based on ctmc with levels, and the tools developed for it to model and analyse this scenario. before we can do so, the missing piece of the puzzle is a derivation of diffusion in one dimensional cylindrical coordinates in terms of ctmc with levels. in this paper we present such derivation, whose main novelties are:



the paper is organised as follows. in section 2 we present the derivation of the pdes to ctmc with levels. in section 3 we present an example. in section 4 we mention related work, while conclusions and future work are in section 5.



the derivations in this section refer to a one-dimensional model in cylindrical coordinates. although the only dimension considered is the radius, it is essential to note that the concentration at each point distant r from the centre represents the concentration at each point along the circumference of the circle with radius r. the length of the cylinder can be neglected, as it is an invariant for our derivations. for this reason we use the terms area and volume as synonymous.



thus we have shown that we can derive odes with compartments from pdes in cylindrical coordinates. this is possible because of the correspondence we have found between the diffusion constant ds in the pde and the kinetic constants ki,j of mass action transport reactions in the odes. at this point, we already know from that we can derive the corresponding ctmc with levels.



in order for the state space of the ctmc to be finite, a maximum concentration mi is fixed for each variable si, to be divided in ni intervals representing hi molar of concentration, with hi=mi/ni and i= 1,..., k.



translation from odes to ctmc with levels of concentration finds its roots in. this has been then investigated further in, where a more solid theoretical link between the two approaches is introduced. transport between compartments is finally considered in.



