the semantic web helps to give supporting materials of semantic feature to web; it is an innovation and extension of the world-wide-web. its aim is to make all web resources have semanteme [1]. and it helps computers to know the semanteme to a certain extent in which makes sharing resources and computers cooperative intelligence more efficient. these information above shows that the research priorities of the



the description logic is a decidable subset of the first-order-predication logic. it is based on logic and its function on knowledge expressing is powerful. meanwhile, the description logic is the logical foundation of the semantic web [2,3]. it is established based on the concept and role. concept is defined as a collection of objects; role is defined as the binary relationship between objects.



we apply this system to automatic course-arranging system. at the very beginning, build ontology of teaching materials. this ontology not only can provide reasoning service for related resources but also make domain knowledge be reused conveniently. then, set rules of course and test arrangement to carry through reasoning service. the main process is as follows:



after the reasoning finished, the new fact which results from reasoning can be added to the ontology according to the need. the jesstab function which manages the ontology can add, modify and delete some contents of its type, attribution and example. these management functions can be used with rules. if the entire preconditions are met, those operations are carried out. for instance, the restricted conditions of course arrangement are met, the conditions of course arrangement established. but this method is just adding a new fact to jess; the ontology will not record the new fact proactively. for this reason, we can import this data into the ontology as needed, or we can import it into other application programs according to the api data provided by jess. for instance, we can import this data into the knowledge base so that the people in charge of course arrangement can visit this data by user interface. in addition, we can put this data online so that those related people can inquire it conveniently.



the semantic web is considered to be a web of next generation. but there are many difficulties and challenges in realizing the semantic web, such as semantic interconnection, semantic reasoning and intelligent polymerization and other theoretical or technical barriers. generally speaking, there are 2 aspects in the study of semantic reasoning. one is how to established the rules when building an ontology; how to reveal the implied relation in the knowledge organization systems better; how to balance the dominant expression of semantic relations and complexity of building the ontology. the other is how to carry through the semantic reasoning more efficient and exactly during the stage of designing and implementation about the system. this paper is concentrated on how to make semantic reasoning efficient. it builds the prototype system of semantic reasoning and uses subsystem of the description logic reasoning to conduct the semantic reasoning. in future, we can focus on the construction mechanism about the rules of the semantic reasoning when building the ontology. and we need to combine it with the designing and implementation of the system in order to provide references for the semantic reasoning of various knowledge service systems in future.



