opengl is a strong there-the graph develop tools,3ds format is a common format for saving there d model based on opengl, the paper researches on the method of 3ds model file read, render and control. first it analyzes the file structure of 3ds, and abstracts the data structure of face, material, object and model by chunk structure used to read in data. the file data is read in with the method of recursion, the read data renders in screen after data disposal. the interactive control of model is accomplished by three kinds of geometric transformation, translate, rotate and scale and opengl select mechanism. finally, those methods are applied into the system of the borehole operation operate simulation and drilling, and achieve better results.



opengl is a strong there-the graph develop tools and a software interface of graph hardware, points, lines, polygons and these basic geometries make up of models in opengl[1], so it's difficult to construct complex models directly in opengl, such as bent or beveling objects. compare with opengl, 3ds max has strong ability to construct models with the method of lathe, lofting and so on in short time. the models in 3ds max could be exported as .3ds file, if the complex models constructed in 3ds max could be import into opengl, 3ds file is saved as chunk structure. beginning of a chunk is 2 bytes id, 4 bytes chunk length information, and then is the main date of the chunk. 3ds file is opened in hex format, the data is saved according to the lower is in the front, and the higher is in the back. for example, 2 bytes ff af is integer in hex, af is higher byte and ff is lower byte; 93 8e 06 00 is long integer, 8e 93 is lower byte and 00 06 is higher byte.



the coordinate system of opengl is different to 3ds max. in this article, the reading program is designed like that, swapping the coordinate of y and z, and then saving the swapped data when reading vertex list data. compare with processing after reading data, this method could save time and space in processing.



create name stack. it is the object choiced by operator saved in name stack. first call function glinitnames() to initialize name stack, that is clear name stack, second call function glpushname() to press object name into the stack when sending command to render all kinds of models, call glpopname() function to push the object name from stack.



