at present, the major shortcomings of information construction are lack of unified planning, construction level uneven and no unified standard construction in the university's information construction. as no account of the global university departments of general in the original design and development, application system of each college or department do their own way and in them own field, then has formed a lot of information isolated islands. these colleges and universities departments urgently need to integrate these independent application systems and their databases in order to realize information sharing.



apache synapse is a lightweight and high-performance enterprise service bus(esb). in essence synapse is a web service arbitration frame, it is the building in the apache axis2 based. powered by a fast and asynchronous mediation engine, apache synapse supports several other content interchange formats, such as plain text, binary, hessian and json. the wide range of transport adapters available for synapse enables it to communicate over many applications. synapse focuses routing, conversion, news based on web services and verified and xml standard registration.



apache synapse has been designed to support very fast xml routing with a streaming xml design based upon apache axiom. in addition, the use of a completely asynchronous architecture and non-blocking io ensures that synapse has very low overhead and can scale to support thousands of concurrent clients without dropping messages. synapse provides the consistent model for management strategies and service. through the will synapse as layer, such as identity authentication, the verification, the log and aspects, load balance and so on can be controlled. this makes organization be more efficient and more effective management resources. finally, apache synapse will convert the existing application systems into web services, information portal presents information from diverse sources in a unified way and provide unified access control for different users though the standard application interface.



