in the process of absorbing samples of automatic clinical analysis instruments, it has a lot of problems with single direction method, such as low accuracy, inaccurate of liquid absorbed, short sample and tip blocked. according to this problem, this paper applies dynamic method of level detection to capacitance sensor. in the method, the influence of the inertness of the motor drive and microcapillarity caused by the infiltration between probe and the liquid are reduced. at the same time, a grey dynamic filtering based on dynamic gm (1, 1) is used to improve the stability of capacitance sensor output. finally, experiments are performed to verify the feasibility of the method. compared with single direction method, the dynamic method improves the accuracy from 0.3mm to 0.1mm.



two plate insulation medium thickness, as permittivity medium .probe type capacitance sensor is different from traditional plate capacitance sensor, probe is a conductor, there is capacitance effect between it and the sample cup at the bottom of the metal frame, thus a capacitance sensor is formed. the filling the medium of electrical insulation is air, and due to the shape if probe is irregular, it is unable to establish a accurate mathematical model, so we just get a very rough estimation [4-7].



introduced by the influence of the tiny fluctuation, and through a lot of experiments, we finally determine 0.1v as standard in experiments. adc module of tms320f2812 starts sampling capacitance sensor output values when probe contacting liquid level or goes from liquid level, slowly.



for the selection of standard value, there is a need of comprehensive consideration of the motor motion inertia and the error introduced by infiltrating the influence of the tiny fluctuation. contrast to unidirectional method curve, dynamic method can effectively eliminate the error introduced by motor motion inertia, meanwhile the smaller the standard value chose, the better motor motion inertia error is eliminated, however if the standard value is chose too small, the errors introduced by infiltration phenomenon, will influence the measurement results greatly. so the selection of standard value should be in avoiding infiltration phenomenon influence under the condition of the maximum degree of eliminating motor motion inertia error. in this paper, we finally determined 0.1v as standard in the experiment.



capacitance sensor output is improved by noise filtering of the sampling results, which ensure the stability of capacitance sensor output value variation to provide accurate judgment. at the same time through a lot of experiments to choose the best variation as liquid surface detection standard value, we can effectively eliminate the error introduced by phenomenon of infiltrating. finally, we can detect liquid level accurately, in dynamic measurement method for probe type capacitance sensor, and minimize carry pollution caused by probe hang fluid.



