(gcn), that operates directly on a graph and induces embedding vectors of nodes based on the properties of their neighborhoods(kipf and welling, 2016). the major limitation of gcn is inherently transductive, graphsage is an inductive framework that can quickly generate embeddings and predict for unseen information(hamilton et al., 2017). whereas, due to over-smoothing problem, it is difficult to improve the predictive performance with stacked up many graphsage layers. meanwhile, as a classical deep convolution neural network(cnn) with strong feature extraction, the residual neural network(resnet) helps in tackling the vanishing gradient problem using identity mappings(he et al., 2016). thus, the embedded resnet module also can act as a buffer layer to reduce the over-smoothing problem of the graphsage layers(oono and suzuki, 2020).



the rest of this paper is organized as follows. the chapter ii briefly introduces the basic concepts of the resnet and the graphsage, and then elaborates the architecture of the proposed resgraphnet. the chapter iii shows experiments of datasets that reveal the performance of the proposed resgraphnet. finally, conclusions are drawn in the chapter iv.



of huge fossil energy consumption, the global temperature is increasing gradually(arrow, 2007). this is a challenge to those methods that use past data to predict the future information(dougherty et al., 2005; hastings et al., 2014; terando et al., 2014), because it is difficult to learn the drastic changes in temperature data in the last few years. therefore, to tackle this problem, we build the novelty architecture of resgraphnet.



in additional, ersstv4(smith et al., 2008), ersstv3b(smith et al., 2008), berkeley-earth(rohde et al., 2013), hadsst3(kennedy et al., 2011), and era5(hersbach et al., 2020) also are temperature data measured in different ways and in different areas. these datasets also are applied to verify the generalization ability of the proposed resgraphnet.



resnet is a type of neural networks that applies identity mapping. it is known that simply stacking up cnn layers cannot indefinitely improve the performance of the cnn model, due to the vanishing gradient problem(glorot and bengio, 2010). to solve this problem effectively, the concept of a highway network is proposed as(srivastava et al., 2015)



for regression problems, the root mean square error(rmse) is generally selected as the performance evaluation indicator(bellocchio et al., 2012). however, the rmse is easily affected by the data itself. if there are great differences in the value distribution of different time series, the magnitude of their rmse may be completely different, which makes it impossible to compare the testing results of these time series.



this chapter first shows the training dataset and the test dataset based on real time series data. then, we build models based on different algorithms and set the parameters of these different models. finally, the training dataset are applied to train each model, while the test dataset are used to evaluate the performance of models.



there are 12 models are applied, including the proposed resgrapnet, the resnet, the graphsage, the gnn with unified message passaging model(unimp)(shi et al., 2020), the gcn(kipf and welling, 2016), the graph isomorphic network(gin)(morris et al., 2019), the rnn with lstm, the rnn with gru, the random forest regression(forest), the linear regression(linear), the arima and the sarimax. we



january, february and march are 0.0015, 0.0109, 0.0048 respectively, as well as the high similarity of annual temperature. thus, the results of prediction show the proposed resgraphnet can accurately predict the unknown temperature data in the future to some extent. note that,



however, there are still two problems that have not been well solved in this paper. first, there is still no better method to choose the best graph structure for specific data such as temperature time series. second, this paper does not solve the problem of long-term prediction of temperature series. therefore, we hope to further improve the performance of the current model.



