agricultural internet of things (iot) has brought new changes to agricultural production. it not only increases ag- ricultural output but can also effectively improve the quality of agricultural products, reduce labor costs, increase farmers' income, and truly realize agricultural modernization and intelligence. this paper systematically summa- rizes the research status of agricultural iot. firstly, the current situation of agricultural iot is illustrated and its system architecture is summarized. then, the five key technologies of agricultural iot are discussed in detail. next, applications of agricultural iot in five representative fields are introduced. finally, the problems existing in agricultural iot are analyzed and a forecast is given of the future development of agricultural iot.



with the wide application of iot technology in agriculture, driven by the development of the internet, digital technology, and sensing tech- nology, sensors made using new technologies are constantly emerging and developing towards the direction of being embedded, intelligent, integrated, and miniaturized. at present, the united states, japan, and germany are ahead of other countries in sensor technology and manufacturing processes, and they occupy a dominant position (he et al., 2009). the functions of agricultural sensors are becoming increas- ingly diversified, including soil sensors, meteorological sensors, water sensors, and plant sensors. these sensors detecting various objects pro- vide powerful support for agricultural production data collection.



planting and transplantation, pesticide spraying and terrain moni- toring, soil structure analysis, and so on. the electrochemical method is based on the electrochemical properties of the sub- stances in the solution and their change rules, which can be used for the analysis of soil chemical composition, crop growth and development, and so on (adamchuk et al., 2004).



the ultimate purpose of information processing is to collect and an- alyze the acquired data. in the process of agricultural production moni- toring, much production data is collected, and they have the characteristics of being in real-time, dynamic, and massive. using iot technology, the production data can be stored and analyzed to a certain degree, and corresponding data patterns can be found. cloud computing technology is mainly used for information processing, and it can effec- tively solve the problem of storage, calculation, and the related process- ing of massive agricultural production data. many emerging cloud regarded as major options for iot applications in smart farming (glaroudis et al., 2019). they presented seven protocols, and compared with respect to their performance, and measured in terms of relevant key indicators. farooq et al. constructed a smart farming with relevant technologies (cloud and edge computing, big data analytics and ma- chine learning, communication networks and protocols, and robotics), and analyzed application domains, relevant smartphone, sensor-based applications, and security and privacy issues in iot-based agriculture (farooq et al., 2019). erlangga et al. aimed to create a mobile learning that provides information and interactive communication about vegeta- ble production needed by farmers using internet and mobile cloud com- puting concept, for better communication, sharing of information and profitability in agriculture (erlangga et al., 2020).



analyze the growth status of the fruit (ampatzidis and vouqioukas, 2009; bowman, 2010). research on identification methods based on rfid has been expanding. accurate location identification, positioning, and navigation are the research hotspots. these applications focus on in- tegrating rfid information with location information from other tech- nologies, such as zigbee, global positioning system (gps), and wireless sensor network (wsn) (yue et al., 2018). he designed a wireless rfid system based on zigbee technology, which improved the sensing and processing capabilities of the rfid system (he, 2020).



remote sensing technology uses different forms of sensors to re- ceive various electromagnetic wave information of ground objects from rs platforms at different heights and processes the received in- formation to detect and identify different ground objects and their characteristics from a distance. it can solve the problem of monitoring crops that are scattered and geographically complex. at present, rs technology has formed a three-dimensional earth observation sys- tem including aerial photography and satellite remote sensing. it has leaped from local observation to global quasi-synchronous obser- vation and is gradually expanding from visible light to infrared, far- infrared, and even microwave and ultra-long wave (li and yang, 2018). agricultural rs technology has a unique effect on the monitor- ing and management of large-area open-air agricultural production. it can monitor crops that are scattered in type and located in complex terrain. it has four research directions: agricultural resource investi- gation, crop yield estimation, agricultural disaster forecasting, and precision agriculture (gao et al., 2020). nowadays, rs technology is playing an important role in the management and protection of farm- land water conservancy projects (ma et al., 2019), ecological environ- ment monitoring (chui, 2017), and real-time decision-making on agricultural fertilization (li, 2017).



of pigs was automatically measured based on infrared technology (meng, 2018). timely observation of body temperature can effectively prevent the occurrence of diseases. to improve the efficiency of wildlife rescue centers on rehabilitation, quarantine monitoring, and scientific release, jia used sensors and rfid technology combined with modern biometric technology to collect state data of wild animals and transmit them to the terminal through wireless transmission technology based on the zigbee protocol (jia, 2020).



by fully investigating the specific conditions of the citrus growing environment, porto et al. designed a citrus traceability system based on iot technology (porto et al., 2011). this system can prevent and con- trol the spread of plant diseases so that citrus growth is promoted. he et al. summarized plant nutrient monitoring, disease, insect pest sens- ing, and the acquisition of plant life information along with spectro- scopic technology and nuclear magnetic resonance imaging technology for plant information perception (he et al., 2013). park et al. deployed wsns to calculate the dew point on the leaves of plants in a greenhouse based on the sensed information (park and park, 2011). then, through automatic adjustment of the greenhouse environment, plant diseases that may be caused by condensation were effectively prevented and controlled. through computer vision technology, li et al. realized successful non-destructive monitoring of the growth of plants in a greenhouse and collected the leaf crown projection area and plant height information (li et al., 2003).



in terms of agricultural product quality safety and traceability, agri- cultural iot is mainly applied to agricultural product warehousing, lo- gistics, and distribution. through electronic data exchange, bar codes, rfid electronic tags, and other technologies, automatic identification and the input and output of warehouse of goods can be achieved. using wsns, storage workshops and logistics distribution vehicles can be monitored in real-time to achieve the goal of traceability of the source and destination of the main agricultural products. many devel- oped countries have conducted in-depth research on agricultural prod- uct traceability systems and have already had relatively mature



the agricultural iot relies on high-speed wireless wan for data transmission. however, in the remote agricultural environment, the wireless communication signal is weak, so it is unrealistic to realize high-speed data transmission. therefore, we can only im- prove the data coding efficiency to ensure the real-time perfor- mance of the system.



agricultural iot system structure and perception node deploy- ment and management need to be researched. the architecture should be distributed, open, and resource-service sharable. by this, interconnections of various heterogeneous systems and resource sharing can be realized, and more detailed and specific agricultural information can be obtained.



