there has been increased concern in the evaluation of risk in the construction field and it is common to have it performed for every task, function and machine. nonetheless this commonly used approach does not take into account most of the intrinsic variables inherent to a site construction and hence several fac- tors reported in literature, as well as experience based analysis, suggest that spatial and temporal vari- ables have a strong influence on risk level distribution. to evaluate the impact of these factors a study was conducted concerning the simultaneity of risks in the construction of an aged people hostel, in the district of braga, portugal. a method was developed in order to reduce peaks of previously estimated risk levels through the reorganization of tasks in time and space attaining a substantial reduction in peak risk tasks. this study, along with the increasing availability of computing tools pertaining to the construc- tion area, demonstrates the necessity for the development of new strategies regarding integrated risk management and planning during the project phase that substantially mitigate risk peaks during construction.



risk evaluation has begun half a century following the indus- trial revolution in england [1] due to a growing concern regarding working conditions, accidents and other risk factors, which were common in the domain of first industries. nevertheless it was in the united states of america that the first initiatives regarding risk prevention took place, given the government, entrepreneurs and specialists intervention. in 1928 the american engineering council had already demonstrated the existing connections between the direct and indirect costs linked to accidents such as payment of non-productive manpower, financial losses and production disrup- tion. in 1931 h.w. heinrich [2] made public a study revealing the direct and indirect costs of work accidents outlining a method that was later known as the domino theory. the study underlined the causality effect as determinant for a cascade effect ruled by five factors: social ambience, human error, dangerous conditions, acci- dent and personal damage [3]. risk assessment is an important tool for risk prevention at work and regardless of the method its assessment is fundamental [4,5,11].



falls represent a major care and cost problem to health and social services world-widely given that 50% of falls result in an injury [15] and it is known that injuries at work have a substantial economic and societal burden [16,17]. doulamis et al. [40]; bourke et al. [41] and li et al. [42] proposed new methodologies based on accelerometers and gyroscopes for the detection of falls neverthe- less the main drawbacks of these studies concern the distinction between involuntary human falls from normal movements similar to falls. the difficulties encountered in these studies demonstrate the importance of detecting and preventing the risk of falls. in gen- eral organizations adopt safety management systems or behavior- based systems approaches to safety functions in an attempt to achieve performance excellence [18,19].



badri et al. [27], upon his literature review on the integration and management of safety with the project management, state the existence of many published books (60% of the selected pub- lished books) that envisage the integration of risks management with process control in the civil construction field as a fatality. lately different approaches to the problem have been suggested, several authors [28,29,30] have tried to combine scheduled tasks to the programming and safety measures. also, and due to critical nature and high number of working accidents, several researchers have proposed tools to integrate safety management in the process of production programming. the following authors are just a few that made attempts to integrate different aspects regarding risk assessment and control: hare et al. [29] tried to integrate safety management within the project phase. he used an approach based on discussions with experts on civil construction in order to determine the critical and detriment factors for the development of an integrative model for safety management; zhang et al. [31] proposed an automatic application integrated in recent systems the optimized distribution of risk within the project plan. taking into consideration the presented approaches for risk assessment and their limitations, this study adds a physical and temporal dimension to the problem and is later assessed through a case study. this paper presents a new methodology for risk assessment in construction sites and it is designed to explore some of the lim- itations of the previously presented studies. it takes into consider- ation previous frameworks and addresses the limited results on the relationship between physical and temporal risk hazard locations providing a map that can be easily assessed to depict critical risk in time and space. there are several theoretical assessment methodologies, however, evaluations that address time and space and are corroborated by a case study have not been yet been pre- sented and validated.



the following three subsections present the different approaches to risk distribution assessment and prediction as well as a final comparison subsection. in the first part it is presented the traditional analyses carried to determine probable problematic periods concerning risk levels. the second part introduces into the risk assessment analyses the proposed method taking into account time and space redistribution of risk. the final part gives a compar- ison concerning the implementation of this method as well as providing evidences pertaining to its benefits on assessing risk and complementary planning of tasks during construction.



following the identification of risk distribution along the execu- tion plan measures were studied in order to diminishing the risk peaks throughout the timeline of the project. these organizational measures were established, without limiting the correct develop- ment of work, i.e. without interfering with critic activities, consid- ering mostly the reduction of simultaneous tasks with the aim of diminishing the peaks obtained in each of the phases. critical tasks are those that cannot be delayed and hence be completed within a predefined / scheduled time and determine the critical path.



the histogram of accumulated risk has shown that this con- struction project is mainly characterized by two distinctive stages. during the first stage the higher risk accumulated tasks demand special attention since higher levels of risk appear mainly due to the cumulative effect of similar tasks duly mixed in the initial con- structive process phase. the second stage is characterized by a high number of activities developed simultaneously with meaningful accumulated risk. that is, lower risk activities in conjunction with the high simultaneity of tasks represent a level of accumulated risk that cannot be underestimated.



the results demonstrate that project planning should pay spe- cial attention to risk maps since these have a strong impact in the management of construction sites. systematic changes in the workforce, the continuous change of conditions and sceneries of work, the exposure to the weather conditions and some other vari- able factors render difficult the task of identifying, observing, eval- uating and gathering data that continuously mutate. it is therefore important that safety managers have access to the risk characteris- tic curves of each type of construction task in order to introduce possible improvements regarding the reduction of accumulated risk in order to accommodate changes in updates of the project plan.



this study further unveils the potential pertaining to the devel- opment of new computer aided tools, as well as, new methodolo- gies concerning risk management intertwined with project planning and managing. the reported organizational measures were successful in reducing peak risk levels and contribute towards the development of methodologies regarding risk man- agement and its dynamic control during construction. the follow- ing research step is to evaluate the efficiency of genetic algorithms in optimizing the redistribution of tasks given the restrictions posed by this problem targeted at reducing risk peaks.



