section 2 critically reviews appropriate literature. section 3 outlines the development of the genetic algorithm tool for solving facilities layout problems, which is integrated with maintenance planning. the experimental results are presented in section 4. section 5 provides a discussion and highlights the conclusions of the work and identifies opportunities for future research.



used for solving flps, including: genetic algorithms; simulated annealing; tabu search; ant colony optimisation; particle swarm optimisation; and biogeography-based optimisation(sooncharoen, vitayasak& pongcharoen, 2015). genetic algorithms have been a popular approach to solving facility layout design problems. kia, khaksar-haghani, javadian and tavakkolimoghaddam(2014) found that ga can find near-optimal solutions in much less computational time than cplex software for almost all problems. lenin, siva kumar, islam and ravindran(2013) demonstrated the effectiveness of ga for solving a single-row layout design problem. the results obtained from ga were more favourable than other approaches. dapa, loreungthup, vitayasak and pongcharoen(2013) reported that ga outperformed the bat algorithm and shuffied frog leaping algorithm in a multiple-row layout design. vitayasak and pongcharoen(2016) investigated the affects of breakdown maintenance and provided a cost-based decision framework for re-layout investment.



machine breakdown has been one of the most studied disruptions in flexible job shop scheduling. the machine failure rate has been represented by the poisson distribution(schemeleva, delorme, dolgui& grimaud, 2012) or generated randomly(nodem, kenne& gharbi, 2011). machine lifetime is commonly modelled using the weibull distribution(fitouhi& nourelfath, 2012). the mean-time-to-failure has been represented by the normal distribution or the exponential distribution. corrective maintenance has also been



the genetic algorithm(ga) is a population-based, natureinspired algorithm(goldberg, 1989; holland, 1962). a set of candidate solutions is generated as an initial set of solutions, which then undergoes an evolutionary search process. gas use probabilistic transition rules to guide a highly exploitative search and also performs a multiple directional search by maintaining a population of potential solutions. in each iteration(generation) of the search process the crossover operator helps the ga move towards a local optimum(hicks, 2006), whereas the mutation operator tends to move the search to a new neighbourhood which leads to increased diversity(hicks, 2006; islier, 1998).



this paper has presented the development of an approach that integrates maintenance planning with the design of non-identical machine layouts subject to dynamic demand, which addresses a gap in the literature. the ga aims to minimise the total material flow distance. the computational experiments were carried out using eleven datasets with different demand distributions. the analysis considered three maintenance scenarios with ppm/qpm(ratios of 20/80, 50/50 and 80/20). three levels of corrective maintenance were considered 10%, 20% and 30%. a combination of pmm/qpm with ratios of(20/80 and 80/20) and two values of%cm(10% and 30%) were studied. the material flow distances can decrease or increase when some machines were maintained during each period. this was caused by changes in the routings due to the use of alternative machines.



designing robust machine layouts considering machine maintenance leads to reduced material flow distances up to 30.91%, 9.8%, and 20.7% for pm, cm, and pm and cm scenarios, respectively. the distances obtained from designing the layout without and with maintenance consideration had statistically significant differences in the means. the ppm/qpm ratios,%cm, and a combination of ppm/qpm and%cm had significantly resulted in the material flow distance in almost all datasets.



