localization-free depth-based opportunistic routing protocols are an energy efficient choice for underwater wireless sensor networks (uwsns). however, most depth-based routing protocols are vulnerable to sinkhole attacks caused by depth spoofing. in this paper, we propose an energy-efficient depth-based probabilistic routing protocol (dpr) that is resilient against depth spoofing. by encouraging unqualified (suboptimal) relay nodes to randomly forward data packets, the adversarial effects of depth-spoofing can be mitigated. as the randomized forwarding probability increases, a better packet delivery ratio can be achieved when under depth-spoofing attacks. to keep energy consumption in check, we propose a simulation-based methodology for finding the optimal forwarding probability. by adjusting the unqualified node forwarding probability, the proposed dpr protocol can effectively resist depth-spoofing attacks with a reasonably efficient energy overhead. a delivery ratio exceeding 90% can be achieved under attack with energy overhead as low as 35% under normal conditions. in comparison with relevant existing protocols, the proposed protocol achieves better energy efficiency, resil- ience efficiency, and scalability.



securing underwater sensor networks (uwsns) has gain consider- able attention in recent years. this is due to the fact that security vul- nerabilities are continuously exploited by adversaries and third parties for political and financial advantages [1]. a wide variety of attacks exist, with objectives ranging from sniffing the network [2] to disrupting or totally disabling operations [3]. uwsns routing protocols have been exposed to variety of several attacks [4]. such attacks may affect the performance of the routing lightly or even completely. in this paper, we focus on securing the depth-based routing protocol (dbr) [5] against a selected proven attack. dbr protocol and its recent variants, such as packet depth until it reaches a surface sink. relay nodes hold packets received from the channel and wait for other nodes, which may be closer to the surface, giving them a chance to forward first. nodes closer to the surface go first and announce their depth in the header of forwarded packets. upon learning that a neighbor has already forwarded the held packet, it is assumed to be closer to the surface, and thereafter, deeper nodes discard their held copies.



one of the threats against dbr protocols techniques, the sinkhole attack. unlike a denial-of-service attack that aims to overwhelm network resources, a sinkhole attack aims to inhibit the network from delivering valuable information [12]. it is considered one of the most critical and severe attacks, as it is very hard to observe [13] and can reduce the lifetime of the network by 70% [10].



although the opportunistic behavior of dbr relay nodes saves en- ergy, it enables a variant of the sinkhole attack called the depth-spoofing attack. an adversary can take advantage of the behavior pattern by convincing relay nodes in a certain neighborhood to drop their held packets prematurely. since the work done by ref. [14], it has been known that a carefully positioned adversary announcing a smaller depth



the rest of the paper is organized as follows: in section 2, we review relevant background and related work on depth-based routing and then illustrate the attack model. in section 3, we present the proposed pro- tocol. in section 4, we detail the evaluation methodology and the simulation settings to be used for evaluation. in section 5, we present the simulation results, discuss our observations, and highlight the main findings. finally, in section 6, we present the concluding remarks and future work.



the energy-efficient cooperative opportunistic routing (eecor) protocol in ref. [22] uses a fuzzy-logic approach to select a forwarding node from among neighbors. in addition to depth information, the relay selection process uses packet delivery probability and energy con- sumption ratio to determine the holding delay for each forwarder.



authors in ref. [27] have proposed rsar and cosar protocols based on depth information. rsar reduces the burden of low-depth nodes by classifying nodes in the network into several energy grades. the deepest nodes will have higher energy grades, while nodes closest to the water surface will have smaller grades. each source node calculates the weight based on depth, energy grade, and remaining energy of the next for- warding node. however, rsar transmits packets using a single link, which may lead to unreliable delivery. to mitigate this issue, the cosar protocol depends on a cooperative forwarding mechanism.



the assumption that the malicious node has the same transmission range as the legitimate nodes can be justified: if the malicious node transmits the spoofed packets to a larger range than that reached by the source, the malicious node can inadvertently deliver the packet to the destination or at least to a relay node that is closer to the destination than the neighbors of the source. in this case, the malicious node will cooperate in the delivery process rather than disrupting it. similarly, if the transmission range of the malicious node is smaller than that of the legitimate nodes, the depth-spoofed packet may not reach some of the neighbors of the source node, which allows them to successfully relay data packets to the destination. therefore, the most effective depth- spoofing attack is possible when the transmission range of the attacker is close to the transmission range of the legitimate nodes.



the seecr [30] protocol was also developed to secure depth-based routing protocols. each node compares its packet against a potential spoofed one using two queues. if the value of the attack threshold of any node is reached, then the protocol ignores this node in the routing process thereafter. however, since the attack model and relevant as- sumptions have not been clarified in this work, we have decided to compare the rpr protocol with our proposed dpr protocol.



dbr drops a buffered packet when the newly received retransmission of the packet deems the node an unqualified forwarder, which allows an attacker to force forwarders to drop their packets. to solve this problem, the proposed dpr instead marks the buffered packet for future potential dropping. the final decision to drop the marked packet occurs after the holding timer of the marked packet expires. the proposed dpr makes a non-deterministic decision to forward the marked packet with proba- and the mac protocol in use. for example, if the transmissions of two or more unqualified forwarders happen to interfere, some or all of them may fail, thus causing no further traffic and reducing overhead. there- fore, the overhead caused by probabilistic forwarding is expected to be reasonably low.



39%, 66%, and 61%, respectively. therefore, the overhead increased with network density, confirming our earlier analysis that a larger number of suboptimal unqualified nodes are involved in probabilistic forwarding. the results indicate that networks with lower node density can tolerate higher forwarding probabilities with lower overhead compared to higher density networks.



in this section, we compare the proposed dpr protocol with existing relevant protocols. as mentioned earlier, dbsr [15] provides a partial solution to the depth-spoofing attack using cryptography but remains vulnerable in case of node compromise. another limitation of dbsr comes from the key assignment problem, which causes a scalability issue. to demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed dpr protocol, we compare its performance with the existing rpr pro- tocol [8] in terms of packet resilience efficiency, energy overhead, network lifetime, and end-to-end delay.



in this paper, we proposed a security improvement to secure dbr against depth-spoofing sinkhole attacks using non-deterministic for- warding. the simulation showed that the proposed dpr protocol is potent against depth-spoofing sinkhole attacks. since energy consump- tion is of utmost importance in underwater networks, the proposed protocol was also shown to have a limited energy overhead. compared to its main competitor, rpr, the proposed dpr has approximately double the energy efficiency. the dpr also has a negligible effect on end-to-end delay. since the performance of dpr is determined by the forwarding probability parameter, we proposed a methodology for adjusting the forwarding probability for a specific network topology using simulation. however, using a constant forwarding probability for all nodes and for the entire duration of deployment may sometimes be suboptimal. therefore, there is room for further improvement of network performance by dynamically adjusting the forwarding proba- bility. moreover, the proposed dpr can further be improved by considering the residual energy of each node to determine the for- warding probability in order to attempt to extend the network lifetime. recently [33], presented a master-slave architecture for uan routing to reduce channel contention by designating master nodes as the only potential forwarders. incorporating such an architecture within the proposed dpr protocol can also be considered. these improvements are left for future research.



