seismic inversion, such as velocity and impedance, is an ill-posed problem. to solve this problem, swarm in- telligence (si) algorithms have been increasingly applied as the global optimization approach, such as differential evolution (de) and particle swarm optimization (pso). based on the well logs, the sparse probability distribution (pd) of the reflectivity distribution is spatial stationarity. therefore, we proposed a general si scheme with constrained by a priori sparse distribution of the reflectivity, which helps to provide more accurate potential solutions for the seismic inversion. in the proposed scheme, as two key operations, the creating of probability density function library and probability transformation are inserted into standard si algorithms. in particular, two targeted de-pd and pso-pd algorithms are implemented. numerical example of marmousi2 model and field example of gas hydrates show that the de-pd and pso-pd estimate better inversion solutions than the results of the original de and pso. in particular, the de-pd is the best performer both in terms of mean error and fitness value of velocity and impendence inversion. overall, the proposed si with sparse distribution scheme is feasible and effective for seismic inversion.



to solve the seismic inverse problem, the classical optimization al- gorithms based on gradient descent is sensitive to the initial model and easy to be trapped in a local minimum (ma, 2002). in addition, it is difficult and time-consuming to fine tune the regularization parameters to obtain a fast convergence rate (zhou et al., 2015; pan et al., 2020).



resource exploration and the earth deep drilling in the continent and ocean. considering the layered earth model, the sparsity assumption of reflectivity is feasible. in a depositional area, a probability density function (pdf) of the reflectivity can be estimated from the acoustic and density logs of a well. in the same depositional area, the reflectivity distribution can be assumed to be spatial stationarity. therefore, based on the pdf of reflectivity, the shape of the f can be constrained, providing more accurate potential solutions for the seismic inversion.



in this study, we proposed the scheme of the si algorithms with pd constraint, such as sparse distribution, to solve the seismic inversion problem. for the sake of comparison, we focus on two si algorithms including de and pso with pd constraint, named de-pd and pso-pd respectively. in this scheme, we construct a probability transformation that keeps the distribution of the model parameter as the same as the pd of the well data due to the spatial stationarity of the reflectivity distri- bution. under the same condition, numerical and field examples show that the de-pd and pso-pd estimate better inversion solutions than the results of the conventional de and pso. in particular, the de-pd is the best performer in the seismic inversion.



sometimes, the density can be simplified as a constant in a seismic inversion. therefore, the velocity, impedance and reflectivity can be estimated by using seismic inversion in the layered earth model, respectively. the choice of inversion parameters of the earth model mainly depends on the detailed geological challenge.



in general, standard si algorithms should have three basic steps. in the first step, the initial population of agents is randomly generated from the solution representation. each agent represents one solution. in the second step, each agent in the population is evaluated by the fitness value calculated by the misfit function. the fitness values of the popu- lation rank the agent within the population for selection. in the third step, a new population is updated by the perturbing of agents in the existing population.



we firstly use the case of a 1-d model numerical example to test the performance of four si algorithms including the de, the de-pd, the pso, and the pso-pd. this model is a part of the marmousi2 model (martin et al., 2006) whose geological parameters are measured from the pe- troleum sedimentary basin.



to keep the priori sparse distribution of reflectivity, we proposed the constrained scheme of seismic swarm intelligence inversion, especially two targeted de-pd and pso-pd algorithms. in this constrained scheme, due to the spatial stationarity of the sparse distribution of the reflec- tivity, a probability transformation is constructed, which can keep the distribution of model parameters as the same as the pdf library extracted from well logs. under the same parameters, four si algorithms, including de, the de-pd, the pso, and the pso-pd, are applied in marmousi2 and gas hydrates data. the results of velocity and impend- ence inversion show that the de-pd and pso-pd estimate better solu- tions than the conventional de and pso. in particular, the de-pd performs best in terms of the accuracy of estimation and speed of convergence among the four si algorithms. however, the main disad- vantage of the de-pd is the largest computation time. in the next, the proposed de-pd will be accelerated by parallel computing with gpus.



