the internal metric introduced in this paper, afs, was found to be a useful indicator of the quality of a cluster set for persona development and gave alternate insights into cluster quality to existing internal metrics. the hypersona framework was found to develop a better set of personas for the use case than a completely automated hyperparameter tuning framework based on a singular internal metric. hypersona was also compared to an existing semi-automated hyperparameter tuning framework for clustering algorithm, hypercluster [10], and was found to facilitate a more efficient evaluation and algorithm selection process. although targeted towards persona development, the hypersona framework has implications for the broader scope of clustering algo- rithm applications, primarily through providing a model that facilitates domain-specific evaluation and proposing a new internal metric. the hypersona also demonstrates that clustering algorithms can identify clusters that reflect complex factors, such as perceptions and attitudes, with minimal manual intervention. in summary, this paper presents



the remainder of this paper is structured as follows. section 2 discusses the related work and motivation behind hypersona. section 3 details the hypersona framework. section 4 describes the case study and parameters used. section 5 gives the results of the case study. section 6 discusses the results in terms of the research questions. then section 7 concludes the paper.



agglomerative hierarchical clustering (ahc) ahc algorithms are depicted as a binary tree, which can be split at any point to cre- ate the desired number of clusters, and is either agglomerative or divisive [1,2,21,22]. ahc starts with each data point as its own cluster and recursively combines the two most similar clusters until all the data points are in a single cluster [1,2,21,22]. ahc is often defined in terms of the linkage used, which is the metric used to determine the similarity of two clusters.



internal methods measure the cluster quality with similarity met- rics, usually measuring: the inter-cluster separability; the intra-cluster homogeneity; or a combination of both [21]. internal evaluation met- rics can be useful but tell very little about the clusters developed and whether one algorithm is better than another is [13]. most internal metrics favour particular types of clustering algorithms making them quite biased [13]. for example, a metric measuring inter-cluster sepa- rability will prefer an algorithm with a similar basis, such as k-means, while a metric measuring the intra-cluster homogeneity will prefer a density-based algorithm.



existing methods, such as the hypercluster package [10], rely on internal metrics and user interpretation to determine the best perform- ing algorithm. hypercluster uses the sc, dbi, and chi as well as cluster sizes as internal metrics when no ground truth values are available, then visualisation tools, such as heat maps, can be employed to de- termine which set of hyperparameters performed better overall [10]. other methods for hyperparameter tuning of clustering algorithms are similar, either relying on an existing internal metric or moving the problem into the supervised or semi-supervised space by using ground truth values and external metrics.



persona development approaches vary along a scale from com- pletely manual to almost completely automated. historically most per- sona development approaches have been manual, based on rich qual- itative data, such as data from interviews or in-depth case studies, and utilising the deep interpretation and extrapolation able to be performed during the manual persona creation process [5,6]. an au- tomated approach uses a clustering algorithm or similar as part of a framework to develop fully realised personas, which results in a quicker and less resource-intensive persona development process [5,6]. however, the automated approach has been criticised as unable to capture the complex concepts and opinions that make personas so valuable [5,6]. semi-automated approaches are everything between the manual and automated methods, from almost completely manual methods with the addition of statistical insights to almost fully auto- mated methods that only rely on manual intervention to polish the final personas [5,6]. semi-automated persona development methods can benefit from the strengths of both manual and automated methods, however, often fall into the pitfalls associated with each, such as a time and resource-intensive process and more shallow personas.



the majority of automated or semi-automated persona develop- ment approaches rely on one of a small set of clustering algorithms with limited prior analysis towards algorithm choice [7,19]. assess- ing the performance of a wider range of clustering algorithms prior to automated or semi-automated persona development may assist in developing deeper and more nuanced personas by taking advantage of the differing nature of clustering algorithms. with a wider range of clustering algorithms and informed selection of the most appropri- ate algorithm, the need for more complicated approaches to persona development can be avoided.



algorithms not handling non-numeric or null data. domain-specific information can be passed into hypersona to determine which features are included in the graphs and acronyms can be provided to simplify the graphs. key features that should always be included in the early- stage personas developed, such as demographic factors, can also be defined. finally, aggregate features can be set, where outputs should also include the average of a selection of features. the aggregate features do not affect the clustering process, they are only to give more



alongside existing internal metrics, hypersona uses a new internal metric specifically designed to target the elements important to devel- oping quality personas, average feature significance (afs). the afs metric is based on the premise that personas within a set of personas should have unique attributes and differ significantly from one another. as such, the value of afs is based on the statistical significance of the features of each cluster centroid.



the internal metrics used are sc, chi, and dbi, as well as the proposed, purpose-specific internal metric, afs. the internal metrics were selected as they all primarily measure the separability and defi- nition of the clusters, with poor values usually indicating overlapping or indistinct clusters which are factors that are also important to persona development. as well as the internal metrics, the cluster size is considered. as the desired personas would reflect the common, signif- icant attitudes and beliefs within the population, rather than outlying opinions, the clusters should each contain a significant portion of the population.



this study used survey responses from 519 nq residents on cyclone preparatory behaviours, psychological characteristics, and demograph- ics [31]. informed consent was obtained before any data was collected and all possible steps were taken to protect the privacy of the individ- uals who participated. the survey covered key elements identified as part of the risk mitigation decision process, as well as the likelihood that they will perform some risk mitigation behaviours, as well as more general demographic details [31]. the data was prepared by first converting any non-numeric features either through directly mapping the values, i.e. {none, low, moderate, high} = {0, 1, 2, 3}, or one-hot encoding when the values were not ordinal. then any null values were replaced using an iterative imputation [39].



based on the internal metrics, the domain-specific evaluation fo- cused on agg_heir_v0 and kmeans_v1 first, followed by agg_heir_v1, and nmf_v1. each cluster set was evaluated based upon how well it aligned with behavioural theory, and how distinctive each prospective persona would be was also considered during the domain-specific evaluation. through the domain-specific evaluation, kmeans_v1 was determined to be the best performer. compared to agg_heir_v1, k-means_v1 was selected as the difference between likelihoods to install cyclone shutters was more significant, and the average risk perceptions of each cluster within the set were more distinct.



a set of three personas were developed based on the early-stage personas produced by hypersona for kmeans_v1. as there were no significant differences in age, gender, marital status, or location be- tween the clusters, those demographic factors were not included in the final personas. the most important demographic factor was found to be previous experience with cyclones and cyclone damage. each a cyclone. the concerned persona spends the most time think- ing about and discussing cyclones and is most likely to have investigated ways to protect against a cyclone. the concerned persona self-reported as most likely to perform all available preparatory behaviours leading up to the next cyclone, and has the highest motivation to install structural upgrades, such as cyclone shutters. the concerned persona is most likely to have previously experienced cyclone damage with 70% of the individuals that make up the persona having reported receiving cyclone damage. of those, almost half reported having received moderate or severe damage.



the confident (cluster 2) the confident persona has the lowest per- ception of the risks associated with cyclones and the severity of high category cyclones. mirroring the concerned persona, the confident persona differs most in their feelings of helpless- ness and depression when thinking about a possible cyclone and the perceived impact of a cyclone on their mental and physical health. the confident persona self-reported being likely to perform simple preparatory behaviours, but are less likely to perform more difficult behaviours, such as putting up ply- wood or installing structural upgrades, such as cyclone shutters. the confident persona is most likely to have experienced a cyclone without receiving any damage, as approximately 46.3% of the individuals that make up the persona have experienced a cyclone and received no damage. of those who experienced cyclone damage, they were least likely to have experienced significant damage with only 12.9% of the individuals that make up the persona having ever received moderate or severe damage.



afs was found to provide insight and information on cluster quality not otherwise present in existing internal metrics that were important to selecting relevant cluster sets for persona development. as such, afs proved to be a useful addition to the hyperparameter tuning frame- work. other problem areas where having distinct cluster centroids are important, may also benefit from applying afs.



the clustering algorithm and parameters used to solve a clustering problem greatly affects the solution reached and clusters developed. as such hyperparameter tuning is essential when applying a clustering algorithm to a problem. however, the subjective nature of cluster evaluation makes hyperparameter tuning difficult to automate, result- ing in a time consuming, tedious process. previous approaches to automated hyperparameter tuning for clustering have relied on having some ground truth labels available, moving the problem out of the unsupervised space, or on internal metrics, which are known to be biased and unreliable.



