this study presents experimental and analytical results obtained from the application of a reinforced self-compacting concrete jacketing technique for the rehabilitation of shear damaged reinforced concrete beams. three shear-dominated beams were initially subjected to monotonic four-point bending loading. the damaged beams were first restored using self-compacting concrete jackets that encased the bottom width and both vertical sides of the beams including small diameter steel bars and u-formed stirrups and then retested. the applied jacket was designed to increase the shear capacity of the initially tested beams and to alter their brittle failure mode to a more ductile one. test results indicated that this jacketing technique is a promising rehabilitation method since the strength and the overall performance of the jacketed beams was ameliorated with respect to the initial specimens. analytical results of the flexural and the shear capacity of the tested beams are also presented. comparisons between test data and predicted strength values showed a good agreement.



recently, the rehabilitation of flexural damaged reinforced concrete beams using self-compacting concrete jackets has been experimentally investigated [7]. test results indicated that the flexural capacity of the jacketed beams was ameliorated with respect to the capacity of the initial specimens. the application of this self-compacting concrete jacketing technique is extended herein to shear-dominated beams.



after the initial loading, the shear damaged beams were rehabilitated using reinforced jackets made of self- compacting concrete. the thickness of the jackets was 25 mm. jackets encased the bottom width and both vertical sides of the damaged beams (u-formed jacketing). the steel reinforcement of the jackets consists of small diameter 5 mild steel straight bars and u-formed stirrups with tensile strength at yield 255 mpa and at ultimate 357 mpa. the geometrical and reinforcement characteristics of the jacketed beams are shown in



initially tested beams sustained severe shear damages, spalling of concrete cover and intense diagonal cracking. all loose concrete fragments were completely removed and the missing concrete parts reconstructed by jacketing reformed and re-casted by self-compacting concrete. no special roughening of the surface of the damaged beams was performed prior jacketing construction. l-shaped mild steel dowels with 5 mm diameter were installed in the vertical sides of the initial beams in order to support the longitudinal bars of the jacket. dowels were bonded by injected epoxy resin into 7 mm holes that were drilled before. the amount of the provided dowels was rather low; every side bar of the jacket had dowels 5 per 150 mm. steel bars, stirrups and dowels of the jacketed beams were all welded together.



the examined self-compacting concrete jacketing seems to be an effective rehabilitation technique to shear damaged reinforced concrete beams. the load bearing capacity and the overall structural performance of the jacketed beams was ameliorated with respect to the initially tested specimens. a good agreement between the predicted results and the test data of this study can be observed.



