peripheral blood and for other cells of human and chickens, for different dyes and varied excitations of fluorescence[1-5]. oxidative activity of dna is visualized at fluorescence. in each experiment is observed fluorescence of three-dimensional(3d) dna nanostructures of all non-coding and coding parts of dna in full set of chromosomes inside cells. each cell makes a chaotic brownian motion at chaotic rotations in the jet of blood, flowing through the laser beam, during measurements. therefore, each fluorescence histogram defines a representative statistics for various two dimensional(2d) projections on the photomultiplier all possible detailed spatial images of fluorescing 3d dna in large populations of cells.



in real life of all dna in the group of cells cannot select, determine and allocate only a single separate contribution of only non-coding and only coding parts of separated dna in combined correlations, synergy of joint actions of full set 46 chromosomes inside cell. detailed analysis statistical data on 3d dna fluorescence inside neutrophils[1-4] shows that actual correlations and topology stochastic coils of complex networks dna for full set of chromosomes in living cells are characterized by non-gaussian statistics, very high dense packing in networks dna consisting from a mix of normal and abnormal fractal structures, changeability and flexibility in self-regulation of information and entropy, which provide high adaptability dna inside cells for real life. complexity real life 3d dna inside living cells is much higher than statics coding single linear fragment of dna, their combinations, gene networks or biochemical schemes in textbooks, in standard genomic researches lonely dna, etc. here exist many unsolved problems in mathematics, natural science, etc however, there are some overall patterns, universal features and switching in networks dna which allow classify different types of correlations and information networks dna inside cells for any given donor in given time[1-4]. new physical and mathematical patterns for information activity 3d dna define new opportunities in self-regulation and medical diagnostics of health and immunity. recording, transfer and selfany cells in body any aerobic beings in the case of any local disorders of any origin, such as inner diseases, infections, traumas, etc. this determines the defensive response and immunity during reconstruction of fractals and complex information networks dna in all cells living inside us[1,2,4,6]. thank self-regulation.



