the threshold crossing intervals (tci) algorithm [4] is based on the number and position of signal crossings through a certain threshold. for each 8s ecg signals, the main ideas of the algorithm is given a threshold value and obtain a binary signals according to the position of the signal above or below the threshold. then the index tci is calculated for each 3s episode of the binary signals, and sr, vt and vf can be sparated based on the calculated values of the tci indices.



aim to the automated vf detection in cardiac care devices, the indicators of triangular-like components with a waveform representation of heart function, an area encompassed by the waveform representation indicative of heart function and their ratio were calculated in the invention [5]. according to these indices, the (minimum) ventricular fibrillation indices can be calculated and used to assess the likelihood of ventricular fibrillation based upon waveform representation of heart function. the results indicate that the invention can enhance the sensitivity and selectivity of the automated detection of arrhythmias within even highly chaotic waveform representations of heart function.



recently, based on the empirical mode decomposition (emd) algorithm, arafat et al. [10] proposed a algorithm for vf detection. concretly, emd obtained the first three consecutive intrinsic mode functions (imfs) of normal sinus rhythm (nsr) and vf, and then found that the imfs of vf are orthogonal whereas the imfs of nsr are not. for the digitized ecg signals in mit-bih arrhythmial database, according to the orthogonality indices, the emd algorithm can offer a good detection of vf for a window length of 3s.



since the shortest possible window length to detect the shockable rhythms is important to increase the the successful rate of rescue, it is a valuable direction to study the fast algorithm, such as emd algorithm can detect vf and nsr within 3s with high accuracy [10]. moreover, to make the advantages of relevant algorithms complementary with each other so as to raise the robustness, we advise to consider the cooperation of different algorithms. for example, though the invention [25] was focus on the detection of cardiac rhythms produced by the heart in icd, the idea that include a pluarality of discriminators for classifying cardiac rhythm may be useful in the field of aeds.



