as a summary, the remainder of this review is organized into dif- ferent sections. we first discuss common data sources used in pharma- covigilance. we then explore informatics methods based on data mining techniques typically used by regulatory bodies for the quantitative pv signal detection and categories of ml algorithms deployed in ddi pre- diction. finally, we draw conclusions along with outlining limitations and recommendations for future researches.



such kind of srss are developed to enable continuous monitoring of pharmaceutical and biological products within pharmacovigilance sys- tems [24]. generally, the structure of srss adheres to the international safety reporting guidance issued by the international conference on har- monisation (ich e2b) that sets standards for reporting individual case safety reports (icsr) [25]. other type of srss is the proprietary com- pany safety databases that contain icsrs of a company pharmaceutical products. they can support early safety signal detection. the merits of srss are represented in providing information necessary for establishing causality assessment from real data and/or developing mining/ml mod- els that might not be available in other data sources. for example but not limited to, apparent temporal time relationship, concomitant med- ications, indications, de-/re-challenge information, some demographic patient data, and action taken & outcome information. despite multi- benefits of srss which playing a crucial role to support wise therapeu- tic decision-making in regulatory bodies, they have well-known bound- aries. those limitations can be summarized in over-/under- reporting rates, limited past medical history of patients, false signaling due to mis- attribution to hidden confounders/risk factors, and inability to indicate real incidence rates.



the principal of multiplicative model is based on assuming that a safety concern accompanied with a medication is multiplied to its back- ground estimate, whereas the principal of additive model is founded on adding the safety concern linked to a drug into its background esti- mate. regarding the multiplicative model, supposing the null hypothesis is real (i.e., non-ddi), the proportional risk of drug-drug-adverse-event



there are different types of unstructured data sources which can be represented in narrative portions of ehrs, biomedical databases, etc. in recent years, researchers have proposed methods for mining such sources to effectively predict adverse ddi signals making up for the lim- itations of spontaneous reporting systems. algorithms related to text mining and natural language processing (nlp) are commonly utilized to evolve these tasks.



jon d. duke et al. [76] have developed a new approach to mine mechanistic features from pv literature abstracts to predict potential ddi signals. authors have specifically investigated interesting ddi pat- terns associated with the increased risk of myopathy and related mus- culoskeletal conditions. first, the authors applied two-step information retrieval (ir) approach to recognize the expression patterns relevant to ddi from pubmed abstracts. then, they performed two logistic re- gression analyses to test each ddi effect on myopathy. they validated clinically significant ddi signals via using a database of electronic health records. five novel ddi signals of increased risk of myopathy along with related cytochrome metabolizing enzymes were predicted.



the real-world applications of svm is subject to non-linearly sepa- rable data where a linear decision boundary cannot be used to classify the dataset. this leads to the emerging of a new generation of learn- ing systems called kernel functions. a svm kernel is a function where it takes input training dataset with non-linearly separable decision surface and transforms the low-dimensional feature space into an abstract high- dimensional space. the most common kernel functions used in smv modeling are gaussian radial basis function (rbf), polynomial, and sig- moid kernels [87].



gorithm is applied directly on unlabeled input data to find regularities, and then a model will be built according to the identified patterns. clus- tering and biclustering algorithms are the most common unsupervised ml techniques [84]. the following subsections from 5.1 through 5.5



gies of network-based ml approaches depend on inferring drug simi- larities between network nodes or learning about topological features of the network structure [122,123]. those knowledge networks can be constructed by extracting and integrating existing drug knowledge from one or multiple data sources (e.g. chemical, biological, target, genomic, pharmacological databases) leading to various shapes of networks (e.g. drug-drug, drug-target, protein-protein, pharmacodynamic, drug-gene, phenotypic, pharmacokinetic, etc.) [124].



the merit of nb modeling is that it is easy to build with no compli- cated iterative parameter estimation. it is particularly useful to imple- ment on large datasets [107]. however, the main limitation of nb is the assumption that all the predictor features are completely independent.



the use of supervised ml has its limits such as class imbalance, sparse features, low overlapping and consistency between different ddis re- sources [142]. therefore, advancements in incorporating unsupervised ml approaches in ddis discovery studies, improvements of ddi cor- pora annotation, and establishing standardized guidelines for establish- ing ddi gold reference datasets are probably essential steps to develop more realistic ml frameworks during drug-development, as well as, pre- marketing phases. other directions of developments to be implemented into routine pv practices are represented in how ml may contribute in boosting ddi signal detection from srs data and/or predicting their types/change in severity, combining more than one data sources (e.g. ehrs, patient support programs, prospective surveys, randomized con- trolled trials, etc.) rather than restricting to srs data, assessing ml al- gorithmic performance by constructing reliable test sets, in addition to advancing frameworks for increasing transparency or explainability of ml outputs.



according to the abovementioned illustrations and beyond the struc- tured pv data sources, the exponential increase of the scientific liter- ature complicates the exploration of such biomedical corpora [143]. biomedical corpora enables constructing learning datasets of medically related terms that embed prior knowledge and aid in the pragmatic use of certain words within specific contexts [120]. informatics-based meth- ods, in particular text mining and ml frameworks have great applicabil- ity in this regard to aid in extracting, analyzing and classifying biological information designated in scientific publications. during the past years, biomedical corpora have presented a valuable pv data source for the detection and analysis of ddi signals. the unstructured nature of this type of data sources is challenging. natural language processing (nlp) approaches are crucial in this context to annotate, standardize and map



the availability of freely available safety data sources along with the adoption of novel dm and/or ml methods has advanced the pv domain. in this review, we particularly focus on developments in in- formatics techniques in the context of ddi signals. we have shown a portfolio of pv resources, dm and ml approaches techniques proposed to discover adverse ddi signals. each method may re-stimulate interest to evolve ddi surveillance practices by offering different prospects. to the best we know, the underlying paper is the first review combining machine learning and data mining methods to disclose potential signals of ddis in drug safety surveillance. possible causal ddis associations are experimented during drug development cycle, then monitored via post- marketing pv systems after being in market. developing better predic- tive methods, to flag potential ddi signals, becomes of great importance to industry and regulatory bodies [144,145].



also, the main challenge in ddi signal detection studies is the lack of well-established guidances for assessing informatics-driven methods performance. principally, this is due to the lack of reference standard for interaction safety profiles of the whole marketed drug products [155]. hence, researchers should conduct more studies with purposes for ac- quiring better comprehension to the landscapes of multivariate associ- ation measures along with estimating corresponding predictive perfor- mance. furthermore, developing approaches targeting the estimation of optimal ddi signal detection thresholds that achieve balanced trade-off between sensitivity and specificity with decreasing false signals can be a valuable perspective.



