fossil fuel depletion and air pollution have pushed the world to face up the environmental sustainability challenge. environmental sustainability is expressed through the use and optimization of renewable energy. in the field of energy saving, heat storage plays a very important role.



in the field of power supply, energy demand and energy availability often do not coincide in time; therefore, the use of thermal storage system could be desirable. there are three main ways for storing thermal energy, i.e., in the form of: sensible, latent or thermo-chemical energy. the heat storage in the form of latent heat can be effectively achieved by means of pcms (phase change materials), i.e. materials characterized by high latent heat of fusion, which through solidification and melting are able to store and release heat.



the thermal storage, in the form of latent heat, has the important advantage of accumulating a large amount of heat in a very small volume, hence presenting a high thermal storage density. the work of zalba et al. [1] presents an exhaustive review with regard to the classification of pcm. pcms are generally divided into two main categories: organic (paraffinic and non-paraffinic) and inorganic (mainly hydrated salts). organic materials have many advantages such as: congruent melting; non-corrosive behavior; high latent heat of fusion; broad range of melting temperatures (depending on the number of carbon atoms in the molecule); minimum tendency to sub-cooling; chemical stability; scarce or null toxicity. a common drawback to all organic materials is the low thermal conductivity, which determines the formation of very high thermal gradients during the transient heat transfer. the main advantage of inorganic pcms is the high storage capacity per unit volume (about twice that of the organic compounds). their main drawback is that they melt in an incongruent way. the thermal storage system, under investigation, is composed of a shell and tube heat exchanger. the heat exchange is performed between the heat transfer fluid, which flows inside the tubes, and the pcm inside the shell.



the pcm absorbs the heat transferred from the fluid through the wall. from the radial temperature distribution it is possible to observe how, inside the pcm, a thermal gradient is generated, whose slope decreases as time increases. the high thermal gradients depend on the low thermal conductivity of the pcm and its large thermal inertia (high specific heat).



