one of the simplest yet efficient machine learning ensemble ap- proaches is bootstrap aggregation (also known as bagging) (prasad et al., 2006). bootstrap aggregation is a fundamental technique that may be used to decrease variance in algorithms that have a high number of it- erations (breiman 1996). the goal of bagging is to decrease variance while retaining the bias of a decision tree and avoiding over fitting (shahabi et al., 2020). the bagging tree generates several sets of input generate models. the average of all forecasts from these trees is then used to create the final conclusion, which is more resilient. using several replicas of the trained data subset improves the precision of a single tree (talukdar and pal, 2019).



people who live in alkaline soils are more likely to have zinc shortages because of the inverse ph of the soil available. some other things that affect soil fertility are how much sulphur there is in it. crops that grow quickly can take in a lot of sulphur. potassium treatments to rice field soils keep the redox potential of the soil from dropping. they also lower acting as a nutrient supply and the pgrs assisting with physiological injury repair. increased specificity of interactions between different management strategies and the environment (soil types, intensity of water logging, etc.) as well as between management practises. in general, all kharif crops in india are cultivated in rainfed circumstances with little irrigation. to sustain tulaipanji farming, irrigation systems need be installed in the study area.



sri gopal ch. ghosh, wbas (admin.), assistant director of agri- culture, kaliyaganj block, uttar dinajpur, deserves our deepest gratitude for skilfully guiding us through the whole study process, giving encour- aging suggestions, bringing new aspects to our work, and carefully covering the entire section and making minute adjustments. addition- ally, the authors want to express their appreciation to the soil testing laboratory in raiganj, uttar dinajpur for conducting soil sample testing. we also thank retd. professor dr. gopal chandra debnath (visva bhar- ati) and former professor dr. narayan chandra ghosh (rabindra bharati university) for their encouragement.



