smart grids is currently a very active field of research. the european union, united states, china as well as taiwan have proposed architectures for smart grids based on smart meters, and are working on several small-scale pilots [13]. a variety of topics relevant for the development of smart grids have been discussed in literature (see e.g. [2,4,6,7,9]). among those, advanced metering infrastructure (ami) is considered to be the most important enabler for the development of smart grids, as it is responsible for measuring, collecting, storing, and analyzing energy consumption data in an automated way [10,14].



the advanced metering infrastructure of smart grids enables a two-way flow of information between the power consumers and providers. with the installation of smart meters, providers are able to change the energy price in order to reduce consumption during peak hours [8]. however, how appliances can be controlled to actually reduce their power consumption has not yet been thoroughly studied. some studies proposed a centralized approach, in which a smart device controller is placed within a home area network, which controls all the appliances in that building or house (see e.g. [3,15]). however, a centralized device controller may not be aware of appliance-specific properties, which can result in undesirable decisions on power consumption. hence, a novel distributed approach based on the concept of intelligent products is proposed in this paper.



the concept of intelligent products comprises two main sources of knowledge. the first source is formed by state of the art theories and frameworks in the field of intelligent products (see e.g. [12,16,20]). the recent research trends, emerging architectural designs, and novel application domains in this field are surveyed in [18], leading to the formulation of a classification model which has been used as a research framework. the second source of knowledge is based on application oriented experience, which was gained during the iterative development of an intelligent products architecture and the evaluation of that architecture by means of validating various prototypes [17].



the proposed system design as presented in this section is based on the concept of intelligent products. an intelligent product is defined as a physical product combined with an information-based representation of the product stored in a database and intelligence provided by a decision making agent [16]. the connection between the physical product and the information-based representation can for example be made by using sensors. in this way, the decision making agent can continuously determine the condition of the physical product, by reading the sensor values, and make decisions based on that determined condition.



in the proposed system design, the concept of intelligent products is applied for electric devices, in order to turn them into so-called smart devices. for every device, a decision making agent is available in the system, which can make decisions on the present power consumption of the device it represents. the behavior performed by the agents to achieve this is introduced next, according to the three levels of intelligence for intelligent products as prescribed by meyer et al. [18]: information handling, problem detection, and decision making.



when a device is not in a problematic state, the agent representing it has to decide whether power consumption is desirable based on information available about the device and information about the power supply. for this purpose, every agent applies a utility function for determining whether consuming power will result in a positive utility. this utility function is based on device-specific thresholds, owner-specific deadlines, and the present energy price. in this way, the agent is able to find a balance between the thresholds and deadlines on one hand and the present energy price on the other hand. for example, an agent is more likely to accept a higher energy price, when there is little time available to complete a task (e.g. clothes in the dryer have to be dry before 10pm) or when it becomes closer to device-specific thresholds (e.g. the temperature of the refrigerator is reaching 7 degrees celsius). however, when there is more time available to complete a task, the agent will try to minimize the energy costs by performing this task when the energy price is relatively low.



in this paper, a generic system has been presented, which enables individual devices to autonomously determine their power consumption. the proposed system for smart devices is based on the concept of intelligent products. these smart devices are capable of managing their own power consumption. the two descriptive scenarios, home appliances in a home area network and electric vehicles in a parking lot, have demonstrated the feasibility and usefulness of the proposed system.



to further confirm the feasibility and usefulness of the system, as well as to gain additional insights on the effectiveness and robustness of the system, a prototype of the proposed system is currently being realized. in future work, this prototype will be used for controlled experiments and simulation studies. moreover, future work will be focused on developing more advanced decision making behavior for the agents representing electric devices, for example by enabling them to negotiate with each other about their power consumption.



