at present, the most widely used multichannel images in every day life are true color images. the simplest way of sparsely representing these images is channel by channel, or adding constraints of correlation across colors [4,17]. however, as demonstrated in this work, sparsity in the representation of true color images can increase substantially if the approximation is realized by means of 3d elements taken from a highly redundant dictionary. the effect is of course more pronounced for arrays involving more channels, such as hyper-spectral images.



the main drawback of the mp method is that it may select linearly dependent atoms. moreover, that approximation is not stepwise optimal because at iteration k the coefficients (5) do not minimize the norm of the residual error. the pursuit strategy that overcomes these limitations is the so called omp [30].



the implementation of omp in 3d (omp3d) we describe here is the 3d extension of the implementation of omp in 2d given in ref. [32]. an alternative algorithm called kronecker-omp, which is based on the tucker representation of a tensor, is discussed in ref. [14]. our algorithm is based on adaptive biorthogonalization and gram-schmidt orthogo- nalization procedures, as proposed in ref. [31] for the one dimensional case.



the self projected matching pursuit (spmp) methodology was introduced in ref. [18] and conceived to be used with separable dictio- naries in 2d (spmp2d). because the technique is based on calculations of inner products, it can be easily extended to operate in 3d (spmp3d).



through the steps a) - c) above is given in ref. [34] for the one dimen- sional case. the proof for 3d is identical to that proof, because a 3d array can be represented as a long 1d vector. what varies is the implementa- tion. a vectorized version of the algorithm would not be applicable in this



we consider nonoverappling blocks. the approximation of each block is carried out independently of the others. when the approximation of all the blocks is concluded, these are assembled together to produce the approximation of the whole image. while the sparsity results yielded by



all the results were obtained in the matlab environment on a notebook 2.9 ghz dual core i7 3520 m cpu and 4 gb of memory. for the channel by channel approximation a c++ mex file implementing omp2d was used. for the 3d approximation spmp3d was implemented by a c++ mex file.



high quality approximation of 3d images has been considered within the context of data reduction. a remarkable improvement in sparsity achieved by the simultaneous approximation of multiple channels has been illustrated through numerical experiments of different natures. firstly it was demonstrated that a standard data set of rgb images can be approximated at high quality using far fewer elementary components if each image is treated as a very thin 3d array instead of as 3 independent 2d arrays. secondly the full power of the approach was demonstrated through the approximation of hyper-spectral images. for the hyper- spectral natural images the sparsity is remarkably higher if the approx- imation is realized in the wavelet domain. for the remote sensing images the domain of approximation has less influence because, as opposed to natural images, these images are not as sparse in the wavelet domain as natural images are.



