this project is basically an investigation of springback behavior during sheet metal forming process on different parameters by using numerical method. non linear numerical simulation was performed by using finite element commercial abaqus/cae software. two different parameters were used in the simulation, which is the material type of sheet metal and the sheet thickness. in evaluating the effect of material types on springback behavior, the boron steel (aisi 15b48h) and composite (carbon fiber reinforced plastics) were used. the computational results show the carbon fiber reinforced plastic has less springback than the steel. the computational results show that thicker sheet exhibits smaller springback compared to thin sheet. the results were verified with available data obtained from literature. current and future trends on automotive door are briefly discussed in this project and some recommendations are made in order for future development of the simulation.



however, there will be a condition that occurs when release of the forming force, the material has a tendency to partially return to its original shape due to its elastic recovery, this is so called springback. springback represents a challenge for manufacturers who desire to meet specific dimensions. this issue is critical when accurate assembly of components in the automotive or aircraft industry necessitates that the parts meet certain tolerances. therefore, controlling and minimizing springback would enable designers to achieve better process control and at the same time reduce reject parts [2].



the factors and parameters that play important role in affecting the output of the result must be first determined. three simulation frameworks are carried out with different combination of parameters i.e material and thickness. in the first simulation, other parameters will be set to be constant and parameters that play around to get the output will be type of materials. for second simulation, another set of simulation with thickness of 3 mm is simulated to compare with the 1 mm set.



in the model, there is three rigid parts (die, punch and binder) and one deformable part (sheet metal blank). a rigid part represents a part that is so much stiffer than the rest of the model that its deformation can be considered negligible. only deformable part is measured. therefore, data are measure from the deformable sheet metal blank in this model. the data collected from the finite element analysis are including the contour plot of von mises stress, strain, displacement, section thickness and energy graph. all the data collected from blank part in both sheet forming and springback simulation.



the differences between maximum section thickness and minimum section thickness for aisi 15b48h steel is greater compared to cfrp. this means that the thickness distribution for cfrp is better and more constantly. this is important for the quality of a product.



from [8], harder material, higher friction coefficient, and thinner sheet will display higher springback value. in the springback simulation carried out in this project, thinner part (1mm), high friction coefficient (0.25) and stiffness material (aisi 15b48h steel) displaying higher value of springback. therefore, the results obtained are similar to the previous work from [8].



