of a continuous consensus system and the stability measures. this formalization, presented in section 2, is not tied to any specific model of computation, in order to understand the basic stability issues. we considered memoryless systems where consecutive one-shot consensus executions are independent, versus the stability of systems that can keep memory of previous executions. we also studied the stability of symmetric systems where decisions are taken solely on the basis of the distribution of the different input values, but not on what specific sensor or processor produced as a particular input value. we characterized the stability of systems according to their memory and symmetry properties, proving tight upper and lower bounds for the various cases.



organization: the rest of the paper is organized as follows. in the next section, we define the system settings and the problem definitions. the case of system with memory is addressed in section 3. memoryless systems are considered in section 4.



in section 3.1 we study the instability of a system with the least possible number of processors n, and show that when n is big enough, the instability is 1. the case of a general n is considered in section 3.2. then, in section 4, we study a system that cannot keep any memory from previous input vectors, and from its previous decisions.



we will first consider the extreme case in which n is the minimal possible number of processors: vt+1 for ev systems as shown in lemma 2.4, and 2t+1 for rv systems as shown in lemma 2.5. we prove that the instability of the system in this case is n; that is, it is possible to force any system to change its decision with each input change.



we have just seen that when n is as small as it can be, i.e., n= vt+ 1, then we cannot reduce the number of decision changes: it is possible to force any ev system d to change its decision with each input change. in contrast, when n is large, we can build a system that changes its decision only once. this will be proved in lemma 3.4.



