in this paper, we examine whether stochastic rule-based modelling captures multi-step molecular interactions. as biochemical interactions are non-uniform and occur at different rates, they are characterized by stochastic fluctuations, nonpoisson time dynamics and decay of particular biological events. for this purpose, we model transcription, which is a typical molecular multi-step interaction. as the first phase of gene expression, transcription involves a tiny minority of the molecules reacting in cells. thus, for modelling transcription, a rule-based stochastic method is preferred over the deterministic method of mass action laws. rule-based modelling directly describes the stochastic and discrete nature of chemical reactions in transcriptional elongation. the primitive agents are the hundreds(or thousands) of base pairs contained in a single gene, and a similar number of nucleoside triphosphates(ntps) that join the transcript via rna polymerase. the present author applied a similar nucleotide-based modelling concept to multiple branching processes in rna interference.



elongation is the polymerisation step, which adds a nucleotide to the 3j end of the nascent rna. this reaction is catalysed by the active site of rnap. after the polymerisation, tec immediately enters the pre-translocation state, and translates forward along the dna template until the active site is correctly positioned to catalyse the next nucleotide addition. pre-translocation is the state immediately



the forward polymerisation of the rna transcript is disrupted by pauses of the rnap(known as transcriptional pausing). the major cause of pausing is backtrack, in which the active site of rnap moves backward along the dna template and rna transcript without depolymerising the transcript. the opposite movement is forward-track(also called hyper translocation) towards the 5j end of the template dna.



extends the rna chain. in other words, oh indicates that the r site of n is not bounded. in the pre-translocation state, the line joining n and noh designates a phosphate bond between the r and l sites respectively of n and noh.



