thermo-sensitive linear and cross-linked copolymers based on 2-hydroxyethylacrylate and 2-hydroxyethylmethacrylate were synthesized and their physicochemical properties were investigated. it was found that copolymer solutions have lower critical solution temperature(lcst) and copolymer hydrogels of certain composition undergoes sharp collapse at temperature increase. the interaction of copolymers with surfactants was studied. it was shown that swelling behavior of copolymers in surfactants aqueous solutions depend on several factors: copolymer composition, surfactant concentration. its influence on copolymer hydrogels is discussed. great enhancing of amplitude of thermo-induce collapse of cross-linked polymers are caused by interaction of some nonionic hydrogels with ionic surfactant in aqueous solutions.



modification of existing thermo-sensitive polymers in order to vary conditions of the phase transition along with pure synthetic methods can be carried out by complexation with ionic surfactants through hydrophobic interaction(langer, 1998; mun, 2004). generally it results in appearing of ionic groups in polymer that enhances polymer solubility in aqueous solutions. applying of higher surfactant concentrations shows more impressive result(hoffman, 2000; langer, 1998). hydrophobicity of polymer and surfactant, its structure influence on effectiveness of interaction between non-ionic polymer and ionic surfactant(langer, 1998; mun, 2004).



lcst diagram was obtained by using turbidity method(uv-vis spectrophotometer shimadzu, japan, mun at al., 2007). the swelling ratio was calculated from v/v0, where v is the volume of the gel at ambient conditions, and v0 is its volume at the synthesis. value of the volume of hydrogel samples was obtained using cathetomether b-320. temperature dependent measurements were carried out in a thermostated water bath.



thermo-collapse of hydrogels was studied in water and its swelling ratio v/v0 was considered as a function of temperature. the temperature increasing interval was about 3-5 degrees. the hydrogels were allowed to adjust conditions for 30 min at each experimental point prior measurement.



we used pegdma as cross-linker to enhance swelling degree of hea-hema hydrogels. also we have chosen copolymerization in the ethanol:water(50:50 v/v) mixture instead of the copolymerization in bulk for the same reason. it is found that hea and hema differ in the structure just for one methyl group but this negligible change in the structure results in appearance of lower critical solution temperature(lcst) of aqueous solutions of hea-hema.



thus, for a hydrogel to show impressive thermo-collapse, it should swell significantly in water and simultaneously have sufficiently high content of hydrophobic groups along its polymer backbone to provide strong hydrophobic interaction. as mentioned in the introduction, an interaction of non-ionic polymers contained hydrophobic moieties with ionic surfactants is a very effective method to increase solubility of the polymers due to electrostatic repulsion between likely charged surfactant's heads attached along the polymer backbone, while concentration of hydrophobic groups in copolymer composition remains to be high. here this method was used to improve stimuli-sensitive properties of hea-hema copolymers. cationic cetyl pyridinium bromide(cpb) and anionic sodium dodecyl sulfate(sds) were used as surfactants.



the presence of gained network charges and the counterions results in extra osmotic pressure on the network. in this case polymer conformation will shape more like an expanded coil than a globule and hydrogels swell. on the other hand at low concentration of surfactant such interaction leads to formation of additional junctions. it is caused by surfactant micelles formed in the hydrogel act as additional cross-linking aggregates, resulting in contraction of hydrogel. domination of the one above mentioned of two factors leads to swelling behavior of copolymer hydrogels in surfactant solutions.



thereby in present work hea-hema copolymers were prepared by free radical copolymerization and their physicochemical properties were investigated by nmr-, spectroscopy, gel permeation technique. the interaction of copolymers with surfactants was studied. it was observed that thermo-sensitive parameters of the water swelling copolymers hea-hema after interaction with ionic cpb and sds are greatly improved, and hydrogels treated by surfactant solutions undergo sharp thermo-induced collapse with high amplitude.



