so nearby inferred line groups are redundant. if there are no real lines near an inferred line group, the quality scores of the inferred lines are used to determine which line in the group is the best line to split the cells. a simple moving average (sma) of the quality scores, looking both forwards and backwards two pixels, is calculated for each group. lines that do not have a valid inferred line are given a zero quality score. using an sma helps reduce the impact of noise in the image, while also fixing corner cases where a single pixel thick inferred line might sneak between characters in a piece of data.



the proposed cnn outputs the chance that these two cells are merged and if one or both of the cells are empty. by using a neural network to compute this information, the effect of imperfections in the image can be greatly reduced. it is important to know which cells are empty to avoid running ocr on those cells. this increases performance, as the ocr is the most time consuming step. the following sections talk about the implementation details of the cnn, the training data, and the post cnn concatenation.



the exclusive purpose of this branch is to identify an improper splitting of the cells. intuitively, the pixels where the cells are merged and the surrounding pixels contain the most crucial information regarding whether the cells should be merged. more complex neural network layers are used in this branch due to the importance of the information and the limited amount of inputs. five convolutions layers, each with nodes signify if the two cells contain data and the third node is high when two cells should be merged. the first dropout layers help guide the network away from relying purely on a single branch. additionally, all of the dropout layers help avoid overfitting that would otherwise be present due to the limited amount of training data.



this material is based on research sponsored by air force re- search laboratory (afrl), united states and defense advanced re- search projects agency (darpa), united states under agreement num- ber fa8650-18-2-7844. the u.s. government is authorized to repro- duce and distribute reprints for governmental purposes notwithstand- ing any copyright notation thereon.



technology (sut), tehran, iran, in 2017. he also received the m.s. degree in electrical engineering and computer science in 2020 from university of michigan, ann arbor, mi. he is currently working toward the ph.d. degree at university of michigan, ann arbor, mi. his research interests include circuit design automation, machine learning, software development and computer architecture.



zineb benameur-el youbi received the b.sc. and m.s degree in computer networks and multimedia communication from the university of grenoble, france, in 2009. she also received the m.s. degree in computer science and engineering in 2020 from university of michigan, ann arbor, mi. her research interests include reliable software development and machine learning.



shuyan yu was born in shenzhen, china, in 1999. she received the b.sc. major degree in computer science and in mathematics from university of michigan, ann arbor, mi, in 2020. she is currently working toward the m.s. degree in computer and information sciences at university of pennsylvania, pa. her research interests include data mining, natural language processing, information extraction and machine learning.



ronald dreslinski received the bse degrees both in electrical engineering and com- puter engineering, and the mse and phd degrees in computer science and engineering from the university of michigan, ann arbor, michigan. he is currently an assistant professor of computer science and engineering with the university of michigan. his research focuses on architectures that enable emerging low-power circuit techniques.



