transmitted data is exposed to numerous storage and security threats [4]. for instance, remote access of medical data over open wireless channels [5] introduces risks and challenges regarding the preservation of confidentiality, integrity and security [3]. in military and civilian applications, internet of drones (iod) has been deployed to offer reconnaissance, remote training and remote process monitoring. how- ever, during communication with other drones or control rooms in ground stations, security and privacy have been noted to be serious challenges [6]. in smart grids, 5g networks have been crucial in the digitization of power grids to offer higher speeds, low latencies and enhanced reliability [7]. unfortunately, the deployment of these public 5g networks introduces numerous privacy and security risks to the smart grid infrastructure. as explained in ref. [8], majority of the se- curity and privacy issues in 5g-iot can be attributed to pervasive and continuous connection of the smart devices to the network. as such, these devices are susceptible to denial of service (dos), impersonation,



it is evident that 5g-iot networks collect massive data that need proper protection. this is critical due to the private and sensitive nature of this data. as explained in ref. [9], iot message exchanges lack pri- vacy and security protection. as such, authentication and device loca- tion identification are crucial in preventing network invasion by malicious devices [10]. to this end, 5g authentication and key agree- ment protocol (5g aka) has been deployed to offer identity privacy. in addition, this aka protocol helps address fake base station attacks which are common in the fourth generation (4g) networks. however, trace- ability attacks against iot devices still remains unresolved [11] in 5g networks.



the rest of this paper is organized as follows: section 2 discusses related work, while section 3 describes the system model of the pro- posed scheme. on the other hand, section 4 presents security analysis of the proposed scheme while section 5 presents the comparative perfor- mance evaluation of this protocol. towards the end of this paper, sec- tion 6 concludes the paper and gives future research directions.



control, the protocol in ref. [25] is introduced. although this approach is resilient against replay and impersonation attacks, it cannot offer mutual authentication and protection against side-channeling attacks [6]. to address mutual authentication challenges in ref. [25], the public key based iot authentication protocol is introduced in ref. [26]. how- ever, the deployed public key infrastructure (pki) results in high computation and communication overheads [27]. similarly, the pki-based scheme in ref. [28] has performance issues occasioned by key management challenges.



the discussions above clearly show that most of the current iot se- curity protocols fail to provide some crucial security and privacy fea- tures, while others have very high communication and computation complexities. to address some of these challenges, this paper presents a lightweight authentication, authorization and key agreement scheme based on ecc and biometrics. this protocol is shown to offer mutual authentication, session key agreement, anonymity, untraceability as well as backward and forward key secrecy. in addition, the proposed



this phase is triggered whenever the user wants some access to the iot devices, for instance to obtain the collected data. to accomplish this, the following seven steps are executed among the mt, gnb and the iot devices. after successful mutual authentication, the mt and the iot devices negotiate a session key for secure packet exchanges. thereafter, the user can access real-time iot sensed data that correspond to user access rights.



this phase is triggered whenever the user wants to update password or biometric data. this may be occasioned by the suspicion that these parameters have been compromised by an adversary. to reduce communication overheads, this update is executed locally devoid of gnb involvement. it may also be important that admission rights accorded to the user be changed when there are changes in policies. this change of admission rights is executed between the user and the gnb over some private channels. this is a five-step process as described below.



step 5: upon receiving this message, the gnb validates the received user parameter a1. here, the gnb substitutes the stored spgi with refreshed the refreshed version spgnew. finally, the current admit- tance right groups args is also replaced with its refreshed one argsnew for this particular user.



in this section, various lemmas are formulated and proofed to show that the proposed scheme is robust against many attack vectors under all the assumptions in the canetti- krawczyk (ck) threat model. these as- sumptions are well articulated in section 1.2 above.



on the other hand, the protocols in refs. [14,41] offer eleven and twelve security features respectively. as such, they are more secure compared with the schemes in refs. [22,25,32]. on the other hand, the proposed scheme offers seventeen security features and is therefore the most secure among all the other schemes.



