r2 is rotor resistance. s represents slip, i2, which depends on load current, represents rotor current. i1 represents stator current, which is made up of i2 and i0. i0 represents excitation current. e2 represents rotor voltage, which has the approximate same size with the stator voltage u. obviously, because i0 does not change when the load changes, so whether the size of i1 change or not will depend on the load. when the load is low, the power factor angle is big while the power factor is small. when the load increases, the current i2 and i1 will increase and the power factor will also increase. from formula (1) we can get the conclusion: when the load does not change, which means that the slip will not change, the rotor current will keep the same and the more the voltage, the less the power factor. therefore, we have to reduce the voltage u if we want to have a high power factor when the motor is in light load, which means that we can increase the power factor if we reduce the voltage.



the thyristor has played an important role in the area of power electronics since it was born. it is widely used in the sphere of power and ac or dc voltage regulation as its excellent price-performance ratio and large capacity, which can not be compared with by the other devices. the thristor can be used to form a switch with its special character. we can control the high voltage and high current circuit on and off when we control the gate current. bi-directional thristor is the mainly derivative component of the thristor series, which can take place of a set of general anti-parallel thyristor in ac circuit. so it is a kind of ideal ac power control component. in order to make the pipe pass the ac current, a gate trigger signal must be sent within each half cycle [4]. the component can continue to conduct only when the current is greater than the trigger current while the component can shut off only when the current is smaller than the maintainable current.



in the process of designing energy saving component we make use of thyristor to control voltage. the size of voltage depends on the thyristor trigger angle. in the following when we make use of the theory of genetic algorithm, we put the thyristor trigger angle as individual in the genetic algorithm.



genetic algorithm is a kind of global optimal search algorithm based on theory of evolution and heredity. through encoding the parameter space and adopting the changeable rules of probability the genetic algorithm makes the process of searching become more efficient [6]. compared with traditional optimistic algorithm, we can get better result by making use of genetic algorithm for optimal probability research . the thyristor trigger angle of the current load is the individual function of the genetic algorithm while the power factor which has been measured is evaluation function of the genetic algorithm. the optimal trigger angle can be gotten by applying the theory of the choosing, crossing and variation. every part has an optimal voltage, and the result will be optimum. the process of the algorithm is as follows:



the total number of the individuals of every generation has a big effect on the efficiency and the final result of genetic algorithm. when in small scale, the algorithm may converge to a local optimum and it can not get the best result. and if it is in large scale the calculation will be very complex and it will be a waste of time to solve it. based on a large amount of research and experiment the best scale range that we can get is from 30 to 110. in early stage the motor can run 30 to 110 cycles randomly. it means that the thyristor trigger angle is a random number from 0 to 180. so we can get the initial population.



when genetic algorithm operates, it depends on the size of adaptive function .then it evaluates the group. in this paper the size of adaptive function which corresponds to the power factor of the motor can be gotten through measuring rather than calculate.



select algorithm completes its operation according to the adaptability of the individuals. we can use the method of select sort whose size is ordered from big to small according to the degree of the individuals' adaptability. then we can ensure the probability whether the individuals will be selected. treat the probability that the individuals assigned as the one they will be selected and then use the proportional sort to produce the next generation.



cross operation imitates the process of biological chromosome pairing, which is also the major means to produce the new individual. the process of cross operation is that the two mutual paired individuals can produce two new individuals according to some set way and a certain genetic value in partial genes which exchange the individual coding series based on cross probability. the method of designing the cross operator is various in different situation. the principle of cross operation is that when the new individual is produced we should try to maintain the individual coding mode..



the variable operation of genetic algorithm imitates the variation in the process of biological heredity and evolution. it completes its operation by changing the genetic value of partial genes in individual coding series which has been chosen. then it creates a new individual and increases the diversity of population. the main function of variable operator in genetic algorithm is to improve the algorithm's local research capability.



there are two main conditions that can stop the operation. one is to find the optimal solution; the other is to reach the termination of algebra. after reaching the termination of algebra, genetic algorithm will stop all the operation and output the best current individual in the population as the optimal solution.



ding bao,tang haiyan,qi weigui. research on fnn energy saving control for light load oil well with intermittent oil extraction. 2006 international conference on communications, circuits and systems, icccas, proceedings, v 3, p 2034-2037, 2006. inst. of elec. and elec. eng. computer society.



