duction and diffusion has also been extensively studied [32,38], and collaborations can facilitate the improvement of research quality, result- ing in more effective scientific production [34]. many studies are con- cerned on the co-author networks [33], co-citation networks [20], co- word networks [39], international collaborations [21,37,38], and cross- institution collaborations [7], in publications (e.g. papers and journals), which adopt the social network analysis (sna) to study the relation- ships involved in the networks. however, to our knowledge, there is no bibliometric and collaboration network analysis based on patents in this inter-disciplinary research field.



patent authorities [28]. key elements of records include patent num- ber(s), priority application information, dmcs, titles, designated states, application details, inventor(s), assignee(s), patent details, ipc classifi- cation number, cited patents, cited articles. each of these patent family records is showed as a single patent. after manually removing dupli- cates, 3610 items of single patent information are acquired [43]. the data of assignees and patent quantity information is cleaned, grouped, and rearranged in an excel spreadsheet.



regarding the quantities of partners and co-owned patent applica- tions, the french public health agent of assisance publique-hopitaux de paris (ap-hp) holds the first place, of which the patents contain claims for the biomarkers combination for the prognosis of hepatic fibrosis or hepatitis c virus treatment. the ap-hp possesses 31 co-ownership patents with 10 co-assignees. the deeply multilateral cooperation of ap- hp might be in connection with its international strategy that develops larger-scale cooperation projects with other institutions, for the benefit of global health [3].



trends, e.g. g06t-g06k (ai in medical image recognition), g06n-g06k (ai in medical diagnostic system), g16b-c12q (prediction of enzyme activity), etc. the results suggest that the application of ai technolo- gies in the medical field mainly focuses on medical image recognition, computer-aided diagnosis, disease monitoring, disease prediction, bioin- formatics, and drug development, etc.



