in the aspect of character, after analyses of license plate recognition technology home and abroad, we use weighted statistics to make plate in the image in a more prominent position. at the same time, we combine the thick grid feature extraction and momentum bp algorithm to distinguish license. this method improves the accuracy and speed of character recognition.



with the development of social economy, the automobile industry and the transport industry, road transport has become much more important than railway transport. but with the increasing popularity of motor vehicles, the phenomenon of traffic congestion is getting more serious and automated traffic management has become a serious problem. intelligent transport system(its) produced an effective solution to this problem, which is proposed on the intelligent transportation society of the united states in the 1990.



license plate recognition(lpr) is an important component of its, applied in the field of electronic billing. as a special computer vision system in the real-tine case, the lpr system mainly includes the sub system of license plate detection and character recognition. the lpr system involves numerous discipline domains, such as pattern recognition and artificial intelligence, computer vision, digital image processing etc. the lpr system can distinguish the license plate numbers, letters and chinese characters, making the computerized monitoring and management a reality.



based on image processing technology, the ultimate goal of lpr system is to identify all the license plate number and the color from the picture. it is difficult to search for license plate characters directly from the collected images. in order to reduce difficulty, the general part of the lpr software is divided into three modules: the license plate location, character segmentation and character recognition. the task of license plate location is to determine plate position from the picture. the task of character segmentation is to cut out one by one after the positioning of characters in license plate images. the task of character recognition is to identify characters by segmentation.



in order to enhance the contrast of images, make license plate and the background contrast stretching, to enhance image processing is necessary. in fact, image enhancement is an amendment to grayscale image. the main objective is to improve the definition of contour lines of license plate number. while the balance of technology of the straight side chart is the best and the algorithm is simple. in this paper, we use the gray histogram balanced method to the image enhancement. suppose having n levels grayscale image, and the probability of i level grayscale appearance is pi, so it contains the information content is



the license plate localization is the region which extract license plate from the plate image containing the license plate. in this paper, we use a weighted statistical method to make plate position to be prominent in the image. it is the concrete principle as follows.



according to statistics of china's motor vehicle licensing standards, china has three types of standard license plate to identify different objects at present. they are chinese character, english character and digital& english, including 51 chinese characters, 25 capital letters except i and 10 digitals. a total of more than 80 license plate characters have the same size and uniform.



the bp algorithm has not only the input spot, the output spot, but also one or many concealed spots. regarding the input signal, firstly, it should disseminate the concealed stratification spot forward. after action function, bp disseminates the implicit strata point's output signal to the output spot. finally network gives the output result. excitation function usually selects the function: where n is input number, m is output number, s is concealed number, and c is integer between 1~10. so, there have 18 chinese characters, 16 english character and 15 digitals in concealed level. the initial weight of bp network is defined in[0,1]. the initial value of learning factor and the momentum factor is respectively



