a medication method is given for different time interval and the weight change. due to the patient's weight is different, and the time intervals of the same medication are not easy to realize, and the velocity of the metabolism is not the same at night and day. and the absorbing velocity is also different, so the dosage of the drug should be different at different time points. according to the rate of change of the concentration of drug and dosage is in proportion, that is the modeling mechanism, two mathematical models are established for the daytime and nighttime drug concentrations. through solving and analysis of being the model, the following conclusions are obtained: patients in the morning dose is relatively large, and at noon and in the evening is the same but less than the morning, as well as the weight and the dosage of the drug dose relationship. thus according to the model manufacture different dose of pills, the pharmaceutical factory can convenient to patients taking. according to this method, the doctor also can prescribe for the patients of different dose prescription. the patients will be in the shortest possible time to heal, but not of physical harm.



this paper is organized as follows: in the section 2, according to the rate of change of the concentration of drug and medication is proportional to the amount of the modeling mechanism, in the 3 given reasonable assumptions, several mathematical models are established for diseased fishes in a variety of body weight of daytime and nighttime drug concentration; in the section 3, the mathematical models are solved and analyzed; in the section 4, these rationality of math models are verified, and some results are obtained for the diseased fishes in the morning dose is relatively large, and the noon and evening dose of the same, but the morning dose is relatively small, as well as the dosage increased with the weight variation laws. thus for pharmaceutical factory provides scientific pharmaceutical method, and it provides doctors to diseased fishes with different dose prescription scheme issued. can make the diseased fishes both in the shortest possible time to heal, but not of physical harm.



a1) taking medicine cycle is 1 days, taking medicine 3 times a day, morning, noon, evening wear time, time intervals are 6 hours, 6 hours and 12 hours a day, respectively. one morning (credited as n0 day) take this medicine first times early in the morning. let 600g fish dosage is qc (qc is the optimum charge to be cured disease). due to the average body weight at different times is different, therefore, we will crowd into on the basis of 60kg, every 10kg increment or reduction of 10kg as a phase value, so the initial dose should be qci (1) and (2), the utility range is wide, can be applied to other fish (such as: turbot, prawn, giant) and terrestrial animal (such as horses, cattle, sheep etc.). however, for other animal, it is necessary to design the initial dose of animal, and according to the animal development, the initial dosage must be adjusted as appropriate.



