currently, the intelligent grid is subject to pay a high attention on a global scale. europe and the united states regard the intelligent grid as an important part of their national strategy. state grid corporation of china has put the concept of "strong intelligent grid" forward, and proposed a three-step strategic planning "strong intelligent grid" fully completed by 2020. the intelligent grid is a new transmission and distribution



the shuttle of traditional avc and ems uses plug-avc model. the model of avc and data acquisition is realized by making interfaces with ems. but this method brings a larger workload to run maintenance staff. they often maintain two systems of ems and avc, which is repeated labor and whose efficiency is too low. while traditional embedded method can also achieve avc system embedded in the ems system, but it also has two drawbacks as follows: 1) data-read uses the api functions provided by the ems manufacturers good- way package to read the database; 2) opening high-level database permissions may bring the security risks to the ems system.



the objective function of the voltage offset is to minimize the sum of the offset amount of the voltage of each node and the ideal voltage value range, i.e. to increase the voltage levels of the load node. function can be expressed as:



the inference engine is an important part of the expert system. it uses the knowledge reasoning in expert systems. using expert experience, knowledge and some reasoning methods, we can introduce the results. by analysis and reasoning of the inference engine, we can use some information through the reasoning problem reasoning and restoring.



this article makes some prospects on intelligent avc embedding method and functions of the system in the future based on the analysis of the disadvantages of traditional avc. and on this basis, it elaborates based on the standard cim intelligent avc embedding method and intelligent avc, which differs from some of the new features of the traditional avc in detail. then it provides a new train of thought for the future of the development and perfect of smart avc.



