the method to produce the hollow micro/nano fibers through the bicomponent spinneret of electrospinning was introduced and the influence of the process parameters on the morphology of the micro/nano fibers was presented in the paper. the result revealed that the pan fibers with uniform hollow construction could be collected while the feed rate of the inner solution was set at 0.08ml/h (single hollow fibers) or 0.06ml/h (double hollow fibers). meanwhile, the morphology was in good condition with 15kv voltage and 20cm receiving distance.



electrospinning machine is usually composed of spinneret and solution supply system, fiber collection plate and high voltage power supply. the traditional spinneret, with a circular cross section, helps to produce the circular solid fibers which possess limited use[2,3]. at present, the researchers have developed co-axial elecrospinning device which can produce single and hollow micro/nano fibers through electrospinning[4,5,6].



pan(mw=50000) was provided by petro-chemicals jinshan co., ltd; n,n-dimethylformamide (dmf) and polyvinylpyrrolidone k-30 (pvp) were purchased from sinopharm chemical reagent co., ltd. a high voltage power supply and a trace syringe pump were used in the experiments, which were purchased from the kansai electronics (su zhou) co., ltd, and tech-knowledge international, inc, respectively. the morphology of the fibers was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (sem) (hitachis-3000n).



of hollow construction were considered in a better condition. continuing to increase the feed rate, the double hollow would merge and the cortices tended to fracture. as a result, the feed rate should not be too fast when fabricating the double or triplicate hollow fibers.



when the voltage was small, the fibers were discontinuous, meanwhile there were beadlike structures called slub pan filament yarn. high voltage was the best way to decrease the diameters (the higher the voltage, the smaller the diameters), but high voltage should be controlled to a certain range. when the voltage kept increasing, the continuity of the fibers became worsen, and the diameter distribution greater. the research found the optimal condition of the voltage would be 15kv. meanwhile, the diameters of the fibers could be optimized in the process of after- drawing.



