in modeling algorithms of scale-free or small-world network, the modification for nodes denotes the metabolism of the system components, and the change for edges represents the metabolism of the system structure. due the modifications of nodes and edges, network structure as well as the network's entropy is changed. therefore, the entropy of the network is used to depict the metabolic processes of the system in this paper based on the network entropy, the ws model is analyzed. the conclusions are that firstly the change of network entropy of ws network is u-shaped. secondly, under the same conditions, the value of p affects the rate of decrease and increase in the entropy's graphic. and, k decides the timing of change from drop to rising.



at present, the study of complex networks mainly focus in three areas [3]: evolution of model of network, the stability of complex networks, complex network dynamics. the creation of complex network refers to the network formation process. the creating algorithm is called as an evolution model of complex network. in recent years, this area is the most active research one. studies in this area are mainly focused on: rules of network formation mechanisms, generation mechanism and model of random map, generation mechanism and model of small-world network, generation mechanism and model of scale-free network, formation mechanism of evolution network and formation mechanism of deterministic network and so on. although the results in this area is quite rich, but there are still some problems [3]: further studies on new mechanism of small-world effects is needed, random network model with a recognized three statistical properties of the real system is lack; the understanding of the analytical method of the evolution network topology still need to explore; the models considering the dynamics and other factors are less; the formation mechanisms of power-law of specific networks in real life still need in-depth research.



this work focuses on exploring the formation mechanism of ws small-world network to understand the classical evolutionary algorithm. based on graph entropy, features of the generated network by ws model are analyzed. on one hand, for researchers, the methods and conclusions of this paper are useful for further solving the problem in the field of modeling complex networks. on the other hand, it provides a new vision for proposing new models of complex network. in our opinion, this is a new attempt.



from the network point of view, the generation and evolution of the system can be summarized into two aspects: the first is node changes; the second is the connection changes [4]. the former represents the metabolism of the system components; the latter is on behalf of the metabolism of the system structure.naturally, we wonder how the entropy changes in the metabolic processes of the system. is it increase, decrease, cyclically or irregularly change? only have a full understanding of the metabolic, "control" is possible on the system. this "control" is reflected in the design of more realistic network model. the ws, nw [5], ba model (or other model), due to changes in the node or edge of the network, the entropy of the network changes with structure is changing. therefore, the use of the network entropy depicts the system of metabolic processes is a natural thing.



for analyzing the ws model [1], algorithm 1 is proposed. in the process of network evolution, the network entropy is constantly changing. one by one, algorithm 1 will record the network entropy generated in the process. the trend of the network entropy reflects the change of entropy experienced by the ws model in its generation process. according to the changed of the network entropy, the characteristics of the ws model can be analyzed, and thus we can improve or even propose a new model.



in this paper, we conducted a series of experiments on the ws model based on the algorithm 1; aim to reveal the impact of main parameters on the structure. at the same time, based on the variation of the network entropy, the ws model is analyzed. we mainly consider various combinations of n, k and p.



experiment iii: it includes three small experiments. in these experiments, n is fixed at a large value 10000, and k is fixed to a small value 4. respectively, p = 0.1, 0.5 or 0.9. in these 3 small experiments, it was found that when n is large enough, the overall trend of the network entropy is same with the first two experiments.



the conclusions drawn from the above results are as follows. 1) under the same conditions, the p-value affects the flat degree of entropy. specifically, p is larger; the graph of the network entropy is steeper. conversely, it is more flat. 2) under the same conditions, the k-value affects the timing dropped into the rising. specifically, k is larger; the timing goes to more frontward. conversely, it is more rearward.



this paper analyzes the small-world network modeling algorithm. based on network entropy, it studies the trend of network entropy in the process of the establishment of ws networks. for the ws model, p and k have some impact on its network entropy. overall, the trend of the network entropy of the ws model shows u-shaped. further research includes: how the trend of the network entropy of scale-free networks is? from the perspective of the network entropy, we are going to consider designing a new modeling algorithm of small- world networks.



