our simulation results show that the uncertainty miners perceive about the cost of executing transactions has a significant impact on the block profit that miners can get. the certainty about the cost of executing transactions can help miners quadruple their block profit. on the other hand, our results do not show an impact of the income uncertainty on the block profit that miners can get. that means the certainty about the income of executing transactions does not help miners increase their block profit.



a blockchain is a distributed database that records all transactions that have ever occurred in the blockchain network. this database is replicated and shared among the networks participants. the main feature of blockchain is that it allows nontrusting participants to communicate and send transactions between each other in a secure way without the need of a trusted third party. blockchain is an ordered list of blocks, where each block is identified by its cryptographic hash. each block references the block that came before it, resulting in a chain of blocks. each block consists of a set of transactions.



and peer-to-peer network. the earliest and most popular example of cryptocurrencies is bitcoin. bitcoin is an electronic payment system that allows two non-trusting parties to transact digital money with each other in a secure manner without going through a middleman(e.g., a bank). other blockchains such as ethereum[2,7] have emerged as the second generation of blockchain to allow building complex distributed applications beyond the cryptocurrencies. smart contracts, which will be discussed in the following section, are considered as the main element of this generation.



transactions in blockchain system can have three different forms. the first one is a transaction to move digital money from one account to another. the second one is a transaction to create and deploy a new smart contract to the blockchain. the last one is a transaction to invoke an existing contract. each transaction needs to specify the following information:



most of the current research conducted on blockchain systems are about identifying and tackling security, privacy and other issues related to the development of smart contracts. in addition, there are a number of studies that investigated performance issues(such throughput and latency). there are a few studies that utilised modelling and simulation techniques to investigate issues in blockchain systems. most of these studies concern about performance issues such as in[4,3,10].



in blockcain systems such as ethereum, however, the only information provided to the miner about the profit of executing a transaction is the maximum income(gas limit and gas price). miners do not know the exact income(used gas) they can obtain from a transaction prior to executing it. not only this but also miners do not know in advance the cost of executing the transaction. this makes miners uncertain about the profit they can gain from executing a transaction. thus, they are not able to make informed decisions about which transactions to select and execute in order to maximise their profits.



selecting and executing transactions: after sorting all pending transactions, the miner selects the first transaction and then check if the transaction can fit in the block or not. if the transaction does not fit, the miner can select the next transaction. otherwise, the miner executes the transaction and then check if the block still has space for other transactions or not. if the block does have space, the miner can select the next transaction. this process is then repeated until the block is full(no more transaction can fit in the block).



step 7: this step is to check if the block still has space for other transactions or not. if the block limit value after executing the transaction in step 6 is more than zero, then select the next transaction by going back to step 4. otherwise, go to step 8.



in blockchain systems, miners face uncertainty about the exact income(transaction fee) they can get from executing each transaction. not only this, but also miners face uncertainty about the cost(cpu time) of executing transactions. the objective of this experiment is to investigate the impact of the uncertainty miners perceive about the income and the cost of executing transactions on the block profit miners can get. to achieve this, we will compare the block profit that miners can get when there is uncertainty about the income and the cost of executing transactions with the case when there is certainty about the income and/or the cost of executing transactions.



exact profit scenario: this scenario is to see whether the certainty about both the income and the cost of executing transactions would help miners increase their block profit. in this scenario, we assume miners know both the exact income and the exact cost of executing each transaction in advance. thus, miners in this scenario sort transactions based on the exact profit they can get from executing transactions. the exact profit is calculated as follows:



for the baseline scenarios, our simulation results show that the average block income gained in both scenarios were almost the same(0.221 ether for the gas price scenario and 0.205 ether for the maximum income scenario). in addition, the average block cpu time for both scenarios was the same(0.091 second). thus, there is no significant difference between the two scenarios in terms of the block profit that miners can get from executing and including transactions in a block.



in the first solution-based scenario(exact income scenario), miners are given the exact income they can get from executing each transaction. this is to investigate the impact of income uncertainty by comparing the block profit that miners can get in this scenario with that for the baseline scenarios. from the simulation results, we have not found any improvement in the block profit that miners can get in this scenario compared to the block profit they can get in the baseline scenarios. in other words, the certainty about the income of executing transactions does not help miners increase their block profit. this might be due to the fact that each block has a limit of how many transactions it can have, and thus, the block income is limited by the block limit. even if miners are uncertain about the income of transactions, they can execute transactions until the block is full to maximise their block income. in the second solution-based scenario(maximum profit scenario), miners are given the exact cost(cpu time) consumed by each transaction. this is to investigate the impact of cost uncertainty by comparing the block profit that miners can get in this scenario with that for the baseline scenarios. from the simulation results, we have found that the block profit that miners can get in this scenario is about four times the profit they can get in the baseline scenarios. the average block cpu time for this scenario is about a quarter the average block cpu time for the baseline scenarios(0.021 seconds in the maximum profit scenario compared to 0.091 seconds in the baseline scenarios). in other words, the certainty about the



in the last solution-based scenario(exact profit scenario), miners are given the exact income and the exact cpu time consumed by each transaction. this is to investigate the impact of income and cost uncertainty by comparing the block profit that miners can get in this scenario with that for the baseline scenarios. from the simulation results, we have found a significant difference between this scenario and the baseline scenarios in terms of the block profit that miners can get. miners in this scenario can get four times as much block profit compared to miners in the baseline scenarios. however, we have not found a significant difference between this scenario and the second scenario in terms of the block profit. this is because the exact income a miner can get from executing a transaction does not have an impact on the block profit as we mentioned earlier.



our simulation results show that the uncertainty miners perceive about the income of executing and including a transaction in a block does not have an impact on the block profit. however, the uncertainty miners perceive about the cost of executing and including a transaction in a block has a significant impact on the block profit. the block profit miners can get when there is uncertainty about the cost of executing transactions is about quarter the profit that they would get when there is certainty about the cost of executing transactions.



