regional financial risk that not only influenced by the external factors, but also be restricted by specific economic environments and market structure in this area. imbalance development in regional economy and finance will make the financial risk having a strong regional characteristic. otherwise, the resistance ability to local risk of regional finance is weaker; the local financial turmoil could trigger regional financial crisis and even national financial crisis.



the regression result shows that the gdp growth, real estate price index, broad money growth, the credit balance, the balance of international trade will have positive influence in financial stress exponents, and the price of crude oil rate of change, sumgdp, the ratio of broad money and gdp, the one-year deposit spreads between china and the united states and japanese gdp growth will have negative influence. due to the collinearity existed between the explanatory variables; the consistent of the explanatory variables may not correspond to the actual situation. but, the collinearity will not affect the explanatory variables as a general cfsi to the predictive result.



on the basis of the research of illing and liu (2003), this paper ensure the measure index of financial risk by the financial stress exponents constructing by synchronization index of financial risk, confirm the explanatory variables the financial stress exponent itself and the economic and financial index having prescience, and then with the aid of empirical methods to construct the financial stress index early-warning model. the model shows that the explanatory variables lagging four quarters (there are two variables were lagging six quarters and eight quarters) can better fitting our financial pressure exponent trend. that is, according to the known current financial stress exponent and other value of explanatory variables, we can use the model to predict the financial stress exponents of the future four quarters.



this research is supported by national natural science foundation of china (grant no. 71071140), technology plan project of hangzhou(grand no. 20102011a22) as well as students science and technology innovation project of zhejiang gongshang university (no.1130xj1711228) and modern business centre of zhejiang gongshang university. we would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and constructive suggestions provided during the review process, which have greatly contributed to improve the quality of the original manuscript.



