determine the hierarchical structure model, through the analysis of the model, the model tree segmentation and separately modeling and model integration at last. the advantage of this is that improve the utilization rate of the model, reduce duplication of work, but also conducive to management. and 3dsmax also offers a hierarchical structure to organize and manage complex model.



we use example technology, and texture mapping technology lod technology in model optimization. in this project, because many tools is widely used,so if every tool, component is to recreate, and load into memory to operate, it will cause great waste of resources, so it can use examples technology, the same tools in memory store only one instance, after translation, zoom and turn we can get other tools. the lod is the technology trading space for time, in this project we constructing some details of the different hierarchy model, when driver the model it can automatically select the relevant details according to judge rules, so as to achieve the real-time model simplified, and do not affect visual result. and texture mapping technology is the



fracturing, stopping water, acidification, the cutting technology etc that used in increase production, are simulation the liquid like water, oil and foam. take acidification for example, its principle is through the acid on the rock cementation, or space, crack formation, restore or improve the gap and fracture permeability. so in the simulation, we should inject acid underground, acid in the rock go on chemical reaction, and viscous liquid turn into bubble etc.



the wellbore information dynamic processing and display system is the use of virtual reality technology to display 3d and manipulate, dynamically draw strata and dynamically display assignment measures. according to the actual application feedback, this system can provide a complete inquiry, analysis tools for engineering design personnel, and directly shows the problems of the various parts information, the well completion status and production measures and so on. it also guide the construction work in well site, help drilling crews and other subjects crews interact and cooperate together, and it can be used in the complex accident prevention treatment, real-time data analysis and decision, etc.



