turn the focus of regulation to social regulation fields. in order to improve the efficiency of regulation, it is necessary to measure the various costs and benefits brought by regulation to determine the need for regulation and how to choose the optimal regulatory tools. as robert. w. hahn ( 2006 ) mentioned, the first cost-benefit analysis report, which was submitted to congress in 1997 by the united states office of management and budget (omb), estimated that in 1997 the cost of regulation in american society was 198 billion$ , revenue was 298 billion$ , and net income was 100 billion$. in theory, the cost-benefit analysis of regulation has important significance for government regulation. however, to accurately assess the social costs and benefits of regulation is quite difficult, social regulation can not only consider the costs and benefits of regulation comparison, it also needs to consider factors such as social justice and sustainable development of the economy and so on. therefore, the cost -benefit analysis only provides an referable assessment standard for regulators to develop and implement regulatory policies.



accurate estimates of coal reserves. whether to have sufficient theoretical techniques to ensure that the sale price of state-owned mineral deposits reasonable, is an important condition to state property loss. in addition, china has no statistics on the water pollution caused by underground water and coal cinder produced during coal extraction. making rules of tax must rely on the estimates of the size of damage of externality, so it is difficult to develop an appropriate types and amounts of taxes.



in reality, property protections not only just rely on the private force, but also on the group's strength and national power. the protection of property rights in our country is relatively small. consumer interests have repeatedly been hurt although there is a "consumer protection law.



social regulation comes at a price, and that price is the cost, in addition to the tangible costs, there are intangible costs which are evaluated in terms of opportunity cost. opportunity cost refers to get an opportunity by abandoning another opportunity. samuelson referred to opportunity cost as: "when we are forced to make a choice between scarce goods, we have to pay the opportunity cost; the opportunity cost of a decision is the value of another kind of available best decision [2].



rather than take the minimum or maximum, is fairly modest both reflect the reward of accepting of regulation and not excessive reward. in this open interval ( k1 ,n k 2 ), all the values are sufficient to have different level surplus after covering the costs of regulation k1 . in other words, any value in this open interval can ensure that regulation benefits outweigh regulation costs, the economic actors are not only got compensation because of sticking to regulation, but also got the additional reward for accepting regulation. and this reward of regulation gain value from an interval, rather than fix value in a numeric point like since k 2 is the largest extreme value of regulation profit, but the profit caused by reject the regulations is greater than the extreme, in this case the economic actors may still be tempted to choose the behavior of rejecting regulation. so, for this case, it should be by law to impose sanctions and punishment. in other words, it is to ask the producer to take self-proof responsibility for abnormally high profits.



the first is the information environment. transaction costs are the loss of social welfare, transaction costs can not be completely eliminated, but it can be reduced by open information. but because of the complexity of reality makes the media information regulation not always comprehensive, it can be used as a complement to regulation on the case law of some significance, though the case law itself is not perfect. such as the u.s. times-sullivan rules can ensure full media oversight role. but this year has also been some question, one of which is considered the rule encourages irresponsible behavior of the media.



