the symmetric circulant traveling salesman problem asks for the minimum cost of a hamiltonian cycle in a circulant weighted undirected graph. the computational complexity of this problem is not known. just a constructive upper bound, and a good lower bound have been determined.



when the general instance is forced to be a circulant graph. codenotti, gerace and vigna have shown that maximum clique, and minimum graph coloring remain np-hard, and not approximable within a constant factor, even if restricted to circulant undirected graphs. muzychuk has, instead, proved that graph isomorphism restricted to circulant undirected graphs is in p, while the general case is, probably, harder.



the undirected case is less difficult. as shown by burkard, and sandholzer, hamiltonian circuit, and bottleneck tsp are polynomial time solvable on the circulant weighted undirected graphs. unfortunately, a similar result is not known for tsp(see, for a survey on the well solvable special cases).



a lower bound for sctsp, and some sufficient conditions for reaching such bound appear independently in, and in. we present here the lower bound(theorem 4.5), and two of these sufficient conditions in the two stripe case(proposition 4.6).



has been already solved. in particular, the not connected case is solved by proposition 4.1, the case c1= c2 is solved by proposition 4.4, the case gcd(n, a1)= 1 is solved by theorem 4.3, and, finally, the case gcd(n, a1)= 2 is solved by theorem 4.6.



finally, let us consider the w.u. graph g= g(45; 20, 9; 1, 2). it is easy to verify that g1= 5, ag={7}, and, so, m= 2. theorem 5.3 assures the existence of a hamiltonian cycle of cost 54. such cycle is not a minimal one, as ub(g)= 53 by theorem 4.3.



although a solution of sctsp has not been found, we think that sctsp is polynomial time solvable at least in the case in which any two stripes have different costs. actually, if we understand how a hamiltonian cycle, or, more generally, a hamiltonian path for a circulant w.u. graphs with s stripes can be transferred to circulant w.u. graphs with more stripes, we could be very close to the solution of sctsp.



