as the most traditional and mature way of generating electricity in the power industry, thermal power has its own advantages, but the industry itself faces many risks. so, it is important to the thermal power industry to have a systematic study of these risks and it has an important significance for both industry operators and national macroeconomic. power industry is moving from monopoly to competition under the influence of deregulation, as the market instability and security risks of the electricity market, caused by fluctuations of the electricity price and raw materials price, has become a prominent issue. at the same time, according to china's electric power system planning, electric market will be eventually fully opened, the relationship between financial markets and power industry will be more closely, and market participants are facing unprecedented market risks. zheng xinli considered that financial security is the core of industrial safety[1], so it is urgent and important to accelerate the improvement a modern financial system. other researchers elaborated the basic framework of china's power financial markets, presented risk management strategies and methods[2-7]. among above of these, the forecast of power financial environmental risk is a very important aspect, however, related literatures are very rare.



this paper constructed data forecast model based on rbf neural network which considered several impact indicators. to verify the validity of the forecast model, three indicators, ma5, bias6 and psy12, were chosen to make the composition of the input vector, which provides an effective algorithm model for the thermal power industry making analysis and forecasting of the financial environmental. in the technical indicator group, bias6 and ma5 outperformed other indicators. using a single indicator to forecast stock closing indices, whether it was a technical indicator, an average stock yield indicator or a closing index indicator, the accuracy was lower than that achieved with group indicators. of all the hybrid combinations, bias6 + mas5 + asy12 were the optimum group with the smallest forecasting errors.



in this paper, quantitative indicators were used to forecast the closing indices. however, stock movements are affected not only by quantitative factors, but also by non-quantitative factors, such as macroeconomic policies, regulations and psychological factors, etc. how to integrate these non-quantitative factors into mathematical algorithms using mining techniques to effectively increase forecast accuracy will be left to future research.



