security in ims networks is an important issue [1], in addition to qos [2], which will ensure the development of new services on its platforms. security concerns the user, service provider over ims and operator responsible for the core ims. several research works are concerned with this issue. in this sense, we propose in this paper an analysis of the highlight work in this field, and an approach to cover the security issues in ims networks. the approach is mainly directed towards the user and the service provider over ims. an analysis of the security in this approach led to identify the critical interfaces that need more effort and concentration in order to strengthen security in ims networks. the paper is organized into sections. sections two and three respectively present the architecture and the risks related to ims. the sections four and five present an analysis of existing work and our approach to secure the ims network.



as can be deduced from the previous section, ims is based principally on ip protocol. therefore, it inherits the security issues of ip networks. the ims architecture is open, distributed and it has the advantage of being flexible in its implementation and deployment. this generates a variety of communication interfaces, which can make the system very vulnerable to attack. add to that, the services offered on the ims network must be provided by ensuring confidentiality and respect the privacy of users. therefore, it is necessary to secure the ims network at every level of its architecture including the final customer or subscriber device [5].



risks in control layer: the ims core uses two main protocols sip and diameter. the sip is messages-based protocol like http. this is why sip is vulnerable to attacks types dos (denial of service).the most critical attacks against ims core can target cscf components, this attacks impact control function and will capture or modify sensitive messages



withregard to the importance of network security in general, ims networks are also affected by this aspect. several organizations (3gpp, itu, etsi, etc.) and others research work made suggestions and recommendations to secure this type of network. we present in this section the recommendations of the organizations 3gpp, itu and etsi.



the tvra method considers a system as a set of properties that can be physical or logical. property in the model may have weaknesses that can be exploited by threats. the realization of a threat can lead to a security incident that violates the security objectives. the vulnerability, according to the definition given in iso, is modelled as a combination of weakness that can be exploited by one or more threats. the method recommends against-measures to protect the system against threats, vulnerabilities and reduce risks [13].



ims client: it represents any user who connects to the ims network in order to access a particular service offered by the network. a client accesses the ims network via an access network which may be a telecommunication network or an ip network. in the case of the telecommunication network, the user has a sim card [14] that includes information used for authentication. in the case of ip network, wired or wireless, the user does not have a sim card.



c-s interface: the interface is used to exchange media content between the client and the service platforms. this traffic can be a voip, video conferencing, video streaming or other. protocols used on this interface depend on the service; it can be a http, rtp and other.



we identify, in our analysis of ims network security, three critical interfaces namely i-c, i-s, and c-s. the traffic exchanged via these interfaces uses public network infrastructures which are unsafe and insecure. it makes these interfaces most vulnerable and exposed the attacks compared to interface within ims core network. indeed, the ims ip-based client is connected to home network, enterprise network or wi-fi public hotspot network in open areas. these networks are also interconnected to the internet service provider to have access to internet. so when such ip-based client join ims network, all the traffic generated by this access is forwarded over an ip network. the risk of attack in this context is more important than inside the ims core. similarly, the interface c-s established over ip public network, forward media traffic between the ip-based client and the service platforms represented in the diagram by "service-box".



in this approach, we give less importance to interfaces and other components inside the ims core network. this choice is dictated by two reasons: the first is that the internal components of ims core cannot be joined from the outside of the ims network. they are internal to a private network protected by filtering mechanisms and access control. the probability of attacks against these components remains low compared to the risks on the three external interfaces we focus on in this article. the second reason is that by giving more importance to the most vulnerable interfaces we enhance the security overall the network.



the confidentiality concerns all interfaces. it must ensure that the content offered in the service platforms should be accessible by only permitted client. it also implies that when the client access to service, the media traffic must be confidential if the two end of communication decide to have this service active.



