we use hybrid logic to achieve two important improvements with dlh: statebased reasoning and introspection. using nominals as abstract state labels, our hybrid calculus is able to leave state succession purely symbolic(state-based reasoning) and only expand symbolic state transitions when necessary for progress(expand-on-demand). this ability is increasingly important for computationally expensive state transitions caused by continuous dynamics. the second advantage results from improved system introspection by providing satisfaction operators to refer back to states during the system evolution.



example 2.3[etcs case study] as our running example, consider part of the european train control system(etcs) case study. in etcs, the movement of trains is controlled by decentralised radio block centres(rbc), which grant or deny movement authorities to trains by wireless communication. the actual acceleration and braking behaviour is determined by the train and subject to movement authority limit, weather condition, slope of track etc.(in this paper, we focus on



here, nominals help to structure verification of components, thereby unleashing a great potential for performance improvements during verification. in general, it is easier to prove several conjectures about smaller subsystems than a single correctness statement about the full system. using nominals for introspection, this effect can even be exploited to decompose reasoning for components when correctness depends on a very tight interplay.



proof.(sketch) the proof relies on the key observation that states of dlh can be characterised completely by(quantified) variable assignments. assume x is the vector of all variables occurring in a formula and i is a vector with fresh variables of the same dimension for each nominal i. with this, a reduction can be achieved using the following replacements for satisfaction operators or propositional occurrences of nominals, respectively:



chaochen et al. presented a proof system for the duration calculus(dc) extended by durational assertions about mathematical expressions in real-valued timedependent states and their derivatives. it has no constructive treatment of arithmetic, but only incorporates an oracle, which needs to guess the mathematical conjectures that are needed for proof progress.



