the aim of this research is to study, monitor, mapping, planning, distribute and locate government phccs in the selected study area. this information is to be held on a database. the paper also focuses on following-up supply and demand in phccs; managing various health care (hc) facilities in accordance to the criteria and standards of ministry of health and population (mohp) on the integration of remote sensing data and geographic information system gis from geographic and hc view, for the best treatment service. el-salam medical region, cairo, egypt has been selected as a study area to perform this research. it is a densely populated urban area. the proposed methodology involved many procedures, based on using satellite images, gis, demographic, health data and field data. the obtained results showed that there was shortage in phc centers in the selected study area. this shortage is more theoretical than prac- tical, as the research concluded that there are many other governorate and private health service, which should be studied in details.



the egyptian hc faces multiple challenges in improving and ensuring the health and wellbeing of the egyptian citizens. the growth of population with a longer life expectancy leads to the population pressure on the health system. lack of full knowledge and awareness of duties and responsibilities leads to a feeling of frustration and aggression or oppositely reluctance towards what- ever the individual is performing. the phc system main aims are to optimize the health status of an entire population throughout the life cycle.



primary care concentrated on the patient and considers all determinants of health. primary care addresses most important issues in the community by providing preventive, curative and rehabilitative services. in egypt, phc centers are considered one of the vital support systems for effective high-quality health ser- vices [3].



the collection of information and the necessary data about phc centers is to in hence the hc and to provide a plan for monitoring the change. phcs constructed as needed without sustainable development plans using the traditional methods. usually, the locations of the phc centers selected on the available location of the state lands does not take into consideration the raped growth of urban areas and population. within the health sector, the phccs have been an area of researches.



vision of health in its social context [4]. the world health organi- zation (who) is a specialized agency of the united nations (un) that is concerned with international public health. it was estab- lished on 7 april 1948 in geneva, switzerland. who is a member of the un development group? declaration of the international conference on phccs meeting in aima-ata on 13/9/1978 express- ing the need for urgent action by all governments n, all health and developments workers, and the world community to project and promote the health of the of all the people of the world [5]. phccs includes all services such as income, housing, education, and environment.



primary care is the element within phccs that focuses on hcs, including health promotion, illness and injury prevention, and the diagnosis and treatment of illness and injury, advocacy and com- munity development. international standards and guidelines are used to check hcs are based on two points which are; a phccs unit should serve a certain number of persons and a phc should cover an area of a certain radius. the mohp in egypt considers the inter- national guidelines within the international standards.



the phccs program in usa, the texas department of state health serves women, children, and men whose income is at or below 200% of the federal poverty level (fpl) and who are unable to access the same care through insurance or other programs [9]. in malaysia, they control, monitor and systematically plan the rapid development of the town due to the increase in the population and economic growth to face the uncontrolled planning process. the findings showed the implementation of gis in town planning can improve the result based on quality of town planning process for saving time and costs and data can be obtained faster [10]. many researchers concluded that the use of electronic medical records was functionally aiming to ensure the applicability and convenience of the medical record and optimizing hcs introduced to our patients [11,12].



the mohp in egypt considers the international guidelines within the international standards. a phc unit in egypt should serve 20,000 persons and area of 2.5 km radius [3]. also, according to the rules of egyptian mohp: (1) the area of phc unit should not be more than 1200 square meters. (2) the construction of phccs must be on land owned by the state or an area of ??land donated by the citizens. this donation must accepted by the officials of the mohp. as example, in emirate of dubai, one health center or clinic served 30,000 individuals [17].



the proposed methodology at beginning stage is based on sim- plicity and to be applicable to serve the different health fields. in the upcoming stages, the method will rely on advanced techniques in remote sensing science, computer science and population pre- diction will based on different models such as exponential models and census data. the following steps have been proposed: data col- lection (satellite images, maps, administration borders) covering the study area; acquisition of gcps, cps and location of phc using handheld gps from field; pre-processing of satellite images; regis- tration satellite image; accuracy assessment of rectified satellite image registration based on rms; image subset; database design of phc centers should includes types of clinics, labs, staff, medical facilities and others; distribution and locations of government phccs. producing vectors layers; projecting of population to 2015; calculating supply of phc centers; applying international and egypt guidelines of phc centers; calculating demand of phc centers and served/un-served citizens and area; and evaluate the results.



proposed methodology applied step by step. pre-processing of satellite images carried out to overcome the distortions due to the earth curvature, relief displacement and the acquisition geom- etry of the satellites (i.e. variations in altitude, aspect, velocity, panoramic distortion). well defined gcps has been collected from gps measurements to register the quickbird image using second order polynomial function. accuracy assessment of the produced geo-images has been done based on the total rms on easting and northing. the results showed that the produced rectified image meet map scale 1:5000.



based on clinic data: from rectified image, records and field. phc centers provide medical examination and treatment services at different clinics for a nominal fees of one egyptian pound and free fees for vaccination. generally phcc clinics includes internal medicine; gynecology; ante natal care; pediatrics; dental; vacci- nation; emergency; delivery; family planning; laboratory and pharmacy. phc sader el-salam center provide only chest clinic, x-ray and treatment.



most of phcc are located in main road where there was public transportation. the road network in el-salam urban area consists of two types of roads paved and unpaved roads. paved roads are designed to carry buses and cars. unpaved roads are narrow roads used by citizens to access to their apartments. access to any health center will be through various ways such as walking, public trans- portation, taxi and private cars to the nearest point to the location of the center. public transportation move only in main road.



population has been projected from 2006 to 2015 based on cen- sus data using average growth rate of population per year. popula- tion at 2006 was 440,444 capita and average growth rate/year was 2% in cairo governorate according to the central agency for public mobilization and statistics [21]. hence, predicted population 2015 was 519,723 capita.



to construct a new phcc the situation has been studied and reported that there is no piece of land in the range of area = 120 0 m2 that belongs to the state inside the study area. so, the solution is searching for donators to solve the problem or re-plan and re- allocation of state lands. the shortage in the number of phcc is more theoretical than practical due to the study explored that there are many other governorate and private health services. the governorate health services such as public hospital and heath insurance clinics. private health services such as private hospitals and private clinics.



many researchers concluded that the use of electronic medical records was functionally aiming to ensure the applicability and convenience of the medical record and optimizing hcs introduced to our patients such as in dubai [16]. phccs could be very different depending on the organization of the system. all mentioned solu- tion should be taken into consideration and studied in details in the next researches.



