this article reviews blackbox optimization applications of direct search optimization methods over the past twenty years. emphasis is placed on the mesh adaptive direct search(mads) derivative-free optimization algorithm. the main focus is on applications in three specific fields: energy, materials science, and computational engineering design. nevertheless, other applications in science and engineering, including patents, are also considered. the breadth of applications demonstrates the versatility of mads and highlights the evolution of its accompanying software nomad as a standard tool for blackbox optimization.



lation used for the design of a helicopter rotor blade failed in 60% of the calls and the aspen(aspentech, accessed: 202011-06) chemical engineering simulator failed in 43% of the calls during the optimization of a process to treat a toxic byproduct in aluminum production.



two variables for each gmon helped to generate better solutions. more generally, this feature allows the user to indicate which set of variables are related with each other. these sets need not be disjoint. the algorithm generates directions in each subset associated to the groups, rather than generating directions in the entire space spanned by all variables.



hq developed the simscape power systems(sps) electrical simulator to model and simulate electric power systems within the matlab simulink environment. sps can estimate electrical parameters of asynchronous machines based on manufacturer specifications(mathworks, 2018a), which is similar to a model calibration problem. hq decided to replace the matlab optimization toolbox by a trust-region approach. although the new method was fast enough, the proposed default settings were inappropriate to generate high-quality solutions. this turned out to be a parameter tuning problem and nomad was used to adjust the calibracessfully applied to different fields of materials science to(i) optimize materials performance,(ii) optimize industrial processes, and(iii) design new materials. a goal in alloys design is to determine a set of compositions, temperature, and pressure that optimize a set of functions that describes the material properties under certain constraints. these functions depend on the amount, type, and structure of phases. note that in the thermodynamic context, a phase is a region throughout which all physical properties of a material are uniform; in general a solid phase has a unique crystallographic structure, while a liquid or gas phase are homogeneous mixtures. the material properties(mechanical, thermodynamic, structural, dynamics, thermal transport, surface properties) depend on the phase volume fractions and the temperature. phase volume fractions depend on both temperature and composition. closedform expressions of material properties as functions of composition and temperature are not known. optimization of industrial processes either involves the determination of an optimal material or optimal process conditions such as temperature, pressure, weight fraction between different chemical constituents, etc.



lead to the design of several innovative materials and the optimization of important industrial processes for the production of primary metals, such as iron, aluminum, and copper. this combination also allowed the screening of potential multi-component alloys, searching for compositions having desired properties and phase assemblages within a reasonable amount of time. in multi-component systems, an evaluation of a given property by factsage can be time-consuming, as it ranges from a few seconds up to a few minutes, depending on the system size and the calculation type. determining optimal alloys under a given set of



low-cost pcms with good performance in terms of heat storage capacity is a real challenge. a methodology to determine local minima of the liquidus surface is presented in gheribi et al.(2011). the technique consists of minimizing the freezing range. when a pcm solution



until no additional pcm solutions can be found. this method has be proven to be reliable, as it predicted with considerable accuracy the global minimum of the liquidus temperature in an eight-components salts system, for which the liquidus temperature was measured experimentally. more recently, the same procedure produced 30 new potential low-cost pcm materials with excellent heat storage capacity.



finally, nomad was used for metamaterials in audet et al.(2013), diest(2013). more specifically, these works aim to adapt the spectral response and near-field interactions of split ring resonator metamaterials, by tuning the spectral position of resonant reflection peaks and near-field interactions within the metamaterial over the near-infrared spectrum.



based on heuristics(e.g., genetic algorithms, simulated annealing, particle swarm optimization, etc.) these algorithms are designed to always yield results, which largely explains their popularity. however, the design engineer cannot characterize the optimality(or lack thereof) of the obtained results, as these heuristics are not supported by a useful convergence analysis(audet and hare, 2017).



the advent of modern direct search methods has offered an invaluable toolkit to design engineers for conducting derivative-free optimization whose results are supported by convergence theory. the first engineering design application reported in the literature utilized the direct ancestor of mads with mixed variable programming(audet and dennis, jr., 2001); a thermal insulation system was optimized with respect to categorical variables(number and material type of heat shields), resulting to a 65% improvement in performance relative to the best design known until then. an interesting feature of the design optimization problem was that the number of optimization variables was a function of one of the optimization variables. the analysis models and constraint handling procedure used in kokkolaras et al.(2001) were enhanced by abramson(2002, 2004), which led to even larger performance improvements.



design optimization of nanoparticles was performed in chamseddine et al.(2020) for a cohort of tumors which vary in sizean important clinical covariate. in this paper, the authors also optimized the drug diffusivity along with the nanoparticle size. the results suggested that integrating the selection of the drug and the nanoparticle size in practice may lead to better treatment outcomes.



talgorn et al.(2017) considered both nomad and gradient-based algorithms to solve the subproblems formulated by an interdisciplinary feasible architecture known as non-hierarchical analytical target cascading. results show that nomad yields higher-consistency solutions(i.e., solutions with smaller discrepancies among disciplinary subproblems), but with greater variance than the matlab implementation of an interior point gradient-based algorithm.



there are numerous applications of direct search methods in astrophysics. in a paper with more than 700 co-authors, nomad was used for a computationally intensive search for periodic gravitational waves carried out with the einstein@home volunteer distributed computing project.



kinematics analysis of galaxies are performed in ramakrishnan et al.(2019), revealing various deviations from pure circular rotation in the inner kiloparsec of seven galaxies, including kinematic twists, decoupled and counter-rotating cores. that paper states that the mads algorithm is becoming quite indispensable in practice.



this review focused on three particular application domains of blackbox optimization. over the past two decades, direct search methods and algorithms such as mads evolved through research motivated by a vast variety of applications. since its introduction in 2006, mads can now consider continuous and discrete,(including categorical) variables, handle blackbox constraints and multiple objectives, tackle increasingly larger problems(partially through parallelism), and, even solve stochastic blackbox problems.



