the rest of the paper is organized as following. section 2 introduces the proposed two methods for road edge detection. section 3 elaborates initial positioning based on road edge detection. section 4 gives out experiments. and finally section 5 concludes the work and points our future works.



color-based method uses both color feature and edge feature, as individual feature based detection suffers affect from shadow. colors on both sides of the road edge are usually very different, and the image gradient of road edge is generally very large. we look for colors of road area and non-road area around points with greater gradient, further to determine whether the points are road edge candidates.



the method is illustrated in the environment where the non-road area is green belt, and the right edge of the read is detection target, as a case. first canny edge extraction is done on the grayscale of the original image, and we denote it c. then the original image is transformed into hsv space and recorded as m.



binary image of m can be got using following formula for each point in m. white points in the binary image denote green points, and black points denote non-white points. f(x) is the pixel gray value. h and s are the h and s components of original pixel. 50-100 and 0-40 are h and s range interval for green pixel.



assume that the total number of candidate edge points is t; the number of points in c is p. if t and p satisfy the following formulas, it means that there may be no shadow on the road and the edge of the road is not clear. then the current method should be stopped by switching to threshold segmentation based method. otherwise, the method continues to fit the road edge line using road edge candidate points.



we convert the image into grayscale image and traversal through each pixel. according to maximum criteria of between-class variance, optimal threshold t can be got. transform the image into binary image using the optimal threshold, and then canny edge extraction is done. scan from left to right (if it is right edge detection) to get the first white pixels, and the road edge can be got by conducting hough transform upon these pixels.



