the market of mobile recently has been evolving rapidly and cloud computing is spreading into mobile as well. that is why mobile cloud computing is becoming a new issue today. cloud computing is the computing that provides virtualized it resources as a service by using internet technology. in cloud computing, a user lends it resources(software, storage, server, network) as needed, uses them, get a support of real-time scalability according to service load, and pays as he/she goes[1].



authentication and data security among cloud computing technologies are dealt with in this section. lim described it into 8 of categories in his paper[2] and traian andrei[3] also mentioned the same referring to gartner's[4]. so as to secure data of individuals or enterprises, authentication technology shall be offered basically. especially, in cloud computing, the availability of entire system can be falling when security a large volume of data, so an appropriate cipher should be used for the situation. also when something happens to the key-stored server, it is not possible for a lot of users to access to data, there should be a study on a key management. it is very important to study on fault tolerance and data recovery technologies when there is an incident in order to prevent a service discontinuance or data loss. examples of cloud service discontinuance and data loss are the examples of what problems can be caused when these mechanisms not work properly. he also described some security guidelines for cloud computing using what gartner says [4]. they are privileged user access, regulatory compliance, data location, data segregation, recovery, investigative support, and long- term viability.



ubidata project was suggested data process and synchronization and addresses these three challenges using an architecture and sophisticated hoarding, synchronization, and transcoding algorithms to enable continuous availability of data regardless of user mobility and disconnection, and regardless of the mobile device and its data viewing/processing applications[8, 9]. manuele kirsch-pinheiro proposed a context-based filtering process, aimed at adapting awareness information delivered to mobile users by collaborative web systems. this filtering process relied on a model of context which integrates both physical and organizational dimensions, and allows representation of the user's current context as well as general profiles. these profiles are descriptions of potential user contexts and express awareness information filtering rules to apply when the user's current context matches one of these rules. given a context, these rules reflect user preferences. they describe how the filtering process performs in two steps, the first for identifying the general profiles that apply, and the second for selecting awareness information[10].



there are no concrete security technologies in cloud computing, however, if we regard cloud computing as an extension of the existing it technologies, it is possible to divide some of them by each component of cloud computing and apply to[18]. access control and user authentication are representative as security technologies used for platforms. access control is the technology that controls a process in the operating system not to approach the area of another process. there are dac (discretionary access control), mac (media access control), and rbac(role-based access control). dac helps a user establish the access authority to the resources that he/she owns as he/she pleases. mac establishes the vertical/horizontal access rules in the system at the standard of security level and area for the resources and uses them. rbac gives an access authority to a user group based on the role the user group plays in the organization, not to a user. rbac is widely used because it is fit for the commercial organizations. technologies used to authenticate a user are id/password, public key infrastructure, multi-factor authentication, sso(single sign on), mtm (mobile trusted module), and i-pin[18].



the representative user authentication security technologies described above have some weaknesses. this section looks at user authentication security technologies and their weaknesses briefly[12, 18]. id/password: the representative user authentication method. it is simple and easy to use, but it has to have a certain level of complication and regular renewal to keep the security.pki(public key infrastructure): an authentication means using a public-key cryptography. it enables to authenticate the other party based on the certificate without shared secret information. in pki structure, it is impossible to manage and inspect the process of client side.



a user's profile specifies information of interest for an end user. so in this paper, the profile was consisted of user information part and service information part. user information part stored user's information such as user's name, inclination, hobby and service information part stored services that they were used such as service name, service provider etc.



this paper had a close look at access control and user authentication which are security technologies used in the platform in the cloud computing environment. in the cloud computing environment, misuse of access authority to resources and leak of personal information which should be used to authenticate a user could affect faster and more powerful compared to mono-system. for the effective user authentication in the cloud computing environment, the authentication technologies described above should be used by combining them suitably or a secure user authentication method for the right purpose of cloud computing should be developed. as a further research, a proper user authentication service model and protocol for cloud computing should be designed and developed.



