medication delivery is a complex multi-stage process that involves several healthcare professionals [5]. medication errors could occur at each step of the medication process [6], with 38% of errors occurring at the administration phase [7]. nurses spend about 40% of their time administering medications, and by virtue of their position represent the last safety defense to intercept errors before reaching their patients [8]. most hospitals relay on nurses to report medication errors, in some cases nurses might be the witness or committer of medication error [9].



in contrast with the traditional feedforward neural networks (fnns), which generally are trained by the well-known backpropagation (bp) algorithms, in elm, the wight for the hidden layer are randomly initiated and then fixed without iteratively tuning. then commonly used activa- tion functions are applied on the hidden neurons. the only parameters learned in elm are the weights between hidden layer and the output layer. in this way, the parameters of the hidden neurons can be inde- pendent of the training data, which makes it possible for elm to attain the near optimal generalization bound of traditional fnn. theoretical studies as in ref. [22,38,39] has shown that elm has the universal approximation and classification properties.



only marginal improvements when the adding more variables. in other words, adding extra variables does not improve the prediction ability by much. please see section 6.1, 6.2, and 6.3. 2) to create comprehensive visualizations for human, only a few variables should be used [49,50], and some study suggests that no more than 4 variables should use [51]. therefore, there are another set of screening rules to decide which variable sets from the selected top predictors to visualize. the two criteria used are: 1) there should not be more than 4 variables to be visualized. 2) if adding one more variable is not providing significant r2



conclusion: subjects who have very high trust and who have very low trust are both likely to report the error. however, subjects who have medium or medium low level of peer trust are uncertain whether they will report the error or not. how long have they been working in the unit also has some effect on the subjects for reporting the error.



subjects in theses cells are more willing to report as well. they are also relatively young to the current unit, between 4 and 5 years. how- ever, their trust to the peers are not too strong, on the margin of the low trust level: around 2 for both orgtrust questions and between 1 for to 2 for the warmclim question.



