an electric vehicle is one of the popular choices for vehicle owners. zero emission and a smooth driving experience are the potential reasons for it. according to majumder(majumder, 2021), the mechanical efficiency of an electric vehicle is between 60% and 70%, while the efficiency of a vehicle with an internal combustion engine is 18% to 22%(majumder, 2021). on the other side, short environmental protection agency(epa) range and charging issues keep people from electric vehiclesthe average range of gasoline-powered vehicles is 300 miles(bonges and lusk, 2016). in comparison, the average range of an electric vehicle is 110 miles(bonges and lusk, 2016). the battery of an electric vehicle is not capable of supporting long-distance driving



a number of other authors suggested that high annual-income households show more interest and are more likely to have electric vehicles at home than low-income households. the price of an electric vehicle is generally more expensive than other types of vehicles. furthermore, those earning more than 90,000 euros per year are more concerned about fuel efficiency, technical reliability, and safety, while households with less than 10,000 euros are concerned about financial savings. those who earn 10,000 euros per year and own electric vehicles are also concerned about the public charging availability and charging speed. therefore, the difference in income level enables people to have different thoughts about choosing an electric vehicle, which leads to two different decisions.



our study aims to use classification machine learning models to predict the current ownership of electric vehicles based on different income levels in the united states. in the modeling process, we decided to apply different classification models, which include svm, logistic regression, decision tree, and naive bayesian, to classify the ownership and identify the primary factor of different income levels in the united states. this research aims to find the primary factors that affect the likelihood of selecting an electric vehicle over other types of vehicles based on income level.



after cleaning the null values, there are 93% of bev owners with 7% from fcv owners from the original dataset, which is extremely unbalanced. fuel cell vehicle(fcv) owners are classified as class 0, while the owners of electric vehicle(bev) are classified as 1. we sample the 921 records of class 0 with replacements so that the data number of rows of class 0 is the same as the number of rows of class 1 so there will be enough data for us to train and test.



for all income levels, sovacoola, kesterb, noel, and rubens have found that the ownership of people under higher agessuch as government officials and retireesis under increasing trend for all income levels, even if there is little experience with the electric vehicle around them; they believed that elder people had short commuting distances and higher budgets. in addition, for large households, large households had more experience in electric vehicles than smaller households and were not willing to own an electric vehicle.



this work focused on identifying the primary features of choosing an electric vehicle by income level. we emphasize explainable machine learning methods, so we do not use complex methods such as neural networks in our study(aggarwal, 2018). we considered a number of such methods and found that the naive bayesian gives the highest accuracy for each income level. our results suggest that the one-way commuting distance is the most important factor for low-medium, medium-high, and high-income levels. our study has limitations on the local infrastructure, culture, and weather conditions. in the future, we hope to extend our work to more extensive datasets on electric vehicles.



