objectives: this study examines research out in decision-making and machine learning when evaluating and selecting players, considering their playing attributes(physical, technical, tactical and behavioral criteria) and how this process influences managerial-financial and sporting performance. player selection is a significant challenge for all clubs, involving multiple criteria that should be evaluated simultaneously. therefore, the process of hiring and line-ups must respect many sports and financial considerations. we aim to assess the main criteria by which decision-makers set line-ups and predict the impact of their choice on sport and financial performance. to this end, decision-making methods may help decision-makers recruit and select the best players, and machine learning algorithms would be appropriate for predicting sporting and financial performances following this selection. therefore, we provide a slr of books and papers published in journals and conference proceedings related to our research topic.



we also consider books and book sections on sports management and decisionmaking:(saaty and vargas, 1982; katzenbach and smith, 1993; saaty, 1996; j. katzenbach, 2009; dobson and goddard, 2001; tzeng and huang, 2011; ishizaka and nemery, 2013). we thoroughly review articles that answer three or more research questions. however, by focusing on these articles, we delve into studies with higher levels of complexity and depth. it is essential to note that our approach does not diminish the importance of articles that address fewer research questions. such studies can be valuable and insightful and often shed light on certain aspects of the topic. we also try to find articleson subjects not from the period selected for the proposed slr, to avoid omitting any relevant and useful articles. to this end, we use the connected papers website, a visual tool that helps researchers.



the reporting phase is designed to analyze and implement a literature review that addresses the research questions related to our topics. this phase addresses 66 studies from the conducting process and other works related to the main papers. section 1 reports the contribution of the literature to the study of the relationship between managerial and financial performance and sports performance(rq1). section 2 describes the main criteria and sub-criteria related to the football players involvedin the selection problem(rq2). section 3 presents the decision-making methods used to assist decision-makers in solving selection problems, referring to player criteria and sub-criteria(rq3). section 4 highlights hybrid models that integrate all technical and economic variables to help decision makers select the best players for a game(rq4).



rq2: what are the main criteria and sub-criteria for selecting football players? the selection of a football player includes many performance attributes, also known as criteria, such as technical, physical, mental, and behavioral attributes that have emerged from big data technologies. due to the increasing amount and different types of sports data, big data has become a challenge(bai and bai, 2021). specialized companies such as opta, fifa, and the websites of the official leagues provide an exponential number of datasets for big data research related to football analytics, focusing on individual player characteristics. in selecting the best player, nikjo et al.(2015) defines six criteria after questioning ten experts and three decision-makers. these criteria include technical and tactical skills, experience of professional play, average number of goals scored per game, ability to coordinate with the team, moral and behavioral features, and social prestige.



goal or reference level approach: this method defines a goal for each criterion, and then identifies the options closest to the ideal reference level or goal. this approach includes the technique for order preferences by similarity to an ideal solution(topsis) proposed by(hwang and yoon, 1981) to identify the best alternative based on the concept of the compromise solution, and data envelopment analysis(dea) formulated by to measure the performance of decision-making units(dmus) that convert multiple inputs into multiple outputs.



study proposes a two-phase approach for selecting football players. in the first phase, the attributes of each player at each position were prioritized using ahp. in the second phase, a 0-1 integer linear programming model was developed using the weights of player attributes and the best players were determined for inclusion in the team. the proposed solution was applied to a turkish football club to demonstrate its applicability and performance.



developed a data-driven framework to help professional football scouts evaluate, search, rank, and recommend football players. this tool, called playerank, is based on a machine learning approach. it uses a large dataset of football records consisting of millions of match events from four seasons of 18 well-known football competitions.



selecting a line-up of teams for a decisive competition is complex because many qualitative and quantitative criteria and sub-criteria must be considered. however, this process tends to be subjectively interpreted, depending on the experience of coaches and managers. mcdm approaches may assist decision-makers in making more objective decisions. in this context, the current research aims to produce a comprehensive report on the relationship between managerialfinancial and sporting performance, and the application of mcdmand machine learning algorithms in football team formation.



future research directions: although this highlighted the combined use of mcdm and machine learning for football player selection and performance prediction, future studies should incorporate more biometric and psychological data to refine these predictions. in addition, with rapid advancements in technology, the exploration of artificial intelligence(ai) techniques will ensure increased transparency in selection decisions. finally, the proposed methodology deserves to be studied in other sports contexts, paving the way for broader applications and interdisciplinary results.



