the exact reasons of preeclampsia are not well known so risk of it may be elevated by some factors such as the first pregnancy. also women with a history of preeclampsia and multiple gestations elevate the risk. furthermore, some disease present before pregnancy such as obesity, diabetes mellitus, insulin resistance, chronic hypertension, gestational diabetes, lupus, vascular or connective tissue disorders and also chronic kidney disease may be increase the risk of preeclampsia. high blood pressure during pregnancy is divided into four groups as recommended by the national high blood pressure education program working group on high blood pressure in pregnancy. the first group is chronic hypertension, the second group is gestational hypertension, the third group is mild and severe preeclampsia and the fourth group is preeclampsia superimposed on chronic hypertension. gestational hypertension and preeclampsia generally can be diagnosed by measurements of high blood pressure and proteinuria. also some symptoms may be associated with increasing in blood



pathogenesis of preeclampsia is influenced by oxidative stress. it could lead to tissue damage by the end. an adaptive mechanism promoting the antioxidant defense system in pregnant women to oppose the effect of oxygen active species through enzymatic antioxidants like superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase, catalase and also non-enzymatic antioxidants like reduced glutathione can hinder the occurrence of oxidative stress in preeclampsia. elevation of lipid peroxidation products causes impaired antioxidant enzyme defense mechanism and this imbalance may result in preeclampsia pathogenesis.



statistical package for the social sciences version 16.0(spss) was used in the study analysis. exploration of data revealed preserved normality. we used mean and standard deviation for description of the central tendency and dispersion. analysis of differences between two groups as regards quantitative parameters was done using independent t-test with the probability of<.05 considering significant. correlation between two quantitative parameters was assessed using pearson correlation with(r) representing the correlation coefficient and its significance was starred if<.05.



adipokines regulation problems may be present in the pathophysiology of insulin resistance, obesity, dyslipidemia and the metabolic syndrome. these findings were consistent with adipokine have been comprised in metabolic adaptations to health pregnancy, as well as in preeclampsia. the expression of visfatin is not only in adipose tissue but also in placenta, fetal membranes, neutrophils, myometrium, bone marrow, liver, kidney, heart, muscle, lung and macrophages. in this study placental visfatin gene expression level was decreased in all hypertensive pregnant women groups when compared with normotensive pregnant women group.



preeclampsia is related with elevated cardiovascular disease risk later in life. preeclampsia and cardiovascular risk factors have the same work in inflammation, insulin resistance, and obesity. since visfatin levels are increased in all above metabolic syndrome, authors were purposed that nampt may contribute to preeclampsia. ferreira et al. showed that serum visfatin levels in preeclampsia pregnant women were increased in comparison to pregnant controls. in contrast, other authors were proposed that expression of visfatin was decreased due to act as a proangiogenic factor so may be related to the pathogenesis of preeclampsia. thus, hu et al. showed that plasma nampt levels were decreased in mild preeclampsia and excessive decreased in severe preeclampsia. in the same idea, kim et al. reported that the expression of visfatin was decreased in placental biopsies in comparison to the nampt levels in placentas from normal pregnant.



dysfunction and so elevated the blood pressure in preeclamptic patients. in the present study, there was decreased in catalase activity, total antioxidant capacity and reduced glutathione levels in hypertensive pregnant women groups when compared with normotensive ones. a significantly reduced of antioxidant in preeclampsia may be due to increased attack of free radicals and thus resulted in low production of them. in contrast to this study, few others reported showed an increased in antioxidants.



lipid peroxidation has the main originator factor for oxidative stress and the etiopathogeneiss of preeclampsia. in this result, there was increased in malondialdhyde level in hypertensive pregnant women groups when compared with normotensive pregnant women group. products of lipid peroxidation are the candidate factors that mediate disturbance of the maternal vascular endothelium and may inhibit prostacyclin synthesis and also stimulate smooth muscle contraction that lead to widespread vasospasm, a prominent feature of preeclampsia.



