the research is aimed to accomplish an automatic visual inspection system for circular objects using cameras and image processing technique. the main concern of the paper is on the pattern analysis of circular objects based on image analysis. first, the authors propose a computational method using global symmetry to locate objects before the further inspection process. it aims at designing a symmetry measure based on distance weight, phase weight and intensity weight. such measure can be used to locate centers of circles, even for those with weak contrast under uncertain complex backgrounds. then based on the measure, similarities of arbitrary circular objects are given and tested. the experimental results for the proposed approach are promising.



when we look at an object with bad quality such as broken edges or contaminated surfaces, we can effortlessly perceive the abnormality without seeing a regular one. people possess a natural visual perception mechanism based on symmetry detection [1, 2]. accumulated evidences have indicated that symmetry detection appears to have great potentials for computer-vision-based applications [3, 4, 5].



however, few efforts have been put to implement symmetry into real vision-based applications. moreover, it is still a challenging task to extract objects under cluttered backgrounds, especially for objects with weak contrast and varying illuminations. for example, it is well known that there are many classical methods to find circles in images, such as moments, hough transforms, active contours, least-square methods [14, 15]. however, these methods completely fail when objects' gradients are weaker than those of their backgrounds.



it describes the symmetries of intensities, structures and directions. the extreme point of (6) means the point with the maximal symmetric measure. so it is center for circular objects. in cluttered backgrounds, the noise can be efficiently filtered out since it is irregular and non-symmetric.



in this paper, a systematic approach for robustly inspecting circular objects is given. the proposed symmetry measure, on the one hand, can directly be used to inspect circular objects with symmetric patterns. on the other hand, it can locate arbitrary circular objects under uncertain backgrounds. in the latter case, after the object is located, a content-based descriptor is used to achieve the inspecting task.



