this paper is organised as follows. we introduce the preliminaries in section 2. in section 3, we describe the aforementioned problem we need to overcome and bring in the necessary machinery which will help us attain the desired construction. throughout this paper, we assume that the reader has basic knowledge in quasimetric spaces, domain theory and category theory. we refer the reader for detailed treatment of quasi-metric spaces and domain theory[8,1,6] and category theory. in this paper, we use the following notations:



a similar concept is later on considered for quasi-metric spaces. indeed, there are several beautiful characterizations for the case of quasi-metric spaces as well and we refer the reader to[2,12,10] and for some of these results. in particular, we close this section with the celebrated kostanek-waszkiewicz theorem which is of utmost importance in obtaining our main result; it opens up for us an option of performing a dcpo completion`a la zhao and fan on the poset of formal balls instead of performing a yoneda completion directly in the environment of quasi-metric spaces.



we describe the intrinsic problem that plagues the space of formal balls, i.e., the mismatch between the convergence behaviour of directed sets and that of cauchy nets. to circumvent this problem, we introduce the notion of translational complete directed families in the space of formal balls.



not long ago, we have considered those mappings between quasi-metric spaces which preserve d-limits of cauchy nets and are non-expansive, i.e., the y-continuous maps. one can readily verify that the quasi-metrics spaces(respectively, yoneda complete quasi-metric spaces) and y-continuous mappings between them form a category, which we denote by qmet(respectively, yqmet). obviously, yqmet is a full subcategory of qmet. it is now clear that every quasi-metric space has a yoneda completion if and only if yqmet is a reflective subcategory of qmet with



admittedly, the construction of the idempotent yoneda completion is technical. thus, it helps to motivate our approach and present a proof sketch in order that the reader can have a quick overview of the underlying principles and processes involved. hopefully, this will make our journey through the thick technical forest in the next subsection a lot easier.



in section 3.4.3, we model after(zf3) to define the yoneda closed sets. lastly, we model after(zf4) to obtain the desired yoneda completion(in the sense of definition 3.6) by forming the yoneda closure of the embedded image of(x, d)



we say that a subset a of x is yoneda closed if every cauchy net in a has its d-limit(whenever it exists) in a. this is analogous to the d-closed subset on a poset, where a subset d is d-closed if it is closed under directed supremum([23,11]). unsurprisingly, the collection of yoneda closed subsets of a quasi-metric space forms the closed subsets of a topology, which we call the yoneda topology.



along our theoretical development, we also taken a closer look at quasi-metric space(x, d) in terms of a specific type of directed families, i.e., the translational complete ones, which gives essential information about the(existing) d-limit of its corresponding cauchy net. we are curious to find out if more properties of the quasimetric space(x, d) with regards to the d-limits of cauchy nets that can possibly be obtained via use of the g-topology and yoneda topology we introduced in this paper.



