Available online at www.sciencedirect.com



AASRI Procedia 3 (2012) 394 – 401




2012 AASRI Conference on Modeling, Identification and Control
Lead leachate from rubies undergone heat treatment process
Patcharin Lekkara, Arubol Chotipongb,c and Chakkaphan Sutthiratb,c,d,e*
a Inter-department of Environmental Science, Graduate School, Chulalongkorn University, Patumwan, Bangkok 10330 Thailand.
b Center of Excellence on Hazardous Substance Management (EHWM), Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330 Thailand.
c Environmental Research Institute, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330,Thailand.
d Department of Geology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330,Thailand.
e The Gem and Jewellery Institute of Thailand (Public Organization), ITF-Tower Building, Bangkok 10500, Thailand.


Abstract
Low quality rubies are usually undergone heat treatment to improve their color and clarity. Some chemical additives may have been added during the treatment. Consequently, some toxic elements, particular lead, have been concerned as well as durability of the treated stones. Lead leachates from treated ruby have therefore been investigated; besides, changes of color and clarity have also been observed throughout the experiment. Three-Stage Sequential Extraction Procedure (BCR) was applied for leaching experiment. This process consists of 3 steps including BCR1 (exchangeable step), BCR2 (reduction step) and BCR3 (oxidation step). This procedure has been suggested to represent natural processes that may altered materials including hazardous one. Apart from regular procedure, we also rearrange the step orders. This aims to find out the most effective condition of lead leaching. The results indicate that the most effective step seems to be BCR 3 which is an aggressive reaction compared to the other steps. However, BCR 2 also yields the highest lead concentration after activating initially by BCR I in series I. On the other hand, BCR1 is unable to extract lead from the treated ruby. Moreover, the appearances of rubies in each series have been altered towards the experimental steps and well corresponded to the concentrations of lead in leachate.

© 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute

 Keywords: Lead, Leaching, BCR, Ruby, Heat Treatment.	



* * Corresponding author. Tel.: +66-2-218-8112 ; fax: +66-2-218-8124
E-mail address: c.sutthirat@gmail.com; chakkaphan.s@chula.ac.th








2212-6716 © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute doi:10.1016/j.aasri.2012.11.062


Introduction

Thailand is a world famous market of colored stone. This is because of the good quality of natural gemstones sources, especially ruby and sapphire, together with the skilled craftsman for gem cutting as well as professional jewelry design and setting. Recently, good quality gem materials have reduced against increasing of price. This situation makes the lower quality gem material attracted the suppliers since their quality can be improved by heating process. According to the process heating with gas feeding, the changes in chemical structure of trace elements inside the stone may improve their color and clarity; this process is then so-classical  [Chucharuwong, 1999]. This process has been widely accepted in
the international gem markets, although a few chemical additives such as borax may also be added during the heat treatment for crack healing and consequent clarity improvement. However, heat treatments have been modified for a few decades; some chemical additives may have been added in the process with trial and error by the gem treaters. These also include lead glass which may lead environmental impact, particular human health, in case they can be altered by natural process and/or daily chemical reactions.
Up to date, none of organization has paid attentions to the harmful of the chemical residue left in these treated gemstones. Normally, these chemicals are possibly leached out during human daily life such as slightly acidic conditions (pH less than 7) when exposure to lime and lemon juices (pH 2.0-2.5), beer (pH 4.5- 5.0), orange juice (pH 3.0-3.5) [Nueanuansuwan, 2006] cow milk (pH 6.4-6.8) [Chuanchuen and Amonsin, 2006]. Moreover, human skins may also change slightly to acidic condition when sweat is excreted. Reducing conditions on skin can be happened by surrounding hydrogen and carbon dioxide. Utilities of toxic or corrosive chemicals in everyday life , such as calcium hypochlorite (Ca(OCl2)2) in cloth bleaching, sodium chlorate (NaClO3) in paper bleaching, disinfectant in tap water or swimming pool as well as oxygen gas in atmosphere, may leach oxidizing condition.
In this study, Three-Stage Sequential Extraction Procedure or BCR test which has been suggested by the Standard, Measurements and Testing program (SM&T), formerly called the    [Rauret et al., 1999] was applied for the leaching procedure of treated rubies claimed as classical heat treatment. This method has been used to determine heavy metal concentrations, especially cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, manganese, nickel, vanadium and zinc in soil or sediment. BCR three stages  composed of exchangeable, reduction, and oxidation steps. Kanjanabut et al., [2010] investigated the lead contents in lead glass-treated ruby from two companies and found that the lead contents increased towards steps of testing due to more corrosion of gems. However, in natural conditions, these three steps of leaching do not continuously occur in order. Therefore, this study was planned to alternate steps of the suggested sequences and investigated the effect of leaching steps to the lead content obtained.

Material and Method

Sample Source

Treated rubies were collected from 7 factories, nine stones of each factories which they announce classical heat treatment.

Three-Stage Sequential Extraction Procedure (BCR)

Each treated ruby was followed the leaching procedure of three-stage sequential extraction procedure (BCR), including: 1) Exchangeable step (BCR 1), 40 ml acetic acid (0.11 mol/l-1) was added, followed by16 h shaking; 2) Reduction (BCR 2), 40 ml hydroxylamine hydrochloride (0.5 mol/l-1) was added, followed by16 h shaking and 3) Oxidation (BCR 3), 10 ml hydrogen peroxide (8.8 mol/l-1) was added, followed by heating at 80±2ºC using hotplate until volume reduced to 3 ml, then 10 ml hydrogen peroxide (8.8 mol/l-1) was added


and further heating at 80±2ºC until 1 ml of solution remained, ammonium acetate (1.0 mol/l-1) was finally added to adjust the volume to 50 ml followed by 16 h shaking.

Sequential Orders

Sequential orders of BCR procedures were divided into 3 series as shown in Table 1

Table 1 Experimental series of BCR step procedures

Three-stage sequential extraction procedure BCR three stages

2.4. Lead Concentration

All solutions obtained from leaching steps were analyzed for lead concentration using Atomic Absorption Spectrometer (Perkin Elmer, Analyst 800).

2.5. Ruby Appearance

Observations of the gemmological appearance were carried out and photographed before and after all leaching steps.

Results and Discussion

The results of lead concentration (Tables 2-8) extracted from each series are described below.

Series I (BCR 1, BCR2 and BCR 3)

According to Series I, the highest lead concentrations leached from treated ruby seems to be extracted from BCR 2 (reduction step) except samples from factories 5 and 6 which BCR 3 gave more effect. The amounts of lead extracted from each step agreed well with the gemmological appearance which number of cracks was clearly appeared after passing BCR 2.

Series II (BCR 2, BCR3 and BCR 1)

BCR 3 (oxidation step) yielded significantly the highest lead concentration among the other steps. In addition, cracking in rubies is clearly seen in this step. However, samples from factories 1 and 7 seem to be exception.
BCR extraction appear to have no effect to treated rubies from factory 7 which lead concentration and cracking could not be observed throughout the tests.



Table 2 Lead concentrations in BCR leaching solutions (Factory 1).



Table 3 Lead concentrations in BCR leaching solutions (Factory 2).



Table 4 Lead concentrations in BCR leaching solutions (Factory 3) .





Table 5 Lead concentrations in BCR leaching solutions (Factory 4).



Table 6 Lead concentrations in BCR leaching solutions (Factory 5).





Table 7 Lead concentrations in BCR leaching solutions (Factory 6).



Ruby No.
Pb concentration mg/kg)
	Series 1	


Table 8 Lead concentrations in BCR leaching solutions (Factory 7).
Pb concentration mg/kg)

Ruby No.
	Series 1	






Fig.1 Comparison of gemological appearance of ruby and lead leached from BCR step (represented by samples of factory 2)

Series III (BCR 3, BCR1 and BCR 2)

BCR 3 (oxidation step) usually yielded the highest effect on extraction. Except samples from factories 1 and 7, BCR 1 obtained higher lead concentrations than those of BCR3. For samples of factories 2 to 6, cracks of rubies were appeared significantly by BCR3 step which they are compatible to lead concentrations in leachate. On the other hand, samples of factories 1 and 7 were clearly cracked after BCR1 test.
The extraction of lead and cracking can be representatively shown and compared by samples from factory 2 (Fig. 1).

Conclusions

It is noticeable that ruby undergone classical heat treatment process, which were claimed to have no lead compound, may yield lead contents ranging from 0-162 mg/kg
According to series I, treated rubies yield the highest lead content in BCR 2. For series II, BCR 2 has been carried out initially but it yield lower lead contents than that obtained from series I. This can suggest that BCR 2 may yield higher efficiency after activated by other BCR steps.
Results from all experimental series suggest that the most effective step seems to be BCR 3.
On the other hand, BCR1 has the least efficiency.

Acknowledgements

This research is financially supported by The Gem and Jewelry Institute of Thailand (GIT) and National Research University Project of Chulalongkorn University. The authors appreciate Dr. Bhuwadol Wanthanachaisaeng for his coordinating and collecting ruby samples from many sources. Thanks also go to GIT and Environmental Research Institute of Chulalongkorn University for laboratories and analytical


instruments.

References

Chucharuwong, K, Gemmology. Bangkok. Faculty of Science. Srinakharinwirot University. 1999.
Nueanuansuwan, S, Food safety. Bangkok. Department of veterinary public health. Faculty of veterinary Science. Chulalongkorn University. 2006.
Chuanchuen, R, and Amonsin, A, Book series of food safety: The quality of milk and products. Food safety. 2006.
Rauret G, Lo´pez-Sa´nchez J.F., Sahuquillo A, Rubio R, Davidson C, Ure A, Quevauviller Ph. Improvement of the BCR three step sequential extraction procedure prior to the certification of new sediment and soil reference materials. Jem Environment Monitering. 1999:1:57-61.
Kanjanabut, K, Chotipong, A, and Sutthirat, C,. Working towards a Procedural Standard in the Testing for both Stability and Assessment of the Impact on Health of Lead Glass-Treated Rubies and Beryllium-Treated Sapphire. The Journal of The Gemmological Association of Hongkong. 2010; 31:48-54.
