Recent developments in (Global) Optimization are surveyed in this paper. We collected and commented quite a large number of recent references which, in our opinion, well represent the vivacity, deepness, and width of scope of current computational approaches and theoretical results about nonconvex optimization problems. Before the presentation of the recent developments, which are subdivided into two parts related to heuristic and exact approaches, respectively, we briefly sketch the origin of the discipline and observe what, from the initial attempts, survived, what was not considered at all as well as a few approaches which have been recently rediscovered, mostly in connection with machine learning.

view some of the many heuristic computational approaches published in the literature in recent years (say, roughly after the publication of our book Locatelli and Schoen (2013), of which this paper might be consid- ered as a continuation). Section 4 surveys recent literature dealing with structured optimization problems for which an exact procedure can be designed. In Section 5 we briefly discuss some computational aspects and suggest sites where exhaustive lists of GO test problems and solvers can be found. Some concluding remarks are finally presented.

point of the next iteration. In Wales (2018) variants of BH are described in the context of energy landscapes for atomic clusters. Different accep- tance rules are proposed that differ from the classical monotonic and Metropolis-like acceptance rules, generalizations to multiple objectives in the exploration phase are introduced, and further refinements based on molecular dynamics are proposed.

It is worth noticing also that in the field of chemical physics many approaches are proposed in which GO methods (in particular, variations of basin hopping) are guided by knowledge on the prob- lem domain obtained through machine learning. As an example, in Meldgaard et al. (2018), low dimensional features are extracted from the original variables of atomic clustering problems and regression is used to assign an energy contribution to each atom in order to let GO algorithms focus on the parts of the current solution which contribute most to the objective function.

We conclude this section citing a paper which does not belong to the literature on algorithms but is quite relevant to the subject. The paper Kawaguchi (2016) deals with a conjecture on the absence of local optima which are not global when using a quadratic loss in training a deep neural network. The results proven there are interesting, as the problem is neither convex nor concave, yet it seems that training with a local optimization algorithm can always lead to a global optimum solution, thus partially explaining the success of local methods in training neural networks.

We conclude this section by mentioning problems for which a polynomial-time solution algorithm is not available but for which polynomial-time approximation schemes are available. In Bomze and de Klerk (2002) a Polynomial Time Approximation Scheme (PTAS) is introduced for the StQP problem. The PTAS is based on the evaluation of the objective function over a uniform grid. In de Klerk et al. (2006), lection C is empty. In some cases, a further collection g is maintained. Such collection contains all subsets over which the lower bound is not higher than the current upper bound. Then, when the algorithm stops (i.e., when the collection C is empty), the subsets in the collection g

sue of the finiteness of B&C methods has been widely investigated in the past and for this we refer to GO textbooks like Horst and Parda- los (1995), Horst et al. (2001) and Horst and Tuy (1993). In what follows we discuss the most recent developments related to the main operations of B&C approaches emphasized above. Note that we are not going to discuss operations like upper bounding and fathoming since these are rather standard operations for which significant developments cannot be expected. For what concerns fathoming we only observe that, be- sides the standard rule based on the comparison between lower and upper bounds, in some cases it is possible to introduce fathoming rules based on optimality conditions. In particular, one can remove subsets from C for which it is possible to guarantee that they do not contain points fulfilling necessary optimality conditions.

ucts of rectangles and right-angled triangles. For linear sum-of-ratios problems in Kuno (2005) cartesian products of trapezoids are used, while for the same problem Locatelli (2015a) employs cartesian prod- ucts of rectangles and right-angled triangles as in Linderoth (2005). The use of these geometrical forms is strictly related to the development of tight under- and over-estimators for bilinear and bivariate fractional functions over the two-dimensional regions appearing in the cartesian products, i.e., rectangles, right-angled triangles and trapezoids.

For poorly structured GO problems we should also mention meth- ods based on interval arithmetic. These are rigorous methods, i.e., they guarantee the detection of a solution within a prescribed tolerance even in the presence of rounding errors. The overall number of contributions in this field in the last two decades is relatively limited, but there are some interesting works. We first mention the two surveys (Araya and Reyes, 2016; Neumaier, 2004), to which we refer for a more detailed discussion about the topic. In some works first and second order infor- mation are employed both to define linear and quadratic underestimat- ing functions and to fathom (or shrink) boxes which are guaranteed not to include points satisfying first and second order necessary optimality conditions (see, e.g., Hansen et al., 2007; Markot and Schichl, 2014; semidefinite. The resulting SDP bound has a good quality but is costly. Conversely, SOCP relaxations, obtained by replacing quadratic functions with convex quadratic underestimating functions, have a poorer qual- ity but are faster to compute. For this reason in Burer et al. (2014) it is proposed to construct mixed SOCP-SDP relaxations which allow for a balance between the quality of the bound and the time needed to com- pute it.

Papp and Yildiz (2019) discusses an alternative and cheaper way to rep- resent SOS polynomials. The bound based on the SOS relaxation (and its dual counterpart, the moment relaxation, see Lasserre, 2001) has been strengthened with the definition of hierarchies of bounds both for the unconstrained and the (polynomially) constrained case, which have been discussed in different papers such as, e.g., de Klerk et al. (2017a,b), Lasserre (2001, 2005, 2006), Laurent (2007), Nie (2013), Nie (2014),

Most of the papers cited in this work report computational experi- ments on different sets of test problems and with different solvers. Dis- cussing in detail computational experiences, test functions and solvers is beyond the scope of the current work. However, we make a few ob- servations and, for the interested reader, we provide pointers to papers and web sites where these aspects are presented in more detail.

The outcome of the computational experiments reported in all these works is that none of the proposed methods strictly dominates the oth- ers. The method proposed in Xia et al. (2020), as well as problem spe- cific ones proposed in Gondzio and Yildrim (2021), Liuzzi et al. (2019), are the best performing over the subclass of StQP problems. The ap- proach proposed in Bonami et al. (2018) performs quite well over the subclass of Box QP problems and techniques proposed in that paper have been successfully incorporated in CPLEX. However, for Box QP prob- lems with dense Hessian matrices the best approach appears to be the one proposed in Chen and Burer (2012). Finally, the approach proposed in Liuzzi et al. (2021) is the best performing over the subclass of QP

Molecular conformation problems lead to challenging GO problems, with a number of local minimizers which grows exponentially with the number of atoms. Exact methods can be applied only at very small dimensions (i.e., with a small number of atoms). But many excellent heuristic approaches exist. Also in this case the best performing ap- proaches strongly rely on special properties (in particular, geometrical properties) of the molecular conformation problems (see, e.g., Ferreiro- Ferreiro et al., 2019; Wales, 2018; Zhao et al., 2017).

which discusses some guidelines to perform a fair comparison be- tween different solvers. Finally, CEC competitions offer the opportunity of comparing with many different algorithms, while within the con- text of GECCO-BBOB workshops, the Comparing Continuous Optimizers (COCO) platform allows for automated benchmarking. Users can bench- mark their own solvers over a wide set of test functions and compare their results with those of other solvers.

