A minor novelty is that we experiment with using an abstract symbolic rep- resentation of Kripke structures. Most formal presentations of BMC conflate a description of the BMC translation from LTL syntax to propositional logic syntax with a description of its semantics, and only informally refer to possible symbolic representations (for example, using propositional formulae, BDDs or Boolean cir- cuits) of Kripke structures. Our approach allows us to keep the translation and semantics distinct. While our approach is more verbose, we argue that it is easier to understand, especially when handling the auxiliary variables introduced by our translation.

The structure of the rest of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we present the foundations of our denotational approach, closely following the logic of the original BMC translation from [2]. Section 3 then gives a high-level overview of our new translation. The translation is split into two phases: the normalisation phase is covered in Section 4 and the translation to propositional logic phase in Section 5. Section 6 covers related work and we draw our conclusions in Section 7.

The original translation of [2] consists of step 2 without steps 1 and 3. Even with careful optimisations, the size of the original translation is claimed in [7] to be cubic in the worst case. Our normalisation in step 1 enables the factoring for linear size in step 3.

The BMC journal paper [1] gives a translation exploiting fixpoint characterisations, though the encoding size is not linear in the bound. As written, the translation is not sound: it appears to be using a greatest fixpoint characterisation for all the LTL operators which is clearly unsound for F and U. We speculate that this mistake could have been avoided if the translation had been derived within a formal framework such as presented in this paper.

Cimatti, A., M. Roveri and D. Sheridan, Bounded verification of past LTL, in: A. J. Hu and A. K. Martin, editors, Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Formal Methods in Computer Aided Design (FMCAD 2004), Lecture Notes in Computer Science (2004).

