controlling, as they are not associated with the problems [6]. Sev- eral research has been carried out to make eco-friendly repellents and larvicidal activity using plants [7,8]. Medicinal plants are found to be the alternative medicine used since ancient times to cure many diseases due to their therapeutic values. Medicinal plants have many characteristics which make them useful for treatments, they are synergic medicine, supportive medicine and preventive medicine [9].

methods. They also find place in the insecticides like nanomaterials-based insecticides. They provide green and efficient alternatives for pest management without harming the nature. The atom by atom arrangement of nanoparticle influences their size, shape and orientation to act specifically on the targeted site. The nanoparticle possess more strength, chemical reactivity and a high electrical conductivity, along with their physical, biological and chemical properties.

The silver nanoparticle efficacy depends on the particle size and their shape. The previous studies shows that reducing agents like borohydride gave smaller monodisperse silver nanoparticles. The use of less reducing agent like citrate gave a slower reducing rate. The chemical synthesis of nanoparticle resulted in toxic and less effective nanoparticles. Green synthesis of nanoparticle is eco-friendly and less toxic. The green synthesis of nanoparticle depends on the selection of substances which are nontoxic, solvents and reducing agent for stability of silver nanoparticles. The experiment is designed to validate the applications of folklore medicine to control the prevalence of diseases.

The whole plant samples of Phyllanthus amarus, Annona squa- mosa, Coccinia grandis and Eclipta prostrata were collected from bottom of Kolli Hills, Namakkal District. These scientific names of these plants were morphologically identified using the database and classified based on their family and authenticated. The fresh leaves were collected, washed and shade dried. The leaves were coarsely powdered by using electric blender and stored separately in an air tight container for further use.

The assay was carried out according to guidelines of WHO (1996), larvae are added to 249 ml of water and 1.0 ml of prepared plant extracts by maintaining five replicates. The control will be maintained without extract and the replicates are left for exposure for 24 h. Then the number of viable larvae will be reported for assessment of mortality rate from the mean of triplicates. The extracts showing higher activity will be considered for further studies.

(1000 ppm) was prepared by combination of 100 ml of distilled water, 0.4 ml of acetone, 100 mg of extract and 0.02 ml of Tween 20 (for complete dissolution of extract). By diluting further, solu- tions of concentration 1000, 500, 250 ppm was obtained. Negative control was maintained for all the samples containing only solvent without extract. A commercial liquidator was used as positive con- trol at three concentrations.

IR spectroscopy study has confirmed that the carbonyl group of amino acid residues and peptides of proteins has a stronger ability to bind metal, so that the proteins could most possibly form a coat covering the metal nanoparticles (i.e. capping of Ag NP) to prevent the agglomeration of the particles, and thus, the nanoparticles are stabilized in the medium [19].

The XRD patterns clearly demonstrates that the AgNPs formed in the current synthesis were crystalline in nature. The sharpening of the peaks clearly specifies that the particles are in the nanore- gime. Nanoparticle XRD patterns exhibit several different size- dependent features leading to anomalous peak positions, intensity and widths. Appearances of these peaks are due to the presence of phytochemical compounds in the extracts. The stronger planes indicate Ag NPs as a key element in the biosynthesis. The minor shift in the peak positions in all the samples indicated the presence of some strain present in the crystal structure [21].

It is evident that there is a global alarm is in raise against vector control due to the development of resistance in vector mosquitoes over conventional insecticides. Hence the present study focuses on the development of larvicides using medicinal plants like Phyllan- thus amarus, Annona squamosa, Coccinia grandis and Eclipta pros- trata and to validate its traditional usage. An attempt is made to green synthesize silver nanoparticles from whole plant and to identify its lethal effect over mosquito larva.

Larvicidal activity was evaluated against Aedes aegypti and the results revealed that ethyl acetate and petroleum ether extracts of all the terrestrial plants were effective. The Eclipta prostrata extract exhibited higher mortality when ethyl acetate, petroleum ether and hexane were used as solvents. Annona squamosa demon- strated does dependent activity against Aedes larvae. Only petro- leum ether and ethyl acetate extracts of Phyllanthus amarus explicated considerable activity. The least activity on Aedes species was seen in Coccinia grandis. Our study is in line with the previous study representing larvicidal activity using medicinal plants [22]. Also it was found that the extracts demonstrated concentration dependent activity, ie. increase in mortality rate with increase in concentration of extract. The results are in coincidence with the previous reports exploring dose dependent activity supported by the presence of phytochemicals which have insecticidal property [22,23].

During the trail with Culex larvae the petroleum ether, ethyl acetate extracts of the terrestrial plants were effective. The highest activity was observed in petroleum ether, ethyl acetate, hexane and methanol extracts of E. prostrata. Similarly, Annona squamosa and Phyllanthus amarus ethyl acetate and petroleum ether extracts represented effective mortality against Culex larvae. Previous reports suggest that the biological activity of plant extracts might be due to the presence of various compounds, including phenolics, terpenoids, and alkaloids present in plants [24]. The finding of the present study revealed that these phytoconstituents present in the plant extracts has represented pronounced effect over mosquito larvae. Among the tested plant extract Eclipta prostrata and Annona squamosa demonstrated effective larvicidal activity against Culex larvae and are quite comparable with previous reports of Raheli et al., [25] representing larvicidal activities of leaf extracts of Indigofera arrecta.

Researchers has reported that synthesized AgNPs may have sig- nificant impact on malaria causing vectors and our results are in line with the previous results [17,18,26] similarly, Velayutham et al., [27] reported silver nanoparticles synthesized using bark aqueous extract of F. racemosa represented maximum larvicidal activity against the larvae of disease spreading vectors which is agrement with our study.

