Network Science (a.k.a. Complex Network Analysis) is an emerging area of interest in the big data paradigm and corre- sponds to analyzing complex real-world networks and theoret- ical model-based networks from a graph theory point of view. Among the various measures used for complex network anal- ysis, node centrality is a prominently used measure of immense theoretical interest and practical value. The centrality of a node is a link statistics-based quantitative measure of the topo- logical importance of the node with respect to the other nodes in the network [1]. Applications for node centrality metrics could be for example to identify the most influential persons in a social network, the key infrastructure nodes in an Internet, the super-spreaders of a disease, etc. The existing centrality metrics could be broadly classified into two categories [1]: neighbor-based and shortest path-based. Degree centrality (DegC) and Eigenvector centrality (EVC) [2] are well-known measures for neighbor-based centrality, while Betweenness centrality (BWC) [3] and Closeness centrality (ClC) [4] are well-known measures for shortest path-based centrality. Vari-

tance for identifying highly modular nodes in complex net- works, most of the research focus in the literature has been on a related measure called the maximum clique size - the size of the largest clique in a graph. As the problems of determining both the maximum clique size and maximal clique size are NP-hard [7], we decided to adapt an exact algorithm for deter- mining maximum clique size in a graph to determine the maxi- mal clique size for the vertices in the graph. We choose the recently proposed exact algorithm by Pattabiraman et al. [9] for maximum clique size of a graph and slightly modify it to determine the maximal clique size of the individual vertices in a graph.

For each vertex vi, to start with, the maximal clique size known until then is 0; so, we construct the candidate set of ver- tices (U) involving all the neighbors of vi and pass them to the subroutine CLIQUE. We could retain all the pruning strate- gies (discussed in Section 3.1) in the subroutine CLIQUE: we need not explore node u (chosen from the set U) and its neigh- bors if their degree is smaller than the value of size (the max- imal clique size involving vertex vi) known until then. For to occupy a relatively larger fraction of the shortest path between any two vertices and incur a relatively larger BWC value compared to vertex 4 (even though vertex 4 has a larger EVC value). Also, even though vertex 3 has a larger degree than vertex 1, the BWC of vertex 1 is significantly larger than that of vertex 3. This could be attributed to vertex 1 lying on the shortest path from vertices 0 and 2 to vertices 4, 5, 6 and 7; on the other hand, vertex 3 lies only on the shortest path between 2 and 5.

The correlation coefficient values obtained for all the three measures range from -1 to 1. Correlation coefficient values clo- ser to 1 indicate a stronger positive correlation between the two metrics considered (i.e., a vertex having a larger value for one of the two metrics is more likely to have a larger value for the other metric too), while values closer to -1 indicate a stronger negative correlation (i.e., a vertex having a larger value for one of the two metrics is more likely to have a smaller value for the other metric). Correlation coefficient values clo- ser to 0 indicate no correlation (i.e., the values incurred by a vertex for the two metrics are independent of each other). We will adopt the ranges (rounded to two decimals) proposed by Evans [16] to indicate the various levels of correlation,

US Politics Book Network (PN; ksp = 1.42): This is a network of 105 books (nodes) related to US Politics that were sold in Amazon.com; there is an edge between two nodes if customers who bought one of the two books also bought the other book and vice versa.

C. Elegans Neural Network (NN; ksp = 1.68): This is a network of 297 neurons (nodes) in the neural network of the hermaphrodite Caenorhabditis Elegans; there is an edge between two nodes if the corresponding neurons interact with each other (in the form of chemical synapses, gap junctions and neuromuscular junctions).

Erdos Collaboration Network (EN; ksp = 2.28): This is a network of 472 authors (nodes) who have either directly published an article with Paul Erdos or through a chain of collaborators leading to Paul Erdos. There is an edge between two nodes if the corresponding authors have co-authored at least one publication.

US Airports Network (AN: ksp = 3.22): This is a net- work of 332 airports (nodes) in the US in the year 1997. There is an edge between two nodes if there is a direct flight connection between the corresponding airports.

connected regime [22] and has a single giant component with no isolated nodes or clusters. For plink P 1/n (i.e., plink P 0.01 for n = 100 nodes) and plink < ln(n)/n, we could refer to the random network to be in the supercritical regime [22] with a sin- gle giant component, but with one or more isolated nodes or clusters. Hence, for a random network under evolution accord- ing to the ER model, we could conclude that the centrality met- rics exhibit at best a moderately positive correlation with the maximal clique size in the fully connected regime, whereas the degree centrality and closeness centrality metrics exhibit a strong-very strong positive correlation with the maximal clique size in the supercritical regime.

In this section, we discuss the results of correlation analysis obtained for scale-free network graphs generated from the well-known Barabasi Albert (BA) model [13]. The BA model for network evolution is based on the notion of preferential attachment: i.e., a newly introduced node prefers to attach itself to nodes with relatively larger degree. In addition to the total number of nodes (n) in the network, the BA model

Overall, the work presented in this paper could serve as a framework for evaluating the various levels of correlation (inclusive of identifying the best-case and worst-case scenarios) between any two metrics for complex network graphs (both real-world and theoretical). We qualitatively categorize the levels of correlation based on the quantitative values of the correlation coefficient observed. We also show that the compu- tationally light-weight centrality metrics (especially the neighbor-based degree and eigenvector centrality metrics) could serve as alternate metrics to rank the vertices of a net- work graph in lieu of the maximal clique size, a computation- ally hard metric. The above assertion holds true for real-world networks and scale-free networks, but, not for random net- work graphs (for which we observe only a moderately positive correlation).

