Formal methods are powerful specification and verification techniques for establishing high confidence in safety-critical systems. However, there are a number of concerns about the use of evidence generated from formal methods, when used in place of conventional testing, for satisfying certain certification objectives. In this paper, we address this issue by reviewing two certification documents, DO-178B and the UK Defence Standard 00-56, focusing on their approach to accepting formal analytical evidence. We also present a generic goal-based safety case that can be instantiated to facilitate the justification and presentation of formal analysis to the certification authorities. The safety case is based on claims about (1) the achievement

The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Sections 2 and 3 examine the consideration of formal analytical evidence in DO-178B and Defence Standard 00-56. The safety case concept is introduced in Section 4. Section 5 explores the role of GSN in communicating safety case arguments. In Section 6, we present a generic GSN argument for the justification of formal analysis. The paper concludes with a summary in Section 7.

In the context of developing, agreeing, and maintaining the safety arguments within the safety case, the biggest problem with the use of free text is in ensur- ing that all stakeholders involved share the same understanding of the argument. Without a clear and shared understanding of the argument, safety case manage- ment is often an inefficient and ill-defined activity. The following section describes a structured technique that has been developed to address the problems of clearly expressing and presenting safety arguments.

The key benefit experienced by those companies adopting GSN is that it im- proves the comprehension of the safety argument amongst all of the key project stakeholders (i.e. system developers, safety engineers, independent assessors and certification authorities). In turn, this has improved the quality of the debate and discussion amongst the stakeholders and has reduced the time taken to reach agree- ment on the argument approaches being adopted.

Successful industrial case studies are also important as they have the potential to demonstrate the effectiveness of formal analysis through generating empirical data. It is necessary for the case studies to show how the formal technique inte- grates consistently with other design and assessment techniques. These case studies should be based on real safety-critical systems. Further, the case studies should be carried out in the context of the assumed authenticity of the selected formal models. Any known limitations of the formal analytical technique should also be communi- cated, which may be specific to the context of a project. For example, the ability to demonstrate correspondence between the mathematical model and the software behaviour at run-time is critical [5]. Otherwise, confidence in formal analysis would

The previous sections address the need to formulate a compelling certification ar- gument which can provide strong, relevant and sufficient evidence that a formal analytical technique satisfies the certification objectives. However, there are always concerns about the practicality of applying formal analytical approaches. There is a misconception that formal specification and analysis are a pure theoretical exercise despite the many successful industrial implementations [6].

In this paper, we have reviewed two certification documents, DO-178B and the UK Defence Standard 00-56, focusing on their approach to accepting formal analytical evidence. We have also presented a generic safety case that can be instantiated to facilitate the presentation and justification of formal analysis. The safety case is based on claims about (1) the achievement of the intents of the certification objectives, (2) the demonstration of the trustworthiness of formal analysis and (3) the practical feasibility of deploying formal methods within a specific project.

