Railway operators have to solve many complex decision problems in order to achieve high quality of service at reasonable cost. One of them is the shunting problem: outside the rush hours there is surplus of rolling stock, and, especially during the night, passenger trains have to be parked in a shunting depot. A major complicating issue is the fact that trains are restricted in their movements by the railway infrastructure of the depot. A depot consists of a set of tracks and, depending on the type of tracks, the depot is called shunting yard or marshalling yard. In the first case all the tracks can be approached from one side only, in a marshalling yard each track can be approached from

The literature on the shunting problem includes works of Winter and Zim- merman [14] and Blasum et al. [1] for dispatching trams. In this two papers all arrivals take place before the first departure. Gallo and Di Miele [4] discuss an extension of their work on bus dispatching in a depot taking in account mixed arrivals and departures. In [10] the shunting problem for passenger train units is faced and several aspects of this problem are discussed along with some mathematical models. Other papers [9,8] deal with the problem of rearranging cars of trains in a train depot.

The paper is organized as follows: after a section on notations and basic concepts, in Section 3, we discuss the case in which the last train arrives before the first departing train. We show some results related to four subproblems which arise by imposing some constraints on the arrival and departure direc- tions. In Section 4 the case of departures before the last arrival is discussed both for shunting and marshalling yards. The last section deals with some open problems.

For the problems of this section, we generally assume that the depot topology is a marshalling one, that is each track can be approached from both sides. We do not take into account the lengths of trains and tracks. That is, we assume that each track is long enough to host the trains assigned to it. We also assume that the first departure takes place after the last arrival: This could be the case of a depot used during the night. In the next section, we

SISO problem: Single Input, Single Output. In this case we assume that each track can be approached by one side and left from the other side, that is the tracks are used as queues. We also discuss the case in which the tracks are used as stacks (that is the inputs and the outputs of the trains are done from a single side and the other is not accessible). This is the case of a shunting yard.

|A| > |B|, then, by using the Pigeonhole Principle, there exist si and sj such that f (si) = f (sj) for some i /= j, i.e., (xi, yi) = (xj, yj). Without loss of generality, let us suppose i < j. Then, either si < sj or si > sj. If si < sj, then xi < xj by definition of (xi, yi) and (xj, yj), a contradiction. If si > sj, then yi > yj, a contradiction.

Lemma 4.1 Let be a family of intervals associated to a set of trains T . The GSISO problem on a shunting yard for the set T can be solved with k tracks if and only if there exists a k-coloring of G[I].

