The structure of the paper is the following: in Section 2, the basic defi- nitions and notation of the graphical approach are given. In Section 3, some conditions for extending the composition of monads to a monad are presented and proved using the graphical approach. As an example, in Section 4 we introduce the problem of generalising sets of terms as the composition of suit- able powerset monads and the term monads, which raise our interest in the problem of composing monads and in a visual interface to make the corre- sponding calculations. Some conclusions are presented in Section 5. Finally, an appendix is introduced containing a standard proof of Proposition 3.2, just to see how the properties of natural transformations are more naturally han- dled in the graphical approach, so that one can abstract them from the main line of reasoning.

In this section we refer to some examples of monads and swappers that provide monad compositions. This example is interesting in that sufficient conditions for a composition of monads to be a monad were obtained using the graphical approach introduced above, and it illustrates how the complexity of checking monad conditions can be reduced to checking only a few sufficient conditions. Let L be a completely distributive lattice. For L = {0, 1}, write L = 2.

The impact of the paper is two-fold. On one hand, we contribute to meth- ods and tools for generating monad compositions. In particular, we focus on composing various powerset monads with the term monad in order to pro- vide generalised terms for extended many-valued logic programming. On the other hand, we provide a categorical instrumentation for unification in the framework of using generalised terms.

Proving composability conditions is complicated as the complexity of the functors increase. The graphical support is beneficial in that composability proofs are expected to reveal further examples of monad compositions that provide useful scenarios for generalised terms. Not only is the graphical ap- proach a theoretical tool for a better understanding of the composition of natural transformations, but computing with natural transformations could be, to some extent, automatised and managed with such a graphical interface.

