The multi-depot open vehicle routing problem (MDOVRP) differs from the classical VRP in that there is more than one depot and the vehicle does not need to return to a depot after serving the last customer. For solving this challenging problem, we propose a hybrid metaheuristic algorithm (GATS-PR) which integrates the granular adaptive tabu search with path relinking. The main contributions of this work consist of introducing a solution- based tabu search technique in granular tabu search, designing an adaptive neighborhood selection method for the large neighborhoods with 22 kinds of move types, and adopting path relinking with a new similarity definition to the MDOVRP for the first time. Computational results on 24 public instances demonstrate that GATS-PR outperforms the previous state-of-the-art algorithms in the literature. Specifically, GATS-PR improved and matched the previous best known results on 4 and 19 instances, respectively.

The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, related work about the MDOVRP is presented. The definition of the MDOVRP is given in Section 3. Section 4 describes the proposed GATS- PR in detail. In Section 5, parameter tuning, computational results and importance analysis of the proposed algorithmic components are re- ported. Conclusion is given in Section 6.

a mixed integer programming (MIP) formulation of the MDOVRP was proposed and solved with CPLEX. In [11] and [16], subtour elimina- tion constraints of [8] were improved and constraints related to the minimum vehicle number and the first customer to visit were added. In [10], a two-index vehicle flow formulation was proposed to solve the open location routing problem and the MDOVRP. In [12], the MIP model designed for the multi-depot open location routing problem with a heterogeneous fixed-charge fleet was adapted for the MDOVRP and solved with CPLEX.

which applies granular local search in the intensification phase and the tabu shaking mechanism in the diversification phase. A multi-start metaheuristic algorithm was designed in [12], which consists of a con- structive heuristic and an iterated local search algorithm to solve the MDOVRP. In [29], a tabu search algorithm was designed for the simul- taneous scheduling of multi-project construction and vehicle routing, and it was adapted to the MDOVRP.

for distinct move types within each category. For example, relocating one customer has a smaller impact on the solution than relocating a lot of customers. By designing large composite neighborhoods with differ- ent functions and impact degrees, the algorithm can select appropriate move types in different search phases and achieve the balance between intensification and diversification of the search.

were selected to tune parameters. Note that similar statistics can be ob- served on the remaining instances. Because the local search procedure GATS and the path relinking operator are relatively independent, their parameters were tuned by applying GATS and GATS-PR to these in- stances, respectively. For each parameter, a default value and possible values were given. When tuning a parameter, other parameters were fixed to default values to avoid explosions in the number of parame- ter combinations. We first tuned GATS-related parameters and set their default values to the selected values when tuning path relinking-related parameters. Three independent runs were performed for the selected in- stances. In order to normalize the results of different instances, the sum

After excluding solutions obtained at the earliest stage of the search, GATS-PR always outperforms No-ANS on these four in- stances. Although No-Group obtains better solutions than GATS- PR at the middle stage of the search on instance pr05, it obtains worse solutions at the end of the search. On other three instances, No-Group is outperformed by GATS-PR. These observations demon- strate the importance of ANS again.

In future research, we intend to apply GATS-PR to other VRP-related problems, such as the multi-depot VRP and the multi-depot green VRP. The advanced population management mechanism is another topic that deserves to be investigated. We are also going to design other similarity definitions between solutions and integrate them to improve the search capability of path relinking to solve the MDOVRP.

