We introduce and motivate a non-standard multi-modal logic to represent and rea- son about ignorance in Multi-Agent Systems. We argue that in Multi-agent systems being able to reason about what agents ignore is just as important as being able to reason about what agents know. We show a sound and complete axiomatisation for the logic. We investigate its applicability by restating the feasibility condition for the FIPA communication primitive of inform.

nested one into another. It has long been argued that modal logic provides a possible solution for these problems. Indeed, many of the most important and widely used approaches to model Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) are now based on various modal logics [1].

A considerable amount of research has gone in the past 20 years into ex- ploring the formalisations of concepts such as knowledge and beliefs in MAS. Many of the most successful theories we now have (such as the area of epis- temic logic, variations of the BDI model, etc.) are based on earlier work in AI, or philosophical logic. For example, the foundations of the modern use of epistemic logic (such as the one proposed in [6]) can be found in the work of Hintikka and Aumann of the 1950s. The basis for the BDI work ([16,17]) take inspiration from the work of Bratman, and Cohen [2], [4]. This is not to say that work in MAS theories consists simply in a rediscovery exercise of previously explored ideas. The theories as they are used now are considerably more refined than they were at the time, and they are now integrated with specification and verification techniques from software engineering (witness recent progress in verification of MAS theories [9,15].

Still, while it is encouraging that the field of MAS has taken inspiration from successful theories first appeared elsewhere, it would be interesting to see whether MAS call for the use of previously unexplored concepts. One way this may happen in MAS theories is for a logic arising directly from MAS studies, and applications. In this paper we argue that this may be the case for the concept of ignorance.

intruder with respect to the content of the messages is preserved. We argue that in these and other examples a key property that we want to reason about is states of ignorance. Note that by ignorance we do not mean the mere lack of knowledge, but something stronger. When an agent does not know a fact

The rest of this paper is organised as follows. In Sections 2 and 3 we give a formal account of ignorance, establishing some of its properties. In Section 4, we investigate a richer framework where ignorance is paired with the classical operator for knowledge. In Section 5 we show how the operator of ignorance can be used to simplify the semantic definition of the communication act of inform as defined in FIPA semantics. We conclude in Section 6.

In order to show completeness we build maximal consistent sets of formulas and show that the canonical model for the logic Ig can be built on these. Although the canonical model construction will be non-standard, much of the background definitions that we use are standard. In particular we assume the usual definitions for logical consistency, and maximal consistent sets. We refer to [1] for details. Since we only refer to system Ig in this section we shall refer

Now that we have a result for a basic system for ignorance we can ask the question of how this relates to what is known already in epistemic logic [6]. Af- ter all the semantics that we have used is based on the one for epistemic logic: we regard two points as related if the agent considers the two as epistemically indistinguishable. What we have done so far amounts to using this semantic concept to express ignorance as opposed to knowledge. But since intuitively it must be possible to build a correspondence between the two concepts, the curious reader must then be left wondering whether ignorance can in fact be precisely expressed in terms of knowledge. Crucially, one must consider the question of whether one could have ultimately proven Theorem 3.10 by a care- ful translation of epistemic operators from the usual modal systems used for epistemic logic such as S5. We explore this and other questions in the rest of this section.

We have argued that the concept of an agent being ignorant is worth investi- gating further, and suggested examples from MAS as to why this is the case. We showed that this analysis can be carried out independently from the com- monly adopted logics for knowledge. Semantic definitions for a non-standard modal operator, and completeness results have been presented. We would contend that the technical results of the paper offer some insights into the possibility of expressing other operators that are not defined on the set of accessible points as it is traditionally done in mainstream modal logic.

More broadly we feel there is much scope for further work with respect to connections to specific MAS areas. One avenue we like to investigate is the application of this work to MAS security. The formalisms resulting from the refinements of BAN logic [3] are concerned with proving that particular protocols are secure, i.e., that any intruder would not be able to decrypt the messages being exchanged. In the language of this paper this means that its state of ignorance is an invariant in the execution. BAN logic in its standard form suffer from the lack of semantics and is purely an axiomatic system. Maybe the machinery of this paper can be used to solve this problem.

