RS has three main factors: users, items and feedback. A unique identifier and some corresponding characteristics represent each user and item. Most user characteristics are generic, such as age, gender, education, profession, and nationality. In the case of movies, item characteristics are mostly domain-specific, such as title, genre, year,

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the related work. In Section 3, the proposed algorithm is introduced. Then, Section 4 provides the experimental results. Eventually, this paper and future work is summarized in Section 5.

This model uses collaborative filtering to combine the interests of users into the newfound score matrix [21]. Besides, Chmiel et al. presented a forgetting function based on the Ebbinghaus forgetting curve of memory retention and Berlynes inverted-U model. Since the intermediate level of variables generated relatively high preference, the model handled well to present significant untapped data for music RS [22]. Wang et al. presented a novel method for providing recommendations by using an attention mechanism to learn the weight of each neighbor in the prop- agation process to distinguish the importance of neighbors called KGAT [23].

The performance of their method showed the core-users-based recom- mendation had less computation compared with other models. After that, Ren et al. proposed an extracting information core algorithm using a multi objective evolutionary algorithm [25]. The information core extracted by their model can not only be helpful in providing accurate recommendations but also provide recommendations of good perfor- mance in terms of coverage and diversity criteria. Furthermore, Sun et al. studied how the core nodes in dynamic optimization ensure the smoothness of the community structure [26].

In this section, we describe in detail the proposed algorithm. The user-item feature item and forgetting rules are explained in Section 3.1. Section 3.2 accounts for how the core node is defined. Four conflicting objectives and constraints are shown in Section 3.3. The details of ge- netic operators are introduced in Section 3.4.

system. At present, core node extraction can be divided into the following categories: degree-based, resource-based, similarity-based, and multi-property. For example, Cao et al. used trust and similarity degrees between two users to extract information cores [24]. The rec- ommended time is significantly reduced as the algorithm extracts core users. And then only these users will receive the resources from items.

node should be in the community center, interacting more with other users. The communities where the core nodes reside rarely change, which can better guide recommendations in a dynamic community. In this article, L is the Laplacian matrix in the community. The loss of contribution of user i to user j is expressed as follows:

accuracy is high does not mean that the recommendation results are meaningful to the user [30]. Taking coverages as an indicator can represent the diversity of the recommendation list to explore the interest points of users. The ratio of items in the recommendation list with all available items is used as performance measures to measure the coverage of RS.

Novelty measures the ability to recommend non-popular products to users, so high novelty can often lead to lower accuracy. A standard measure of novelty is to use the average of recommended items [31]. The lower average of items in a list means that the list is more novel to the user. Due to its rationality, self-information is used in this paper. The mean value of the self-information of items given by the RS is the novelty of the recommendation result, which is computed as follows:

In this paper, all the experiments are conducted in 2021a Matlab on an Intel(R) Corei5 computer with CPU(TM) i5-12500H and 2.50 GHz memory. In Section 4.2, we confirm the effectiveness of game-based core node guided on our evolutionary model. The parameter analysis is presented in Section 4.3. Section 4.4 explores the performance of our model with other compared algorithms.

neighbor node guide with the highest similarity and the resistance distance-based core node guide. Because of the different community sizes, the number of core nodes set to a fixed value is unable to describe all cases. This article sets the number of core nodes as a ratio of the total number of users, which is set to 0.1. From [35], the computational complexities of all comparison recommendation algorithms can be easily deduced. The computational complexity is mainly determined by the evolutionary search. Calculating the objective values of the in- dividuals in the population and selecting parent solutions by using the

Besides, the hypervolume(Hv), also known as an S metric or Lebesgue measure, is adopted as the performance metric [34]. The Hv is the only known monadic metric that can evaluate the quality of a solution set. Hv is a comprehensive index to assess the convergence and diversity of approximate solution sets.

dominated by all solutions in the true PF. A recent survey points out that the effect of the reference point on multi-objective problems with triangular Pareto fronts and two-objective minimization problems is small [18]. Thus, unless the reference point is too close to the nadir point, the experimental results are not sensitive to the reference point specification.

MOEA-Probs	Pc = 0.8, Pm =1/L, L = 10, N = 100, Gen = 3000, k = 0.9 PMOEA	Pn = 5, Pm =1/L, L = 10, N = 100, Gen = 3000, n = 20 MOEA-EPG	Pc = 0.8, Pm =1/L, L = 10, N = 100, Gen = 3000, k = 0.5 with the core node are better than those with the neighbor node guided. The game-based core node performs better than the distance-based core node in the MoiveLens. However, there is little difference in perfor- mance between the game-based core node and the distance-based core node in the CiaoDVD.

