Computer Science is currently undergoing a paradigm shift, from viewing computer systems as isolated programs to viewing them as dynamic multi-agent societies. Evidence of this shift is the significant effort devoted recently to the design and implementation of languages and protocols for communications and interaction between software agents. Despite this effort, no formal mathemat- ical theory of agent interaction languages and protocols yet exists. We argue that such a theory needs to account for the semantics of agent interaction, and propose the first mathematical theory which does this. Our framework incorporates category-theoretic entities for the utterances made in an agent dialog and for the commitments incurred by those utterances, together with maps between these.

The most widespread approach to the design of agent interaction protocols has drawn on dialog games from the philosophy of argumentation, which date at least to Aristotle [4] and which were revived in modern times by Charles Hamblin [9]. They have a structural resemblance to the games of economic game theory [25] and to the two-party games of model theory [15,10]. Agent interaction protocols have been articulated for many different types of dia- logue, for example, for dialogs involving Information-Seeking, e.g. [2]; mutual Inquiry [19]; Persuasion [28]; Negotiation over the division of some scarce re- source [3]; and Deliberations over what action to take in some circumstance [18]. See [21] for a review of recent work on agent dialogue-game protocols.

Drawing on the programming language semantics literature, van Eijk [6] iden- tified three generic types of semantics for agent communications languages. An axiomatic semantics defines each locution of a communications language or protocol in terms of the pre-conditions which must exist before the locution can be uttered, and possibly also the post-conditions which apply following its utterance. For example, the semantic language, SL, for the locutions of the FIPA Agent Communications Language, is an axiomatic semantics of the speech acts of the language, defined in terms of the beliefs, desires and in- tentions of participating agents [7]. Similarly, the semantics defined for many dialog game protocols for agent interaction, e.g., [2], are also axiomatic se- mantics.

These efforts at defining language and protocol semantics have focused pri- marily on individual languages or protocols, or on limited classes of protocols. We know of no effort underway to define a semantics for all agent interaction protocols. In other words, there is as yet no mathematical theory of agent interaction protocols, in the same way that the lattices of possible worlds se- mantics provides an algebraic theory for modal logical languages [27]. Such a theory would, we hope, provide a formal means to compare one protocol with another, to identify when two protocols are the same (in some sense or other), and to choose between protocols. Such a theory is the aim of our work.

This paper presents the first mathematical theory of agent interaction pro- tocols, comprising a categorical semantics for a very broad class of protocols. We consider protocols which can be defined explicitly, and abstract away from the type of protocol and the nature of the interaction outcomes. Section 2 of the paper describes our view of Agent Interaction Protocols, Section 3 presents our semantics, while Section 4 presents some mathematical implica- tions of the framework. In Section 5, we present examples of how interaction protocols may be represented in the framework, to illustrate its expressive power. We end the paper with a discussion of future work in Section 6.

It is worth noting that our problem domain and objectives differ from efforts currently underway to develop a semantics for interaction of compu- tational processes in general, such as the work on game semantics [1]. As mentioned above, our domain involves interactions between purposeful agents, each entering a multi-agent dialog with the intention of achieving some goal. Accordingly, the outcomes (both partial and final) of agent interactions are important to any semantic theory, and to the design, engineering and con- trol of the interactions.  It is not clear to us that the game-semantics-of-

Commencement Rules: Rules which define the circumstances under which the dialog commences. Typically, the Commencement Rules of a protocol refer to states prior to or outside the dialogue, and so are not modelled within it. We will not consider these further in this paper.

With respect to commitments, it is worth noting here that more than one notion of commitment is present in the literature on dialog games. For example, philosophers of argumentation often treat commitments in a purely dialogical sense, so that they may have no reference to anything beyond the dialogue, e.g., [9]. In contrast, others treat commitments as obligations to (execute, incur or maintain) a course of action [32]. These actions may be utterances in a dialogue, as when a speaker is forced to defend a proposition he has asserted against attack from others; so propositional commitment can be seen as a special case of action commitment. Because our primary motivation is the design of interaction protocols between autonomous software agents, we believe it is reasonable to define commitments in terms of future actions (or propositions) external to the dialogue. In a commercial negotiation dialogue,

Of course, this structure does not capture all agent interaction protocols, for example, those which cannot be defined formally or finitely. However, it is sufficiently general to represent protocols of each type commonly seen in human or agent dialogues, such as those defined in the typology of [32]. In the next section, we present a categorial semantics for all protocols definable with this structure.

We begin our presentation with some explanatory words on category theory [16]. A (small) category is a minimalist mathematical construct which consists of two sets and a system of combination rules. The first set, called the objects of the category, is largely a placeholder. The second set, called the morphisms of the category, consists of a collection of arrows from one object to another. Thus, one might think of a morphism as an arrow with a tail (or source) and a head (or target). Given a pair of arrows, one can try to combine them to form a longer arrow if the head of one lies at the same object as the tail of the other.

O. In this case, O may be more efficiently described as a monoid, which simply means a set together with a multiplication that may (or may not) have inverses but does contain a unit. The set in question is the set of all morphisms of O, the multiplication is given by the composition law and the unit comes from the identity map of the unique object. For example, the whole numbers under addition form a monoid, with 0 as the unit. As another example, consider the

The question of the existence of inverses corresponds to the question of which commitments may be retracted without restriction. If all commitments have a retraction, the monoid becomes a group, a mathematical construct which may be more familiar than either monoids or categories. The group associated to the whole numbers under addition is the integers under addi- tion. The group associated to the integers under multiplication is the rational numbers (fractions of integers) under multiplication. In fact, one can always find a smallest group that contains a particular monoid, which would allow us to focus on groups rather than monoids if we prefer. Notice the group would be Abelian (multiplication order is irrelevant) precisely when commitments are all time-independent of one another.

and all targets are different. (See below for a tiling example with only three morphisms.) Free objects are one of the most carefully studied concepts in category theory, sometimes thought of as the most universal constructions. This connection with a free category explains the feeling that many other protocols could be modeled by imposing relations on the FIPA ACL.

For the commitment category in this example, notice that no commit- ments are defined or associated to locutions in the FIPA ACL, hence there are no combination rules for commitments. In our framework, this may be rep- resented by saying the commitment category should simply be [0] described above. That is, we should instead think of a single outcome which iterates to itself as the outcome associated to each (legal) locution.

this case. In order to represent this, we should think of F as adding basepoints to an ordinary functor from a free category to the category with one object and only the identity morphism. There is only one such functor into such a trivial category, namely the functor which sends all objects to the unique object and all morphisms to the identity morphism. Thus, our functor F will send only the basepoint morphisms to the basepoint morphism of [0] and every other morphism will be sent to the identity morphism in [0].

Perhaps the most widely-used formal interaction protocols are auctions. These are processes by which one or more buyers negotiates the price of some good with one or more sellers [14]. In the most common form of auction, the so-called English auction, multiple potential buyers of a single good bid in- creasingly higher prices to purchase the good from a single seller. The winning bidder is that potential buyer who makes the highest bid, and the amount paid by the buyer is the amount indicated in that highest bid. Each bid may be viewed as an utterance creating a commitment to purchase the item if agreed by the seller. We can represent this process by viewing our category as a tiling, where a single tile is defined by the number of atomic locutions and the set of parameters allowable for each.

