In this paper, we extend a class of globally convergent evolution strategies to handle general constrained opti- mization problems. The proposed framework handles quantifiable relaxable constraints using a merit function approach combined with a specific restoration procedure. The unrelaxable constraints, when present, can be treated either by using the extreme barrier function or through a projection approach. Under reasonable as- sumptions, the introduced extension guarantees to the regarded class of evolution strategies global convergence properties for first order stationary constraints. Numerical experiments are carried out on a set of problems from the CUTEst collection as well as on known global optimization problems.

The challenge of this paper consists in extending (Diouane et al., 2015b, Algorithm 2.1) to a globally convergent framework that takes into account both QR and UR constraints. The author acknowledges that a preliminary version of this work was produced during his PhD thesis (Diouane, 2014, Chapter 5). In what comes next, we define the merit function as follows: 2009), that was in turn inspired by the filter approach of Fletcher and Leyffer (2002). The merit function will be used to evaluate a trial step and hence decide whether such step will be accepted or not. The ex- tension of the globally convergent ES to a general constrained setting can be seen as a combination of two approaches, a feasible one where either the extreme barrier or a projection operator will be used to han- dle the UR constraints, and a merit function approach (possibly with a restoration procedure) to handle QR constraints.

being feasible. We note that, if a solver fails to find a feasible starting point for a given problem, the problem is considered as unsolved, in this case the convergence test is not used. The performance and data profiles are computed for a maximum of 3000 function evaluations. For the stochastic solvers, we will describe our results using the median data/performance profile obtained over 20 runs.

Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 are implemented in Matlab. The ob- tained implementation will be called ES-MF. Most of the parameter choices followed those in Diouane et al. (2015b) (where some of the user-specified parameters are the same used by directional direct search barrier approach is not able to solve more than 50% of the problems (as shown by the performance profiles). The data profiles indicate that the extreme barrier can be competitive for small budgets. Overall, the merit function approach is outperforming the extreme barrier approach. Thus, relaxing the constraints clearly makes it possible to reach better optimal solutions which motivates the use of the merit function approach ES-MF instead of ES-EB.

DDS-MF Gratton and Vicente (2014): a Matlab implementation of a directional direct search (DDS) method where a merit function (MF) is used to handle QR constraints. The parameter choices followed those given in the numerical section of Gratton and Vicente (2014). We recall that ES-MF is inspired from the DDS-MF method, hence including the latter solver in the comparison can be also very mean- ingful. We note also that this is the first time DDS-MF is compared using an extensive test set. The behavior of the solver is stochastic

CSA-AL Atamna et al. (2018): a Matlab implementation of CMA-ES using an augmented Lagrangian approach to handle QR constraints. For the CMA-ES part, we used the same choice of parameters as for ES-MF, for the parameters associated with the augmented La- grangian part we chose the values given in Atamna et al. (2018).

In this paper, we proposed a globally convergent class of ES algo- rithms where a merit function is used to decide and control the dis- tribution of the generated points. The proposed approach included a restoration procedure which is entered whenever a decrease on the con- straint violation function is achieved while the objective function is being considerably increased. The obtained algorithm generalized the work (Diouane et al., 2015b) by including quantifiable relaxable con- straints. In the spirit of what is achieved in Gratton and Vicente (2014), the proposed convergence analysis was organized depending on the number of times Restoration is entered.

