Many image inverse problems are ill-posed for no unique solutions. Most of them have incommensurable or mixed-type objectives. In this study, a multi-objective optimization framework is introduced to model such ill-posed inverse problems. The conflicting objectives are designed according to the properties of ill-posedness and certain techniques. Multi-objective evolutionary algorithms have capability to optimize multiple objectives simultaneously and obtain a set of trade-off solutions. For that reason, we use multi-objective evolutionary algorithms to keep the trade-off between these objectives for image ill-posed problems. Two case studies of sparse reconstruction and change detection are imple- mented. In the case study of sparse reconstruction, the measurement error term and the sparsity term are optimized by multi-objective evolutionary algorithms, which aims at balancing the trade-off between enforcing sparsity and reducing measurement error. In the case study of image change detection, two conflicting objectives are constructed to keep the trade-off between robustness to noise and preserving the image details. Experimental results of the two case studies confirm the multi-objective optimization framework for ill-posed inverse problems in image processing is effective.

Ill-posed problems were proposed by Hadamard in the beginning of last century [1]. A problem is defined to be ill- posed if there is no unique solution. Hadamard first defined a mathematical problem to be well-posed when its solution (i) exists; (ii) is unique and (iii) depends continuously on the initial data; otherwise, a problem is ill-posed. An arbitrary small perturbation of the data can cause an arbitrary large perturbation of the solution. Most of the classical physics problems are well-posed. However, their inverse problems are usually ill-posed. Today there is a vast amount of literature on

In this paper, a multi-objective optimization (MO) frame- work is introduced to solve ill-posed inverse problems in image processing. Sparse reconstruction and change detection are used as two case studies to show how the MO framework can be successfully used to solve image ill-posed problems. Sparse reconstruction is a typical ill-posed inverse problem. In this paper, the measurement error term and the sparsity term are used as the two conflicting objective functions and opti- mized by MOEAs simultaneously. Sparse denoising of natural images and sparse unmixing of hyperspectral data are imple- mented to validate the effectiveness of the proposed MO framework. In the case study of change detection in synthetic aperture radar (SAR) images, two conflicting objectives are designed to preserve details and restrain noise, respectively. Experiments on simulated and real data sets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed MO framework.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In the next section, the MO framework for image ill-posed problems is introduced. Section 3 shows the case study of sparse recon- struction in detail. The case study of image change detection is described in Section 4. Finally, concluding remarks are given in Section 5.

For multi-objective optimization, it has been recognized that evolutionary algorithms (EAs) are well suited because EAs can deal with a set of possible solutions simultaneously [11,12]. Since [14], various EAs to deal with MOPs have been proposed and these EAs are termed as multi-objective evolu- tionary algorithms (MOEAs). MOEAs seek to obtain a set of Pareto optimal solutions for approximating the true PF in a single run. Most of current MOEAs can be classified into three categories. The first category is Pareto dominance based, such as the nondominated sorting genetic algorithm II (NSGA-II) [15] and the simulated annealing-based multi-objective opti- mization algorithm (AMOSA) [16]. The second one is per- formance indicator based, the hypervolume is the well-known indicator used in these algorithms. The third category is decomposition based [17,18], these algorithms decompose an MOP into a number of single objective subproblems and optimize them simultaneously. Each subproblem is optimized by only using information of its several neighboring subproblems.

strategy  is  used  to  solve  the  problem  above.  The  MOEA we	  used is the nondominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA-II) proposed by Deb et al. in [15], which builds a population of competing  individuals  and  ranks  them  on  the  basis  of  non- dominance.  Although  the  coefficient  x  is  encoded  in  sparse	 representation instead encoding all pixels, the dimensionality

decision variables of dimension m2N is divided into n sub- components randomly. Each subcomponent is generated from a randomly grouping of decision variables in order to better capture the variable interdependencies. Meanwhile n sub- populations are created and each one has Np individuals. For each subpopulation, the mutation and crossover operators are applied to the current subpopulation to obtain new solutions and then the collaboration operator will be executed. The elite- preserving operator is implemented to obtain the new popu- lation Pnew. And we will extract the subpopulation form Pnew

to replace the original subpopulation for the next generation of collaboration. The population Pt is evolved with the evolution of each subpopulation. In order to further search exhaustively, the local search proposed in [28] are employed to obtain the next generation. In the end of MO framework, optimal trade- off solutions to the spare reconstruction problems can be ob- tained by angle-based method [29].

disciplines, such as mineral exploration, environmental monitoring and military surveillance. The problem of hyper- spectral unmixing is one of the most important problems that restrict the development of remote sensing technology, which can be solved by the sparse unmixing technique. Sparse unmixing aims at separating the mixed pixels into a collection of constituent spectra or endmembers, and estimating their fractional abundances. The sparse unmixing model has been widely used in recent years [34e37]. The sparse unmixing via variable splitting and augmented Lagrangian (SUnSAL) [34] based on the alternating direction method of multipiliers has been proposed to cope with the sparse unmixing problem. The accuracy assessment used to evaluate the abundance estima- tions for all the experiments is the signal-to-reconstruction error (SRE) [38], and it is defined as follows

speckle noise can be transformed in an additive noise component and the range of variation of the ratio image will be compressed and thereby enhances the low-intensity pixels. In [39,40], a multilevel representation of the multitemporal in- formation was computed by decomposing the log-ratio image into several images of the same size as the original one to reduce the noise impact. Bzai et al. [41] used the generalized Gaussian distribution to model the changed and unchanged classes to reduce the corruption of the speckle noise. Further- more, many probability density functions such as Log normal, Generalized Gaussian, Nakagami ratio, and Weibull ratio were

investigated to model the distribution of the two classes in [42]. In [43], Hu et al. presented an automatic and effective approach to the thresholding of the log-ratio change indicator whose histogram may have one mode or more than one mode. Moreover, many researchers have added local or non-local information into their algorithms to make them robust to noise. In [44], Gong et al. proposed a reformulated fuzzy local- information C-means (RFLICM) for classifying changed and unchanged regions, which incorporates the information about spatial context by adding a new fuzzy factor into its objective function for the purpose of enhancing the changed information

and reducing the effect of speckle noise. In [45] [46], Markov random field (MRF) based change detection algorithms were proposed to combat speckle noise, which provides a basis for modeling information about the mutual influences among image pixels. Furthermore, non-local means (NLM) method that utilizes nonlocal relationship between image pixels was also used in many change detection techniques to reduce the corruption of the speckle noise [45,47].

For image change detection problem, it has two cluster centers for unchanged class and changed class. In this paper, the idea of decomposition is also used in the process of updating the membership values. Decomposition transforms the MOP into a set of distinct scalar aggregation problems. The function of each subproblem is defined as:

The original membership updating formula of the standard FCM algorithm is not appropriate to update the membership values of each pixel. By using decomposition mechanism, this paper updates the membership values according to the weight values of each subproblem. The new membership updating formula make full use of the information of the difference image and the filtered difference image.

The quantitative analysis of change detection results is set as follow. The first quantitative measure is missed alarms (MAs) which means the number of changed pixels in the change detection result that are incorrectly classified as un- changed when compared to the reference map. These pixels are the missed alarms of the actually changed pixels. The second quantitative measure is false alarms (FAs) which means the number of unchanged pixels in the change detection result that are incorrectly classified as changed when compared to the reference map. These pixels are false de- tections of the actually unchanged pixels. In order to roughly assess image details and noise of the change detection maps, in the experiments, they are reported as percentages, which are shown as number of the pixels of the difference image. Finally we compute the kappa coefficient which is an overall evaluation criteria used to evaluate the effect of the result in the domain of image segmentation. The higher the value of kappa coef- ficient is, the better the segmentation result is.

but meanwhile gets many FAs. RFLICM and the proposed method have better results than others as they incorporate local information for the purpose of reducing the effect of speckle noise. To sum up, the proposed approach will fit two situations where the changed area appears scattered (the Ottawa data set) and centralized (the Bern data set). For more complicated situation, the proposed method still works well.

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 61273317 and 61422209), the National Top Youth Talents Program of China, the Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (Grant no. 20130203110011) and the Fundamental Research Fund for the Central Universities (Grant no. K5051202053).

image understanding. Dr. Gong received the prestigious National Program for the support of Top-Notch Young Professionals from the Central Organization Department of China, the Excellent Young Scientist Foundation from the National Natural Science Foundation of China, and the New Century Excellent Talent in University from the Ministry of Education of China. He is the Vice Chair of the IEEE Computational Intelligence Society Task Force on Memetic Computing, an Executive Committee Member of the Chinese Association for Artificial Intelligence, and a Senior Member of the Chinese Computer Federation.

