In words, the infinite set of all permutations in GA (a) can be reconstructed from the information described by the (finite) set of all permutations in GA (a) that only alter the support of a, by composition with all the permutations that only alter names outside the support of a. This theorem is exploited in named sets to obtain a finite description of the symmetries. Such a finite description is still a group, hence it can be efficiently represented (using its generators, see [18]).

Named sets with symmetries arise from permutation algebras, after observing the effectiveness of this model to faithfully represent the semantics of name-passing calculi, but the failure to re-use names, that is, to model garbage collection. Named sets are a computationally efficient representation of permutation algebras (thus, of nominal sets and Schanuel topos), allowing systems represented as coalgebras in this category to be minimized and verified. The theory of named sets has been developed in various stages, however it can be captured, a posteriori, by two basic facts.

The second novel aspect of named sets is based on the observation that the essence of permutation algebras lies in the symmetry of orbits. Two objects that have isomorphic sets of orbits, and for each pair of orbits in the isomorphism, a pair of elements with the same symmetry, are isomorphic in turn as objects of the category, as shown in theorem 2.13.

resources attached e.g. to a state of a system, and for symmetries as denoting indistinguishability of some resources. The backward set of name mappings in a named function traces the history of resources along the function, in particular identifying those that are preserved, and those that are discarded.

The meaning of the above theorem is that there exist constructions to obtain a permutation algebra from a named set, and conversely a named set from a permu- tation algebra, in such a way that going in one direction, and then back, gives an isomorphic object. We introduce the functor G, used in theorem 7.3.

representation of elements of named sets in terms of the symmetry of orbits. To improve the minimization algorithm, and in perspective for model checking, effi- cient group-theoretical algorithms over generators could be employed. We plan to investigate the adoption of algorithms described in [25] to this aim.

