One of the authors has proposed the notion of P -simple point [2]. A subset composed solely of P -simple points may be deleted in one time while preserving the topology. Furthermore, a P -simple point may be locally cha- racterized. In this paper, we introduce the notion of Px-simplicity. This permits us to propose a new thinning scheme based on the deletion of Px- simple points. This scheme needs neither a preliminary step of labelling nor the examination of an extended neighborhood, in the opposite of the already proposed thinning algorithms based on P -simple points.

X. If X is finite, the infinite connected component of X is the background, the other connected components of X are the cavities. In order to have a correspondence between the topology of X and the one of X, we have to consider two differents kinds of adjacency for X and for X [15]: if we use an n-adjacency for X, we have to use another n-adjacency for X. In this paper, we only consider (n, n) = (26, 6). The presence of an n-hole in X is detected whenever there is a closed n-path in X that cannot be deformed, in X, into a single point (see [16], for further details). For example, a hollow ball has one cavity and no hole, a solid torus has one hole and no cavity, and a hollow torus has one cavity and two holes.

The set composed of all n-connected components of X is denoted by Cn(X). The set of all n-connected components of X and n-adjacent to a point x is denoted by Cx(X). The cardinal number of X is denoted by #X. The topological numbers relative to X and x are the two numbers [1]: T6(x, X)=

The first strategy consists in the repetition of two steps [2]. During the first step, the points belonging to P are labelled, through the access of Bk(x), and of Wk(x), for all points x of Z3; at most l pairs (Bk(x),Wk(x)) have to be checked. During the second step, the four conditions of P -simplicity of the Proposition 3.2 are checked for all points of P : the checking of these four conditions may be possible by the previous labelling step.

We can prove that a Px-simple point is P -simple, with the help of topo- logical numbers, and under our assumption made in the previous remark. Therefore, an algorithm deleting Px-simple points is guaranteed to preserve the topology. In the following, we will propose a thinning algorithm deleting Px-simple points.

X. The point y belongs to Px as y belongs to V . In this case, x is not a Px-simple point because the first and third Px-simplicity conditions are not verified: T26(x, Rx) = 0 and there is no point of Rx 26-adjacent to x and to y.

A 6-subiteration thinning algorithm removing P -simple points, has already been proposed [2]. Now, we give a general scheme for 12-subiteration thinning algorithms deleting Px-simple points. It can be described by the scheme of section 5.1, with DEL(Y, Dir) = S(Px); S(Px) being the set of Px-simple points for Y which are not end points according to the wanted skeleton and according to the direction Dir. From this scheme, we will propose our algo- rithm by defining an appropriate P (sections 6 and 7), in the sense that we investigate P such that our algorithm deletes at least the points removed by pk. In the following, we write lb c (resp. lb s) to indicate our final algo- rithm which produces curve skeletons (resp. surface skeletons) by deletion of Px-simple points.

In the first part of this study, we have introduced the notion of Px-simplicity. Then, we have proposed a new thinning scheme based on the parallel deletion of Px-simple points which needs neither a preliminary of labelling nor the examination of an extended neighborhood. Thus, it permits us to compare with some other existent thinning algorithms conceived in such a way.

algorithm A. The condition is such that the final proposed algorithm deletes at least the points removed by A, while preserving the same end points. This also implies that A preserves the topology. We precise that if we define P as the subset constituted of points that A may delete from any object X and if this subset is a P -simple set then A is guaranteed to preserve the topology. This work has already been made in [4](see also [3]).

