Abstract In our study, we proposed a novel Neuro-fuzzy classification technique for data mining. The inputs to the Neuro-fuzzy classification system were fuzzified by applying generalized bell- shaped membership function. The proposed method utilized a fuzzification matrix in which the input patterns were associated with a degree of membership to different classes. Based on the value of degree of membership a pattern would be attributed to a specific category or class. We applied our method to ten benchmark data sets from the UCI machine learning repository for classification. Our objective was to analyze the proposed method and, therefore compare its performance with two powerful supervised classification algorithms Radial Basis Function Neural Network (RBFNN) and Adaptive Neuro-fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS). We assessed the performance of these classification methods in terms of different performance measures such as accuracy, root-mean- square error, kappa statistic, true positive rate, false positive rate, precision, recall, and f-measure. In every aspect the proposed method proved to be superior to RBFNN and ANFIS algorithms.

from large real-world databases. Such analysis can provide a deep insight into the better understanding of different large- scale databases. The study related to effective knowledge development is also very popular in any research as because the decision-making process mainly depends upon the effectiveness of the classification method being utilized.

Basically data classification [3,4] is the method of discover- ing a model or classifier that describes and differentiates data classes so that the model could predict the class of entities with unknown class label value. It is a two-step procedure, in the first step; a classifier is constructed denoting a predefined set of concepts or data classes. This is the training phase, where a classification algorithm constructs the classifier by learning from a training data set and their associated class label attri- butes. In the next step the model is used for classification. In order to estimate the performance of the classifier a test set independent of the training tuples is used. Several preprocess- ing steps such as data cleaning, data selection and data transformation are also applied to the data set before the classification procedure takes place.

This research study is arranged as follows: Section 2 includes the related works done in this area. Section 3 describes our proposed Neuro-fuzzy classification method while Section 4 explains the detailed procedure. Section 5 discusses the performance analysis and results; and Section 6 is reserved for the conclusion.

A study performed by Kuncheva [21] described how to utilize fuzzy pattern recognition concept in solving real life problems. According to her work, fuzzy pattern recognition can be related to fuzzy clustering or with fuzzy IF-THEN sys- tems used as classifiers and it is close to any pattern classifica- tion paradigm that involves fuzzy sets. She also indicated that fuzzy systems combined with neural networks should exploit the merits of these two approaches efficiently.

of fuzzy systems with the learning abilities of artificial neural networks and evolutionary algorithms. The aim of their work was to study different hybrid soft computing based systems by considering the combined use of evolutionary algorithms and artificial neural networks in order to empower fuzzy systems with learning and adaptive capabilities. This research work vastly contributes to the evolutionary Neuro-fuzzy systems.

Abonyi et al. [24] designed Computational Intelligence (CI) based techniques by combining fuzzy rule-based expert sys- tems and data mining algorithms founded on Soft Computing principles. They too established that such techniques could be considered for feature selection, feature extraction, rule base optimization and rule base simplification. Applications of these CI based techniques were demonstrated successfully using the benchmark Wine data classification problem.

The three classification techniques namely NFS, RBFNN, and ANFIS are trained and tested on ten benchmark data sets from the University of California, Irvine (UCI) machine learn- ing repository using MATLAB software (version R2013a). These data sets are namely Breast Cancer Wisconsin, KDD Cup 1999 (10-percent), Statlog Landsat Satellite, Mammo- graphic Mass, Wilt, Mushroom, Pima Indians Diabetes, Iris, Spambase, and Car Evaluation. Several comparisons are per- formed; a comparison of classification accuracy, root-mean- square error (RMSE), kappa statistic values; and, a compari- son of True Positive Rate (TP-Rate), False Positive Rate (FP-Rate), Precision, Recall, and F-Measure values derived from the confusion matrix of each classifier.

NFS, RBFNN and ANFIS classifiers are applied on each of the ten UCI machine learning repository data sets for investi- gation and performance analysis which is reported below. We have employed the two-third of each data set for training pur- pose and the remaining one-third data set for testing purpose. The results described here are exclusively based on the simula- tion experiment that we have taken.

RMSE value of 0.1105 and a kappa statistic value of 0.8787; followed by RBFNN having an RMSE value of 0.2247 and a kappa statistic value of 0.7876 and ANFIS stands last with the highest RMSE value (0.2549) and the lowest kappa statistic value (0.7589). Therefore, with regard to the performance measures such as accuracy, RMSE and kappa statistic, the NFS classifier has performed the best.

With regard to the different performance measures used for the ten UCI data sets; we have got better results on average for NFS compared to RBFNN and ANFIS. An algorithm having lower error rates will be considered effective as because it has the more powerful classification capability and predictive abil- ity in the data mining field. Considering this, our proposed NFS based method has performed better than the RBFNN and ANFIS algorithms.

RBFNN and ANFIS classifiers based on different perfor- mance measures like accuracy, RMSE, kappa statistic, TP- Rate, FP-Rate, Precision, Recall, and F-Measure. These classi- fiers are tested with ten benchmark UCI data sets. The results suggest that among the three classifiers studied and analyzed, the proposed NFS classifier has the potential to significantly improve the conventional classification methods for use in Data Mining research field. These classification methods, described here are powerful and effective. The results reported in this study are correct, appropriate; and completely based on simulation experiment. Nevertheless, a more widespread experimental assessment of the proposed technique will be the goal of our future research. Furthermore, the integration of other interestingness measures mentioned in the literature is also part of our intended future work.

