Abstract With the continuous growth in the amount of data, data storage systems have come a long way from flat files systems to RDBMS, Data Warehousing (DW) and Distributed Data Warehousing systems. This paper proposes a new distributed data warehouse model. The model is built on a novel approach, for the intelligent distribution of data warehouse. Overall the model is named as Intelligent and Distributed Data Warehouse (IDDW). The proposed model has N-levels and is based on top-down hierarchical design approach of building distributed data warehouse. The building process of IDDW starts with the identification of various locations where DW may be built. Initially, a single location is considered at top-most level of IDDW where DW is built. Thereafter, DW at any other location of any level may be built. A method, to transfer concerned data from any upper level DW to concerned lower level DW, is also presented in the paper. The paper also presents IDDW modeling, its architecture based on modeling, the internal organization of IDDW via which all the operations within IDDW are performed.

with the centralized DW system. This centralized DW is responsible, for storing the entire data of the organization, answering all the queries and for decision making. For an organization, as the amount of data and number of queries to be answered increases to an extent, the need for the distribu- tion of stored data generates, that in turns develops the need of Distributed DW. The need for Distributed DW is also devel- oped when an organization grows in size with increase in num- ber of its branches or with the increase in the size of its branches. Many approaches were proposed by many research- ers for the distribution of data and construction of Distributed DW. One such approach is distribution of data in hierarchal fashion called Hierarchal Distributed DW. For building Hierarchal Distributed DW either of two design approaches, Top-Down or Bottom-Up is used. Bottom-up Approach

The other sections in the paper are as follows: Section 2 pre- sents the Related work; Section 3 presents the proposed work that includes the IDDW Modeling; the IDDW architecture; IDDW data model; the internal organization of IDDW which comprises of global MDS, local MDS etc. and with the help of which all the operations in IDDW are executed; the construc- tion of N-level hierarchal structure, IDDW using three algo- rithms; in Section 4, A case study is taken for IDDW, showing an education system in India in 8 level hierarchal structure; and in Section 5, Experimental setup is developed, based on an 8-level hierarchal structure. A program was writ- ten in JAVA with SQL in backend. The real-time data is inputted using a front page in the system and is intelligently stored in the concerned DW in the system, and in Section 6, various observations and analysis are made about IDDW based on experiment performed.

The IDDW proposed in this paper uses top-down design approach. However, it has advantages over other Distributed DW using top-down design approach. The advantages that the IDDW provides over others are as follows: first, that there is no need to place a DW at each location, rather a DW can be built anytime at any location as per the need of that location; second, IDDW architecture is such that every user registered in the system (i.e. data of registered user stored in a DW within IDDW) is uniquely identified; third, operations to be per- formed on the system are not location specific rather it can be executed from anywhere within the system; fourth, the internal organization of the proposed system is such that it makes possible for transfer of data from one DW to another.

MDS. As new user that belongs to location of Level L, where a new DW is built, gets registered their records are stored in the DW and its information is passed to Global MDS via its Local MDS. Any DW at the location at higher level may access this information from Global MDS via Discovery services.

Once the IDDW modeling is done, the data model in each DW is known and internal organization of IDDW is designed and the next is the construction of IDDW. In the next section the procedure of IDDW construction is presented. The proce- dure explains the construction of different levels of IDDW. The three algorithms are presented for the construction of dif- ferent levels in IDDW. Algorithm 1 is used for the construc- constructed using, Algorithms 2 and 3. The choice of algo- rithm between 2 and 3 for the construction of IDDW depends upon the two cases discussed in the section. For the construc- tion of Level N a separate procedure is given.

The last level, named Identity, does not build any data ware- house at any of its location. Rather, a process is executed at this level to generate a unique three digits number. The number is generated serially at each location in this level. For one loca- tion of Level Position, 999 unique numbers (from 001 to 999) are generated. The three digit number acts as a unique Id for a user. The unique Id helps to distinguish any two users in a

The location in Level Year is Y: 10 with DW named 2010. The location in Level State is S: 01 (Uttar Pradesh) with DW named UP. The location in Level University is U: 01 (Gautam Budh Technical University) with DW named GBTU. The loca- tion in Level Institute is I: 001 (Kamla Nehru Institute of Technology) with DW named KNIT. The location in Level Department is D: 01 (Computer Science & Engineering) with DW named CSE. The location in Level Category is C: 1 (Fac- ulty) with DW named FAC. The location in Level Position is P: 1 (Professor) with DW named PROF. The identity that is generated at Level Identity for ID: 002 is 002.

case study are built in the database MySql 5.0.45. The hard- ware needed to model the case study, includes a 16 ports Switch and eight machines each with the following specifica- tions: Core 2 Duo processor, 3.0 GHz and 1 GB RAM.

The front page contains eight drop-down menus. In seven of these, from top, one can also enter new values. In eighth drop-down menu a three digit number is generated automati- cally. Each drop-down menu is labeled, with name same, as that of each level in 8-level hierarchical architecture considered in case study.

In this section, we discuss the various observations that are made about the IDDW. The observations are made on the basis of the case study. The observations are also made on the basis of outcomes observed while inputting the user data in the architecture, implemented for the case study. Some of the observations about the system are as follows:

The value of percentage shows the availability of DW for the case when any one of the DW fails among the DW built so far. It means that DW built, up to, in a location of various levels in a hierarchy starting from top. It can be seen from the graph that percentage availability of DW does not increase much with the increase in DW at more levels in a hierarchy.

another. It has been seen experimentally that by using the algo- rithms presented in the paper a DW is built with ease at any location of any level of IDDW. Finally the proposed architec- ture is justified by taking a case study. An experimental setup was prepared for case study. The experiment was performed and various observations were made on the basis of result obtained from experiment. The observation reflects about the ability, adaptability, availability, capability, reliability and scalability of IDDW.

After the implementation of the proposed work, IDDW, there is a scope for the researchers to do brain storming on it. Some of the future scopes on which work may be extended further are as follows: One can find the method of intelligently placing of data in a DW within IDDW. Intelligent placing means locating the correct DW, within IDDW, for the concerned data; One can find the solution of intelligently mining of data from a DW in IDDW; and Parallelization approach may be implemented for both placing of data in IDDW and in mining of data from IDDW.

Agarwal Abhay Kumar is a Assistant Professor in Computer Science & Engineering Department at Kamla Nehru Institute of Technology (KNIT), Sultanpur, India. He received his B.Tech degree in 1999 from (BIET) Jhansi in Electronics & Instrumentation Engineering and M. Tech in 2006 from Samrat Ashok Technology Institute (SATI), Vidisha, in Information Technology. Presently he is pursuing his Ph.D. in Computer Science & Engineering. His research interests are Data warehouse & Data Mining, Parallel Processing and Algorithms.

