In this paper, we propose a parallel genetic algorithm for cell image segmentation under severe noise. Our contribution aims at overcoming the drawback of the slow convenence of the traditional genetic algorithm, which was used in our previous work. A priori knowledge about cell shape is incorporated in our method. That is, an elliptical cell contour model is introduced to describe the boundary of the cell. We firstly obtain the gradient image using Canny edge detector; and then use kernel- based dynamic clustering to find out the image points that have a high probability belonging to each cell. Finally a parallel genetic algorithm is used to adjust the parameters of the cell contour model to find a best matching. The segmentation results of noisy human thyroid and small intestine cell images demonstrate that the proposed method is very successful in segmenting images of elliptically shaped cells.

by which we can obtain the edge information and the possible image points belonging to each cell boundary. In section 4, we introduce the parallel genetic algorithm optimizing the parameters of the mathematical model to match the cell contour. Section 5 devotes to the experimental results. Section 6 is a conclusion and the future work.

After detecting the approximate location of the cells, we use kernel-based dynamic clustering method to find out the image points possibly belonging to each cell. Kernel-based dynamic clustering method is a no-monitor clustering method. In this method, a kernel kj, which represents a cluster, is defined. A kernel can be a function, an image point sets or other models. In order to determine whether a sample point belongs to a cluster, a measurement

Using the above method, we can find out the image points that have a high probability belonging to each cell respectively. After the image points possibly belonging to a cell are detected, we can search an ellipse that best matching the cell boundary in a relatively small space. So, the time spent in finding the solution is decreased greatly.

According the above basic algorithm, different migration strategies and differ- ent strategies of subpopulations self-evolution produce different instantiations for parallel genetic algorithm. For the strategy of subpopulation self-evolution, we can apply the successful and popular accepted genetic algorithm. As to the migration strategy, the most popular models are the island model and the stepping stone model [17]. In the island model, best individuals are allowed to be sent to any other subpopulation, i.e. all subpopulations are neighbors. In a sense, the island model represents a better model of nature at the cost of a high communication overhead is introduced in it. In order to reduce communi- cation overhead, the stepping stone model defines a close chain neighborhood structure in which any subpopulation is merely able to share individuals with its two neighbors. Below, we present a parallel genetic algorithm for extraction of cell boundary with a different migration strategy.

Step 6: Randomly set how many sub-populations will send individuals to others and how many best individuals will be sent. Our migration strategy is different from the island model and the stepping stone model. Who and how many sub-populations will migrate their best individuals to others are randomly determined. This strategy is a better compromise between the island model and the stepping stone model, which not only reduces the communication but also makes the parallel genetic algorithm behavior more close to nature.

Step 1: Get Initialization Message: To initialize each chromosome, randomly generate five integers between 1 and N (N is the number of the possible edge image points) as the index of five image points. We repeat the process for L times to initialize the whole population. Let k = 1, where k is the iteration step indices.

Selection and crossover: We use the fitness proportional model to select chromosomes to reproduce offspring. To get Nr children, we should select Nr/2 mother and dad respectively. Each pair of two parents has two children. The crossover operator is described as follows. Randomly generate an integer m between 1 and 5; Exchange the genes that have the index m of the two chromosomes selected as parents. So, Nr new chromosomes are reproduced.

Mutation: For all of the newly generated chromosomes, according to a mutation probability to mutate them. The mutation method are de- scribed as follows. Randomly generate an integer m between 1 and 5 and another integer n between 1 and N . Replace the gene having the index m of the chromosome by the integer n.

Remark 1 Firstly, we compute the fitness of each chromosome and the fit- ness can be viewed as a distribution function. Then we compute the entropy of the distribution function. When the entropy does not change again, we think the genetic algorithm converged. If the number of generation N is reached, we also stop the iteration.

In this paper, we have proposed a novel approach to cell image segmentation under severe noise conditions by combining kernel-based dynamic clustering and a parallel genetic algorithm. In our algorithm, we make use of not only the edge information but also the shape information of the cell contour that the cell boundary has an ellipse-like shape. Due to a priori knowledge of the cell boundary is incorporated in our approach; our method has a high abil- ity to resist noise. Image points that possibly belonging to a cell are firstly determined using a kernel-based dynamic clustering method, so the search space is sharply reduced and the time used to optimize the objective function is decreased accordingly. By using parallel genetic algorithm as optimizer, we achieved not only a more accurate solution but also a speedup because of several processors sharing the population evaluations. The results indi- cate a promising direction for further research into automatic initialization, which is especially important for designing automatic algorithm in biomedical applications.

