The subject of quantum programming languages has emerged as a new field ly- ing at the intersection of programming languages and quantum computation. The goal is not so much the search for the right notation and semantics, but rather the search for structure in quantum computation. Thus the standard programming lan- guage ideas of compositionality and modularity emerge in new settings. Quantum computation has some radically new features: the impossibility of copying and of unrestricted discarding, entanglement and superposition and the probabilistic na- ture of measurement. These features make for entirely new challenges in the search for structure. The field of quantum programming languages is the search for this structure.

In this paper, we describe an approach to game semantics for quantum program- ming languages. Classical game semantics is used to construct tight denotational models of various programming languages and logics. Interest in game semantics for programming languages was sparked in the mid-90s by the introduction of two game-based fully-abstract models for PCF [2,9], after many unsuccessful attempts to construct such tights models for this language using other structures. The ap- proach has since been successfully employed to provide fully abstract models for many other languages with various features (non-determinism, probabilistic, con- currency, etc.), all these results following a similar pattern, each new feature being captured with the help of new types of strategies. This paper introduces a con- cept of quantum strategy which is conceptually close to these various classical game semantics.

We analyse in detail a game semantics for a particular language: the measure- ment calculus of Danos et al. [5] which is based on the one-way model of Raussendorf and Briegel [12]. This language is quite low level and quite specific to the one-way model. However, it is a rather novel model of quantum computation and one which has attracted interest among physicists as a basis for implementations. In particu- lar, measurements play a fundamental role, as the name would suggest, and game semantics for this model could shed light on the connection with interpretations of quantum mechanics, for example the consistent histories interpretation [7,11,6]. Our ultimate goal is the development of a higher-order quantum programming lan- guage informed by the theory of game semantics. Our work takes probabilistic game semantics, as introduced in Danos and Harmer [4], as the starting point, but defines games in terms of quantum ingredients like projective measurement operators.

quantum game given below is different because the basic ingredients of the game, the arena and the moves are quantum. The strategies defined below are probabilistic but the probability arises from the fact that quantum measurements are made; at no point does a strategy just pick a move according to an arbitrary probability distribution. The key point is that quantum strategies are much more restricted than general probabilistic strategies: they have to respect constraints to reflect the laws of quantum mechanics.

We pointed out the connection between plays in a game and consistent histo- ries. It would be interesting to understand the connections between game theoretic restrictions (analogous to innocence and history-freedom) on strategies and consis- tency conditions on families of histories. It may be the key to understanding which strategies are physically realisable.

