To limit the adverse effect of the fluid pressure field in high-speed gearing systems, especially for the main reducer of helicopters, shrouds usually adopted to enclose and approaches the high-speed gears will play a vital role in the windage and pumping power losses in axial and radial directions. To better explore and predict the total load-independent losses, this paper proposes an improved quasi-analytical method to quantify the power losses caused by the windage and pumping effects, considering the gear pump characteristics with the compressibility of the air or air-oil mixture. The theoretical calculations using the improved model are then compared with experimental results in the open literature. Leveraging the swept volume of the gear pump, the squeezing/pocketing behavior of the fluids in the tooth space can get a better understanding as the shroud approaches the gear pair.

losses are also seen to be a significant part [4]. Due to the gear windage and churning losses approximately proportional to the third power of the rotating speed, the sum of these two losses is more than 50 % of the total energy dissipation of the gear system as the speed exceeding 100 m/s [5]. Thereby, shrouds are commonly adopted to limit these inde- pendent losses and improve the efficacy. Indeed, it is just what this paper tries to deal with the prediction of the power losses when the shroud approaches the gear pair.

to the compression and expansion of the very small cavity and contact of the gear pair in all time, Al et al. [41] conducted a 2D CFD study to explore the pressure change on the gear teeth during the mesh cycle by using several meshed teeth instead of a meshed gear pair, the numerical results agree well with experiments by Diab et al. [24]. Regarding the fluid flow to be isothermal and incompressible, Burberi et al. [23] exploited a dynamic mesh dealing with the meshed gear not in contact to investigate the meshed spinning gear pair partly submerged in an oil

Making a better sense of load-independent losses of the shrouded gears is relatively scarce, especially for the shroud closely approaches the gears. Therefore, this paper presents a quasi-analytical method to deal with the prediction of the load-independent losses of the tightly shrouded meshed gears, considering the windage and pumping effects. Then, based on the volumetric change in the processes of compression and expansion of the given cavity and subsonic compressible flow characteristic, this theoretical calculation model is improved and then compared with experimental findings.

causing variations in fluid density, pressure and temperature. This behavior mainly depends on the attributes of the air or the air-oil mixture (density, viscosity, etc.), gear geometry and operating param- eters, the sonic or non-sonic conditions of the flow, the ambient pressure and temperature.

As a shroud approaches the spur gear pair, the whole of the gears and the shroud can be regarded as a gear pump. The behavior of pumping fluid through the clearance gap on the top of the tight shroud is similar to the operation principle of a gear. Following the definition of swept volume as described in Ref.[4,42], the squeezing/pocketing losses of the meshed spur gears are expressed as: clearance between the pinion or the gear and the shroud is 1 mm, simply as group G1. The orifice and approach width are 3.91 mm and 26.4 mm for the radial clearance is 17 mm, simply as group G2. The rotating speed of the pinion was changed from 0 to about 8700 r/min.

and gear profiles at the inlet and outlet of the given tooth space. V0 is the initial volume of tooth space. V is the real-time volume, as the product of the cross-sectional area Sa (i,j) and the gear width b. The changing rate of the tooth space concerning the rotating angle is obtained as:

Leveraging the swept volume of the gear pump, the squeezing/ pocketing behavior of the air or air-oil mixture in the tooth space of the tightly shrouded meshed gear pair is investigated, thereby the total load- independent power losses are predicted considering the windage and pumping effects. Based on the compressibility of the various in tooth space and subsonic compressible flow, the quasi-analytical model of the total power losses is improved, it is capable of estimating the total losses including the pumping and windage losses, from low speed to high speed. Furthermore, when the pitch line velocity exceeds 127 m/s (8681 r/min), the pumping losses are over 11.3 kW, and it has been a signifi- cant contribution to the total power losses.

clearances. The range of applications needs to be concerned and extended in follow-up studies. Furthermore, the end face and circum- ferential sealing of the gear device is significantly worse than that of the gear pump system. The leakage of the lubricating medium is not negli- gible. These factors do have an impact on the model computation pre- cision, especially in the case of a larger clearance between the gears and the shroud. Follow-up studies of this pumping loss model are being planned from two aspects: on the one hand, the influence of the air flow at the import and export of tight shrouded gear pair needs further investigated; on the other hand, The leakage of the lubricating medium at the end face should be focused.

The authors are deeply grateful for the funding from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 52305081), Natural Science Foundation of Changsha City of China (Grant No. kq2208275), and the National Defense Pre-Research Foundation of China (Grant No. KY-44-2018-0219).

D. Massini, T. Fondelli, B. Facchini, et al, Experimental investigation on power losses due to oil jet lubrication in high speed gearing systems. in Proceedings of the ASME turbo expo 2017: turbomachinery technical conference and exposition. Heat Transfer, Charlotte, vol. 50886 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1115/GT2017-64703.

