A TMF system should be transparent ; by this it is meant that the availability of reputation information should be instantaneous. The users of such system should be free from the burden of searching the recommenders and gathering the evidence from recommenders to find the reputation of target entity. The timely availability of the reputation information at the desired location holds the key for this system.

i.e. each node should decide its own policy and the trust decisions should be made accordingly. This is because of the fact that trusting attitudes vary between individuals so there should be provision in the TMF system for defining policies dynamically.

The research presented in this paper proposes a distributed large-scale, self- managing Trust Management Framework (TMF) that addresses the challenges of mining scattered evidences, which is apparently invisible, and combining these ev- idences to form reputation and most importantly catering for the evolution of the reputation information. According to [11], the concept of reputation evolution is central to trust management system but it is rarely discussed in a practical way. In order to provide scalability and ease of management, the proposed TMF is designed in layers. By this design it is intended to enhance the flexibility and extendibility of the overall system. The first layer is used for capturing the evidence at the data layer. In the second layer this evidence is used to form reputations in the informa- tion layer and finally these reputations are utilized to determine the trustworthiness of an entity in the knowledge layer.

The availability of the reputation information is very important at a desired location in a timely manner when instantaneous decision making is being done in an online environment. To achieve this we have adopted a strategy in which the reputation of each entity is calculated and stored at the RS, where it is registered, in an offline setting. In this way the reputation information of each entity is present beforehand and is returned immediately upon querying. By following the design strategy employed in the TMF, the placement of a RS is very important, particularly where the RS randomly selects the interactors of an entity from the stored list in order to poll the evidence. With this strategy the chances of a single interactor skewing the reputation of an entity is low since it does not have the control to be selected in the random selection process. In the case that it is selected, it should anyway be in a minority of one.

that there are two different evidence values. By using formula (1) the total time weight for value 2 is 7 (4 + 3) and for value 1 is 5 (3 + 2). This means that the final reputation value for Jan in the context of Data reliability is 2. As a final step this reputation is stored in the RS and evolved with time on a periodic basis.

population of information technology users. However, the use of email addresses alone will not suffice but an infrastructure like TMF, involving both physical and virtual organizations is necessary for the success of the overall concept. In our approach TDCs are only responsible for introducing the entities in the RS so as to reduce the chances of entry of malicious agents in the system.

Having presented our results, allows us to provide a more detailed comparison with the related approaches. The work presented in [10] is of theoretical nature and same is the case in [6]. However, the works described by Kwei-Jay Lin et al.

Trust Management plays a crucial role in a society which is becoming increasingly dependent on networked information systems. In this paper the design of a large- scale, self-managing Trust Management Framework (TMF) has been presented. The salient features of this design include: 1) the provision of an efficient and reliable mechanism for collecting evidence from the global inter-network, 2) the capability for disseminating reputation information very effectively in the distributed systems scattered over the globe and 3) the ability to cater for the social phenomenon of reputation evolution in computation. The TMF provides a platform where the vision of dynamic virtual organizations involving any number of either known or unknown global partners can be realized. Our results determine that the adopted approach is scalable and very efficient. In essence, the focus of our work revolves around the practical aspects of building a scalable Trust Management System. The results from our research would be very beneficial for the ongoing research in the field of Trust Management in many domains e.g. ecommerce, mobile agents platforms and P2P computing.

Amendolia, S. R., et al, MammoGrid: A Service Oriented Architecture based Medical Grid Application, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 3251 (2004), pp. 939-942, ISBN 3-540-23564-7 Springer-Verlag. (Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Grid and Cooperative Computing (GCC 2004). Wuhan, China. October 2004).

