This paper aims at being a brief introduction to their theory. After discussing the basic definitions, we present some of the most celebrated results from almost one hundred years of ongoing research in the field. Although there are far more significant results than we can mention in this short survey, there are even more open problems. Indeed, as soon as the cardinality of the set A exceeds two, very little is known about the structure of the lattice of all clones on A. We will present some of the most outstanding open problems, giving the reader an impression of

The paper is structured as follows: Following the introductory words, we start our short survey in Section 2, which contains basic definitions and motivating ex- amples. We continue in Section 3 by giving some examples of typical objects of research in the field, including a selection of results and open problems. The fourth section explains the Galois connection Pol-Inv, and the last section presents the connection between clones and Lawvere theories.

Hence, research aims at much more modest goals, like investigating particular parts or properties of these lattices. This work has been going on for several decades and is (to a large extent) summarized in the monographs [32,43,21]. Our goal in this section is to give the reader an impression of this research by choosing and discussing what we consider to be typical questions. Some of them have been solved, some of them are still open.

All this shows how little we know about the structure of the lattice of clones. Going away from the hope of describing certain parts of the lattice precisely, one may also ask about the cardinality of a chosen interval. For instance, since we know all minimal clones on a three-element set, we may ask how many clones are above each atom. While this is easy for some of these clones, the last remaining bits of this question were only solved recently in [51].

Near-unanimity operations are of particular interest because clones that contain them have several special properties. Among other things, they are necessarily finitely generated (i.e., they are generated by a finite set of operations), and there are only finitely many clones that contain a given near-unanimity operation ([1]). They also play an important role in duality theory in the sense of [10]. Indeed, algebraically speaking, they could be considered the reason why dualities such as the Stone duality ([41]) or Priestley duality ([34]) work.

Evidently, Pol-Inv is a Galois connection between the set of finitary operations and relations on A. The concept of preservation is fundamental, but its history in clone theory is not entirely clear. To the best knowledge of the authors, it was first studied for unary operations on finite sets in [19]. The Galois connection as defined here seems to have first been studied in [11,3] for the case that A is finite. The case for arbitrary sets A is briefly discussed in [11] and intensively studied in [29,30]. However, as pointed out in [32, p. 20], preservation was also successfully used in the 1950s by A.V. Kuznecov.

Thus, the Galois closed classes of Pol-Inv are precisely the locally closed clones of operations and the locally closed clones of relations, respectively. This explains why the clone of a topological space can almost never be described as the set of polymorphisms of some relations: it is almost never locally closed. As mentioned in the last section, however, most research in the field of clone theory assumes a finite base set A. Once we restrict ourselves to this framework, we can completely forget the local closure operators. Indeed, for a finite A, we have Pol Inv F = Clo(F ) and Inv Pol R = CLO(R), that is, the Galois closed classes are precisely the clones of operations and the clones of relations, respectively. In particular, this means that every clone C on a finite set arises as the set of polymorphisms of some relations. Moreover, in case that A is finite, we can also simplify the definition of a clone insofar as we do not need to use the rather unappealing general superposition from Definition 4.3: relations. In fact, the most celebrated result mentioned in this survey was obtained in exactly that way: Ivo Rosenberg did not directly determine the maximal clones of operations; he determined the minimal clones of relations. Having the Galois connection at his hand, this did not only give him the result he was after, but also a very elegant description of the maximal clones. He listed six types of relations on A such that a clone is maximal if and only if it is the set of polymorphisms for some relation from the list.

