We introduce a Control Flow Analysis, that statically approximates the dynamic behaviour of processes, expressed in the Beta-Binders calculus. Our analysis of a system is able to describe the essential behaviour of each box, tracking all the possible bindings of variables and all the possible intra- e inter-boxes commu- nications. The analysis offers a basis for establishing static checks of biological dynamic properties. We finally apply our analysis to an example, based on an abstract specification of the interaction between a virus and cells of the immune system.

The underlying idea is that a biological system can be abstractly modelled as a concurrent system. The behaviour is usually given in terms of its transition system, whose size can be huge, making its exploration computationally hard. Resorting to static techniques offers the possibility of drastically reducing the computational costs, particular high when modelling complex biological systems. The specifica- tion of the system is statically (i.e. at compile time) analysed in order to extract i.e. they are only possible. Therefore, the analysis offers a basis for establishing static checks of biological dynamic properties. We can prove some basic facts, that can be immediately exploited to establish simple properties, such as the absence of interaction of two boxes or the isolation of a box.

The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we present the Beta Binders formalism. We introduce the Control Flow Analysis in Section 3. In Section 4, we propose some possible applications for our analysis. In Section 5, we show how the Control Flow Analysis works on an example. We conclude in Section 6 with an assessment of our approach.

It is impossible (since it is undecidable) to predict at compile time if the com- munication between x(y).Q1 and xz.Q2 will be fired at run time. The binder x could be indeed either hidden or unhidden, depending on which is the last interface operation occurred. In our analysis, the communication is predicted as possible.

