Model generation and minimal model generation is useful for fault analysis, verification of systems and val- idation of data models. Whereas for classical propositional and first-order logic several model minimization approaches have been developed and studied, for non-classical logic the topic has been much less studied. In this paper we introduce a minimal model generation calculus for multi-modal logic K(m) and extensions of K(m) with the axioms T and B. The calculus provides a method to generate all and only minimal modal Herbrand models, and each model is generated exactly once. A novelty of the calculus is a non-standard complement splitting rule designed for minimal model generation. Experiments show the rule has the added benefit of reducing the search space.

Model generation and minimal model generation is useful for fault analysis, verifi- cation of systems and validation of data models ([16,1]). For classical propositional and first-order logic several approaches have been developed for model minimization. These existing approaches can be classified as belonging to three different categories: those aiming to minimize the domain of interpretation (for example [8,10]), those aiming to minimize the interpretation of certain predicates (for example [11,12]), and those aiming to minimize the interpretation of all predicates (for example [3,13,5]). For modal logics and related description logics minimal model generation has not been studied much. Minimal model generation has received most attention for modal logics with non-monotonic operators and non-monotonic semantics, where the aim is the minimization of certain predicates (for example [6,7]). As the common modal logics can be translated into first-order logic [14], classical approaches for is open and fully expanded, the minimal modal Herbrand model that is given is extracted. The model constraint generated from this model is added to the only other branch as model constraint 9. In the right-most branch it is possible to note how the model constraint avoids the creation of super-models. In fact, the branch is closed by an application of the (SBR) rule to 9 and 12a.

The next step of the proof is the substitution of the positive unit hyperresolution rule with a selection based resolution rule where the side premises are positive ground unit clauses. We refer to this modification as the SBR approach. Like the PUHR approach, the SBR approach is minimal model sound and complete.

Even though there is some similarity between some of the rules, the 3MG calculus and the PUHR calculus [3] do not correspond directly to each other in the sense that a step in the modal calculus can be simulated by one or more steps of the calculus of the PUHR approach, or the other way around. As said in Section 4, and explained in detail in [15], we prove minimal model soundness and completeness of the 3MG calculus by showing that the two calculi are approximations of each other via a non-trivial new translation of modal formulae to first-order clause form. Our new translation has the additional benefit that it leads to the reduction of the search space in the application of the PUHR approach to clauses obtained by the standard translation.

A possible extension of our approach includes lazy clausification performed by appropriate extension rules. This would not improve the theoretical worst-case complexity of the calculus but will be of practical benefit in a future implementation. The calculus presented in this paper does not use lazy clausification because it makes it easier to prove its soundness and completeness via the connection with the PUHR approach, which is a purely clausal approach.

