In open and distributed property-based access control systems, access rights are granted because of presented certified properties. However, controlling agents base their access decisions not only on presented certified properties. Crucial factors are the correlations between certified properties, experiences and expectations concerning other participating agents, and the resulting trust modalities. This work identifies the essential correlations and demonstrates how they can be explicitly integrated in access decisions.

To face the first issue, we deploy a comprehensive view of trust. Instead of assuming a global property scheme, controlling agents decide on the trustworthiness concerning certifying agents. As earlier proposed in [15], each access control policy reflects (local) trust modalities of the respective controlling agent. It turns out that local trust modalities are determined by different local and global aspects of the underlying system. To face the second issue, our model considers revocation of already certified properties, explicit access prohibitions and statements about trust and distrust concerning other agents.

We specifically argue for dealing with doubt and distrust as well. Therefore, we extend the meaning of bound properties as follows. Trust on the side of an owner leads to granting a bound property that is regarded as a positive access right. Distrust leads to granting a bound property that is regarded as a negative access right. Thus, distrust does not lead to removing a granted positive access right. Whenever an owner has doubts on a granted bound property, he removes it.

uation is determined by expectations of the corresponding participant a as follows. If the participant expects that for a given grantor-property pair (ai, pi) assigner ai honestly certifies or will honestly certify property pi, then a positive evaluation maps the grantor-property pair to trust, i.e. , evala(ai, pi)= TRUST . Analogously, a negative evaluation maps a given grantor-property pair to distrust, and a neutral evaluation maps a given grantor-property pair to doubt. Obviously, the local eval-

