In pervasive and autonomous computing systems, security issues are in deep con- tact with cooperation aspects. Indeed, these systems consist of different entities that have to cooperate and share resources to achieve a certain goal. On its turn, cooperation is often related to trust, being the entities at stake more inclined to collaborate with parties that they trust.

In this paper we focus on the integration of formal modeling and analysis of security and trust. In particular, we present our framework to uniformly model security protocols and some form of trust and reputation management procedures, like Automated Trust Negotiation (ATN, [18]). We thus show that a strong con- nection exists between methodologies used to establish, manage and negotiate trust and the security mechanisms used to guarantee the confidentiality and integrity of information.

In this framework, cryptography is usually modeled by representing encryptions as terms of an algebra, e.g., mk may represent the encryption of a message m with a key k. Usually, the inverse operation, decryption, can be performed only by knowing the correct information, i.e., the decryption key.

Trying to unify trust features in a pre-existent framework already dealing with security is particularly appealing for our aims. Indeed, when one analyzes a secu- rity protocol, usually assumes that public keys, digital certificates, and generally speaking credentials are already given, and does not usually check how these are formated, negotiated and managed. Such a limited view seems not completely ap- propriate for dynamic, fully interconnected systems, where entering some resources may depend on credentials presented by users.

may be used by A to find some people (e.g., D) that is able to do f . Also we could consider that each credential has a weight expressing the degree of trust of one entity on the other for performing the function f . How trust values are calculated depend on the specific inference rules.

Once we are able to model both security protocols and trust management policies in a unique framework, we are also able to easily relate different concepts. For instance, we will formally show how the notion of privacy in trust negotiation is related to a well known concept in security, i.e., non interference. Similarly, once

In [7], Li et al. introduced the RT family of languages for managing and express- ing trust relationships among entities. In the RT family of languages, credentials carry information on policies to define attributes of principals by starting from assertions of other principals. RT combines the strength of Role-based Access Con- trol (RBAC), [15], by inheriting the notion of role, interposed in the assignment of permissions to users, and of Trust Management, [3], by inheriting principles for managing distributed authority through credentials.

