which allow sensors to communicate directly with nearby cluster- heads rather than forward all data to a more remote base station. Clustering routing protocols must seek a compromise between extending network lifetime and assuring effective coverage of the area of interest [26]. Many studies have focused on improving net- work coverage efficiency, scalability, and data routing with mini- mal energy consumption [2]. The most common clustering routing protocols for wireless sensor networks are LEACH [24] and its descendants TEEN [27], APTEEN [28], PEGASIS [29] and HEED [30]. These routing protocols differ in the means used to form clusters, select cluster-heads, and route sensor data to the base station. Recently, a Markov clustering routing protocol has been proposed (MCL-BCRP) [31], in which the Markov clustering algorithm (MCL) [32] is used to form clusters and select cluster- heads based on sensor location and residual energy. In simulations, this protocol outperforms HEED, LEACH, PEGASIS and TEEN in

This manuscript presents an improved version of the Markov clustering protocol. The proposed version is called the Weighted Markov clustering protocol (WMCL-BCRP) where the cluster-head selection is based on weighting sensors. The weighting is applied according to the abundance and residual energy of the sensors. This extended version handles sensor distribution randomness and non-uniformity more suitably in order to improve the resili-

Low-energy adaptive clustering hierarchy or LEACH [24] is the most popular clustering protocol devised for WSN applications. It was the first to use hierarchical structuring to organize network sensors into clusters. Head sensors selected randomly are respon- sible for collecting and aggregating data from the other (nearby) sensors in the cluster. Each head transmits data to the base station and its TDMA schedule to its sensors to organize intra-cluster com- munication. LEACH has drawbacks, for example, head selection is random, without consideration of sensor residual energy or other adaptive criteria. It is presumed that all heads can reach the base station. When a head becomes non-operational, the network becomes non-functional until a new head is elected. Variants have been proposed to overcome these deficiencies: LEACH-C, a central- ized version in which the base station selects a group of cluster- heads from candidates with the highest residual energy using the simulated annealing algorithm [39], VLEACH, which elects heads the same way LEACH does but at the same time designates a vice-head to take over when the principal head power supply is exhausted [40], MH-LEACH and TL-LEACH, which allow multi- hop transmissions between cluster-heads and the base station [41,42]. More recent enhancements include ESO-LEACH, which proposes a meta-heuristic particle swarm for cluster formation using the concept of advanced nodes and a more sophisticated set of rules for head selection [43], lGA-LEACH, which uses a micro genetic algorithm to compute an optimal set of cluster-heads [44], LEACH-VD, which explores the shortest paths between all cluster- heads using vector quantization and the DIJKSTRA algorithm [45], and F-LEACH, which introduces a fuzzy-based data aggregation algorithm to prolong network lifetime [46].

The hybrid energy-efficient distributed or HEED protocol [30] is another extension of LEACH, based on two new metrics for cluster- head selection: sensor residual energy and the cost (energy) of inter-cluster communications. During the initialization phase, the probability of selecting a sensor as a head is computed from the residual energy and the optimal number of clusters. Simulations show that this protocol increases network longevity compared to LEACH because cluster-heads are not selected randomly.

In the present article, we present an improvement of Markov- clustering-based routing, called weighted Markov-clustering- based routing (WMCL-BCRP), based on selection of cluster-heads and sensors in a way that extends the lifetime of networks charac- terized by non-uniform distribution of sensors. Its adaptive cluster-head selection is based mainly on two parameters: sensor residual energy and distribution density. This weighting at each round makes all sensors in the network potential candidates for selection as cluster-heads. Based on abundance, the lowest- weighted sensors are selected as queried sensors. By distinguishing low and high abundance (density) regions within the network, sparse regions are kept alive for as long as possible and intra- cluster energy consumption is reduced by bypassing redundant data transmissions in dense regions.

kov clustering is that if a walk starts randomly from one node to another, there is a greater chance of walking within the same clus- ter than moving to another cluster, since clusters are, by definition, separated by spaces of node sparseness. Clusters therefore can be discovered by exploring changes in the node density of the flow space. Random walks are determined by transforming the flow through the graph to a Markov chain. From a transition matrix as input to the algorithm, stochastic matrices are generated by alter- nating two complementary mathematical operators, namely expansion and inflation, until a convergence matrix is obtained [32].

Network matrix representation sub-phase. The network matrix is the main input to the MCL algorithm. Using GPS modules, sensors transmit their locations to the base station, and identifiers are assigned to them. The GPS module is disabled once the sensor location has been transmitted. The Euclidean distances between all network sensors are then computed. Mean distance is then calcu- lated as follows:

Markov clustering sub-phase. The Markov clustering sub- phase consists of applying the MCL algorithm to structure the net- work as clusters, by computing the Markov matrix induced from the matrix M. The MCL algorithm produces different clusters depending on sensor distribution over the sensing area. Simula- tions show that this algorithm rarely gives overlapping clusters.

In hierarchical structure WSNs, two modes of communication can be distinguished: inter-cluster and intra-cluster. In intra- cluster mode, communication between the different sensors and their cluster-heads is enabled by the TDMA access method. Each sensor is assigned a time slot to transmit readings to the cluster- head. In intra-cluster mode, the CDMA access method is used instead to allow different cluster-heads to transmit aggregated data to the base station. The communication phase is carried out as repetitive cycles of fixed duration called rounds. Each round comprises a setup sub-phase and a steady-state sub-phase.

The performance of the proposed weighted Markov-clustering- based routing protocol (WMCL-BCRP) is compared below to its unweighted ancestor (MCL-BCRP)[31] as well as to the TEEN [27], PEGASIS [29],LEACH [24] and HEED [30] protocols. The authors chose these protocols for simulations because, in addition to the availability of their codes in Matlab programming language, they are the most used as performance benchmarks in the literature. The simulations were carried out on a battery of tests containing 100 random wireless sensor networks. After presenting the simu- lation parameters and their selected performance comparison cri- teria, we discuss performance in terms of the round during which the first and last sensor expirations occurred, the number of expired sensors per round, average sensor lifetime, and the average energy dissipation by the network per round.

SIS or LEACH, and ten times compared to HEED. Moreover, the weighted Markov-clustering-based routing (WMCL-BCRP) triples the network lifetime (i.e., last sensor expiration) compared to its unweighted ancestor (MCL-BCRP) sixfold, ninefold, 11-fold, and 33-fold compared respectively to the TEEN, PEGASIS, LEACH and HEED protocols. However, the latest first sensor expiry delay was obtained with TEEN, followed by the unweightedancestor (MCL- BCRP), thenPEGASIS, LEACH, and finally the weighted Markov- clustering-based routing (WMCL-BCRP). Only HEED had a preco- cious first sensor expiry than the weighted Markov-clustering- based routing (WMCL-BCRP).

The best performances recorded during the simulations in terms of average sensor lifetime and last sensor expiry are clearly in favor of the proposed protocol compared to its unweighted ancestor and the other protocols. This is mainly due to the efficient management of energy inside clusters by using a cluster-head selection without additional overheads and by limiting the number of queried sensors in each cluster. However, the poor performance of the proposed protocol in terms of first sensor expiry is due to the selection of queried sensors with the lowest weight factor, that is, with weak batteries in high-density and low-density regions. Despite this disadvantage, the restriction on queried sensors con- tributes significantly to the conservation of residual energy within clusters.

Battery energy places major limitations on the deployment of wireless sensor networks (WSNs). Routing protocols have been developed to optimize sensor use and hence energy efficiency dur- ing data transmission and thereby prolong network lifetime. This article proposes an improvement of the Markov-clustering-based routing protocol, in which a clustering algorithm is combined with a strategy based on location, abundance and residual battery energy to select sensors as cluster-heads. Called weighted Markov-clustering-based routing, the proposed protocol selects cluster-heads and queried sensors. Cluster-head selection is based on the best weighting factor within sensor-dense regions to reduce intra-cluster communications with the base station. In contrast, the selection of queried sensors is limited to the candidates with the lowest weights both in dense and sparse regions of the net- work to conserve energy within the clusters. These selection strategies aim to restrict the sending of redundant data in dense regions, maintain sparse regions for as long as possible, and thereby reduce network energy consumption. Simulations show that the new protocol represents an improvement in terms of net- work lifetime; average sensor lifetime, average dissipated energy per round, and expired sensors per round. The applicability of the protocol to other fields will be investigated in future work.

Ujager, F. S., Mahmood, A., Usman, M., A., Rathore, M. S. (2022) A Hierarchical Energy Conservation Framework (HECF) of Wireless Sensor Network by Temporal Association Rule Mining for Smart Buildings, Egyptian Informatics Journal, Volume 23, Issue 1, March 2022, Pages 137-147..

