Abstract The brain signals usually generate certain electrical signals that can be recorded and ana- lyzed for detection in several brain disorder diseases. These small signals are expressly called as Electroencephalogram (EEG) signals. This research work analyzes the epileptic disorder in human brain through EEG signal analysis by integrating the best attributes of Artificial Bee Colony (ABC) and radial basis function networks (RBFNNs). We have used Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) technique for extraction of potential features from the signal. In our study, for classification of these signals, in this paper, the RBFNNs have been trained by a modified version of ABC algorithm. In the modified ABC, the onlooker bees are selected based on binary tournament unlike roulette wheel selection of ABC. Additionally, kernels such as Gaussian, Multi-quadric, and Inverse-multi-quadric are used for measuring the effectiveness of the method in numerous mixtures of healthy segments, seizure-free segments, and seizure segments. Our experimental outcomes confirm that RBFNN with inverse-multi-quadric kernel trained with modified ABC is significantly better than RBFNNs with other kernels trained by ABC and modified ABC.

In this study, we have highly emphasized on the perfor- mance enhancement of RBFNN. For this, a novel algorithm for training RBFNN using Artificial Bee Colony (ABC) [20] has been proposed. Rest of the Sections in this paper is set out as follows. Section 2 describes about the materials and dif- ferent methods used to carry out this research work and the proposed algorithm for RBFNN training. Section 3 describes our proposed work. In Section 4, the experimental studies have been carried out with an analysis of the outcomes. Section 5 concludes the article with lots of research issues.

For this research work, we have collected EEG data for epilep- tic seizure identification from publically available online resource. This is an openly available source of data for EEG used by many researchers for their research work. It is mainly categorized into five types set A, B, C, D and E. Each set con- tains 100 single channel EEG segments. Each segment is of 23.6 s duration. All these data have been prepared by removing artifacts due to eye or muscle movements. Sets A and B have been collected from healthy patients having eyes open and closed respectively. Sets C, D, and E have been collected from epileptic patients, but C and D are recorded in seizure-free activity, whereas set E contains seizure activity.

signal comes with 5 different sets (A, B, C, D, and E). There- fore, the experimental work is divided into three parts. First is consisting of A & E, the second is set D & E, and the third is a collection of A & D with E. These datasets are now ready for the classification work.

For this study, five sets of EEG signals for Epileptic seizure identification have been collected from publicly available source [27]. There are three combinations of these sets taken for exper- imental study, that is set A & E (Experiment 1), set D & E (Experiment 2) and set A + D & E (Experiment 3). All these three datasets are first taken for classification using RBFNN with Gradient Descent Learning algorithm. This algorithm is evaluated by taking different values of learning parameter (g) from 0.5 to 1.0. By different experimental evaluation we found that for EEG dataset the Gaussian and Inverse-multi-quadric basis functions outperform as compared to Multi-quadric func- tion. After that a deep research has been done to enhance the performance of RBFNN using ABC algorithm.

