Cellular automata are a well known model of computation, studied from already fifty years. This model is a very powerful tool for simulation of various phenomenas, from gas flows up to the circulation of crowds of pedestrians in railway stations and other physical, chemical or sociological problems of everyday life. At the same time, they are very simple dynamical systems which raise a lot of difficult theoretical questions which are far from being solved. Cellular automata are also a model of computations to which the theory of computability applies. There are a lot of results about the complexity of computations with cellular automata. There are also a lot of results on the Turing complete power of computation of this model.

In the nineties and very recently, a few works appeared on the question whether the question of the existence of Garden of Eden is connected with the growth func- tion of the group associated to a Cayley graphs. This function of n gives the number of elements of the group which can be represented by a product of at most n gen- erators of the group and their inverses. In [6,2,1], the question is considered in different settings of Cayley groups. In [6], a counter-example is given when the group has an exponential growth: then, there is an injective global function which is not surjective and there is a surjective global function which is not injective.

However, the techniques of Cayley graphs do not apply to infinitely many tes- sellations of the hyperbolic plane. They apply only when the generating polygon is of the form {2p, 2q}, which means that its number of sides is even and that the number of polygons around a vertex in the tiling is also even, see [3]. In the other cases, especially for polygons with an odd number of sides and with an odd num- ber of copies around a vertex, these techniques do not apply. However, for all the mentioned tessellations, whatever the parities, the technique indicated in [7] always apply: there, tools are developed which allow to locate the cells in the hyperbolic plane, facilitating the implementation of cellular automata in these contexts.

Cellular automata live on regular grids. There are infinitely many ones in the hyperbolic plane. Here, we choose the simplest ones in some sense: the pentagrid and the ternary heptagrid, see [11] for a detailed study of these grids. The pentagrid is constructed on the replication of a copy of the regular pentagon with right angles in its sides and, recursively, of the images in their sides. The ternary heptagrid

Now, the hyperbolic plane has no privileged point and it is intrinsically non- oriented too. Basically, we do things in a very similar way with what is performed in the Euclidean case. First we fix a cell which will be the central one. This fixes the sectors around the central cell: each neighbour of the central cell is identified with a root of the Fibonacci tree which spans the considered sector. Next, fixing in a sector which cell will be the leftmost son of the root allows us to fix what means clockwise in this context, as the leftmost son of another sector is defined by the rotation which maps this sector to the first chosen one. This correspondence between the two processes allows us to say that defining the father of all the cells, except the central one, amounts to define a direction in the hyperbolic plane.

Proof of Theorem 4.2. The states are again 0 or 1 and we denote by N (x, t, 1) the number of neighbours y of x, with y /= x for which s(y, t) = 1, where, again, s(y, t) is the state at y and at time t. We define the transition function in such a way that:

From these results, it appears that a new argument has to be found to prove the undecidability of the surjectivity or the reversibility of cellular automata in the hyperbolic plane. For the injectivity, the problem can be proved undecidable by transferring to the hyperbolic plane the way opened by Jarkko Kari, although it is not all that easy, see [13]. It seems reasonable to conjecture that the surjectivity and the reversibility of the global function of a cellular automaton are undecidable. An argument, in favour of this conjecture is that the tiling problem for the hyperbolic plane is also undecidable, as it was proved by Maurice Margenstern and by Jarkko Kari, independently and by very different methods, see [5,8,14].

