In this section, we recall some basic notions and notations for term rewriting that we will use in the rest of the paper. We refer the reader to [1] for additional information. A signature F is a finite set of function symbols together with their (fixed) arity.

X denotes a denumerable set of variables X1, X2,.. ., and T (F, X ) denotes the set of terms built up from F and X . Terms are identified with finite labeled trees. The symbol at the root of t is denoted by root(t). Positions are strings of positive integers. The subterm of t at position p is denoted by t|p and the result of replacing t|p with u at position p in t is denoted by t[u]p.

ualistic Satisfaction, the shared group ethos. Other forms of group ethos are, of course, possible (e.g., to allow for group competitiveness, altruism, etc); these alter- natives are the basis for different e-collective meta-policies that can, nevertheless, be naturally represented in our framework.

Example 3.2 Consider the following empowerment theories EMPm1 , EMPm2 , EMPm3 , and EMPm4 , for the e-collective members m1, m2, m3 and m4, respec- tively. The empowerment theories assume that the Principle of Maximal Satisfac- tion is to be implemented.

In addition to an fNT theory and an EMP theory, each agent m in the e-collective will define an AUT H theory. An AUT H theory is a set of rules for specifying whether m authorizes a client c to perform an action a on a resource r when m is acting in f-mode or C-mode. The specification of the authorization policy may follow any of the standard access control models. For instance, we may specify a role-based authorization policy. We omit the details of the access control model (see for instance [5] for a rewrite-based specification of the RBAC model) and just show the general form of the rules:

Termination and confluence of term rewriting systems are undecidable properties in general, but there is an extensive body of work aimed at providing decidable suf- ficient conditions for confluence and termination (see, for example, [20,25,24,3,2,9]). In particular, orthogonal systems are confluent, and systems that define recursive functions using a primitive recursive scheme are terminating. These conditions have been used in [5] to derive sufficient conditions for totality and confluence of access control policies, and the same techniques can be used for action control policies.

