In order for MANET routing protocols to function as desired, we must trust that intermediate nodes within the routing path follow the protocol rules. Trusting intermediate nodes to follow the protocol rules is a significant issue in MANETs, as these networks consist of highly dynamic nodes. Nodes may join or leave the network and network topology changes with mobility.

Developing a proper threat model against MANET routing protocols presents a significant challenge. Defining a threat model is directly related to applying as- sumptions to attacker capabilities. The attacker strength may range from assuming the attacker has the same power and capability of a non-malicious node to assuming the attacker has virtually no limitations, 5 as viewed in the classical Dolev-Yao [7] attacker model.

The invisible node attack (INA) occurs when a node participates in a routing protocol without revealing its identity. An invisible node simply forwards messages between the source and destination during route discovery, regardless if keying ma- terial is being utilized or not. Any discovered route that is dependent on the invisible node reports a path that does not reflect the current network topology.

Modeling attacker capabilities poses a significant challenge for proper MANET pro- tocol security analysis. In the security protocol community, the Dolev-Yao [7] model provides the strongest formal model to effectively evaluate authentication 6 proto- cols. In the secure routing community, the attacker model does not traditionally follow formalized attacker models.

The Dolev-Yao attacker in a MANET environment can capture any message in the network and can transmit a message to any network node. Since the attacker can effectively reduce communication between any two nodes to a two-hop network channeled through the attacker, the Dolev-Yao attacker provides the strongest at- tacker model for evaluating MANET routing protocols. If a routing protocol can be shown secure against a Dolev-Yao attacker, the protocol will be secure against any attacker capability.

Unfortunately, the Dolev-Yao model is not traditionally used to evaluate MANET routing protocols. The most common approach to model attacker ca- pabilities used throughout the MANET community is to assume the attacker node has the same capabilities as any node within the network. Forcing an attacker to use nodes without any additional capability unrealistically limits the attacker. Re-

Parmetric Attacker. The parametric attacker approach in [12] further re- fines the active-n-m attacker. The parametric attacker, represented by A(k, SA), identifies the number of attacker nodes k and the initial pre-distributed attacker knowledge SA, such as keys. The Dolev-Yao attacker is included as a special bound- ary case, in which each network link contains a parametric attacker. However, the authors do not indicate how the Dolev-Yao boundary case interacts with the pro- tocol. Additionally, the authors do not allow colluding attackers to share captured information during network operation. The scenarios they evaluate contain a single adversary with the same communication capabilities exhibited by the non-malicious nodes.

path from the source to the destination exists or to add itself to the route, since it is not an authorized user. Insider nodes have the added capability to sign messages, as they hold a trusted cryptographic key. Since malicious insiders are authorized users, adding themselves to a valid route does not constitute an attack for the malicious insider. Therefore, malicious insiders only attempt to corrupt the route.

Between the standard node attacker and the Dolev-Yao extremes, we add an attacker with an unlimited reception capability and a limited transmission capabil- ity. This category (classifications III, IV, and VIII) does not assume the attacker node follows bi-directional communication rules (i.e., the attacker is asymmetrical), allowing the attacker to appear as a normal node during transmissions, while at the same time allowing any message to be received. An attacker with this capability can arise by having a more powerful transceiver or antenna than the standard network nodes. However, the attacker can restrict its transmission range by adjusting its output power.

