In this paper we develop the metatheory for Timed Modal Logic (TML), which is the modal logic used for the analysis of timed transition systems (TTSs). We solve a series of long-standing open problems related to TML. Firstly, we prove that TML enjoys the Hennessy-Milner property and solve one of the open questions in the field. Secondly, we prove that the set of validities are not recursively enumerable. Nevertheless,

In the areas of embedded and cyber-physical systems, more than two decades of research have been dedicated to developing quantitative modeling and specification formalisms that allow for the construction of systems with guaranteed functional and non-functional properties. In particular, many embedded systems are highly safety critical, with hard constraints on real-time behaviors being essential. Here, the notion of timed transition system and timed automata [4] have proven extremely convenient for modeling purposes and are now routinely used for the analysis of real- time communication protocols and control programs.

Secondly, we prove that the satisfiability problem for TML is undecidable despite its restrictive expressive power, thus generalizing the known undecidability result of satisfiability for TCTL [2]. Moreover, we show that the set of TML-validities is not recursively-enumerable. This implicitly means that any complete proof system will generate a non-recursively enumerable set of provable formulas, and makes one wonder whether this logic can, in fact, be axiomatized at all - see e.g., the discussion in [6].

Our axioms provide a set of sufficient conditions that characterizes the concept of time in models like TTSs and timed automata. They reflect properties such as persistence, continuity, linearity, density of time, synchronization, or the fact that all clocks measure the same time flow. Most of these axioms are similar to axioms seen in other modal logics and these relations open interesting further questions.

This paper does not aim at addressing problems related to timed automata, nor to model verification, model construction or model checking. Our purpose is to clarify the open problems of model theory for TML. The interesting questions regarding timed automata-semantics will be addressed in a future work.

proof system is strongly-complete for the TTS-semantics. The completeness proofs consist of the construction of a canonical model. Being the role of interpretations in the semantics of TTS, the canonical model is not constructed from maximal consistent sets, as for other modal logics. This is because a maximal consistent set does not identify a state of a TTS; it identifies a set in the presence of a fixed interpretation. Moreover, the same maximal consistent set might be satisfied by non-bisimilar models under different interpretations. To cope with all this complex situation we propose a new method for constructing canonical models.

The axioms (A5)-(A10) describe the nature of time in TTSs. Thus, (A5) states that the time is linear and 0-delays do not perturb the system; (A6) that the time is persistent; (A7) that the flow of time is unidirectional (the past and the future are disjoint); (A8) that the time is deterministic; (A9) and (A10) that the time is continuous. The axiom (A11) guarantees that all the clocks measure the same time flow.

The aforementioned technique to construct canonical models cannot be applied directly for TML because to the same state of a given TTS corresponds different maximally-consistent sets of formulas under different interpretations. We generalize this construction to cope with the complexity of TML. To the best of our knowledge, the following construction is original.

