The extensive industrial growth during the last century has resulted into environmental pollution including water con- tamination. Waste water discharge from industries such as textiles, paper manufacturing, plastics, leather, food, antisep- tics and dyes to water reservoirs has severely damaged water quality [1]. Heavy metals are horrible non-biodegradable water pollutants which are toxic and affect human being greatly. Lead and zinc are two important heavy metals that are well- known toxics, used in metallurgy, tannery manufacturing, paper and pulp industries, metal products, paints and varnishes, battery manufacturing industries, galvanizing plants, etc. [2]. Lead exists as Pb(II) in water that enters into food chains and accumulates in soft tissues of the body. It is a known meta- bolic poison and enzyme inhibitor that accumulates in bones, brain, kidney and muscles and causes a variety of health prob- lems such as anemia, nervous system deterioration, reduction in fertility both in men and women, failure of kidneys,

adsorbent that was coated on an inexpensive support, sand. Only few papers are available where manganese oxide has been coated on cheap source and used for the adsorption of Pb(II) or Zn(II). Even if few papers are available, these studies have some drawbacks, like high contact time, high dosage, low ad- sorption capacity and incapability to work under natural water conditions [31]. No detailed mechanism had been given any- where in literature. Therefore, in the present paper efforts were made to coat manganese oxide onto river sand for the prepa- ration of an adsorbent for the removal Pb(II) and Zn(II) from aqueous solution. Detailed mechanism, isotherm and ther- modynamic studies had been discussed herein.

Batch experiments were carried out using a series of Erlen- meyer flasks of capacity 50 mL covered with Teflon sheet to prevent any foreign particle contamination or removal of metal solution from the flask during shaking. Each experiment was conducted twice, and the data given herein were the average values. The effects of metal concentration, dosage of adsor- bent, temperature, contact time and pH on adsorption were studied by varying one variable while keeping all other pa- rameters fixed. Isotherm experiments were performed by taking different concentrations of Pb(II) and Zn(II) and optimum dosage was major having the highest intensity (963 a.u.), and when the angular data were compared with XRD data of Indian stan- dard sand, the test sand turned out to be quartz with some impurities [44]. The XRD pattern of MOCS showed peaks at 13.6

tration of Pb(II) and Zn(II) solutions. The increase in adsorption with the increase in the amount of MOCS was attributed to the number of binding sites available for both Pb(II) and Zn(II) ions [46]. Higher adsorption of Zn(II) in comparison to Pb(II) might be due to difference in size and electro-negativities [47].

increased adsorption [51]. Therefore, for elimination of pre- cipitation effect, and for considering the only adsorption efficiency, pH of Pb(II) and Zn(II) solutions were kept lower than the critical pH of hydroxide precipitation. Therefore, pH 6.0 was optimum pH for both Pb(II) and Zn(II) ions.

Temkin isotherm. Temkin isotherm is based on the as- sumption that the heat of adsorption of all molecules in the layer decreases linearly with the coverage of adsorbent surface. The isotherm is applicable for adsorption on heterogeneous solid adsorbent surface and liquid adsorbate. The linearized mathematical form of Temkin isotherm is:

Kinetic study of process is necessary to obtain information about the adsorption mechanism, which is crucial for the practical- ity of the process. The mechanism of the adsorption process depends on the physical and chemical characteristics of the adsorbent and adsorbate. The mechanism and rate of adsorp- tion were proposed by fitting the experimental kinetic data to pseudo-first, pseudo-second and Elovich kinetic models.

The insignificant non-zero intercept values indicated that the film diffusion mechanism might be followed by both metal ions. Smaller deviations might be due to the shear on the particles during agitation, which considerably reduced the thickness of the aqueous layer surrounding the particles. Thus boundary layer resistance or film diffusion might be rate-limiting step in both metal ions adsorption.

The water pollution caused globally by toxic heavy metals due to discharge of industrial wastewater may be resolved by ad- sorption onto adsorbents. Two most toxic heavy metals, Pb(II) and Zn(II), had been removed by MOCS. Adsorption depended on pH and temperature and followed both Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms. High Langmuir monolayer adsorption ca- pacities for Pb(II) and Zn(II) at three temperatures indicated suitability of the adsorbent. Pb(II) adsorption followed pseudo- second-order, whereas Zn(II) followed pseudo-first order kinetics. The spent MOCS was regenerated using 1.0 N NaOH and reused. Thus, MOCS represents a class of recyclable low cost adsorbents that can be safely used for the removal of heavy metals from industrial wastewater.

