Simple as this cascade is, it already generates about six hundred different species, and would be tedious to specify by traditional reaction-based methods, and even more so to modify. In fact one of the major advantages of the approach we advocate is to avoid the combinatorial explosion of traditional approaches. A more complex example which illustrates this point in spectacular fashion can be found in Ref. [3].

The description of a system in Kappa consists of a collection of agents and rules. An agent has a set of sites, which may have internal states, typically used to denote phosphorylation and other post-translational modifications, and may also bind to other sites, to represent the formation of complexes. Rules describe conditions under which agents associate, dissociate or get modified. Agent deletion or creation is also possible. This idealised repertoire allows to model a substantial part of the interactions involved in cellular signalling.

In the textual notation we are using here, internal states are shown as subscripts u (unphosphorylated) and p (phosphorylated) to the sites they are attached to; bonds are represented as shared superscripts across agents to indicate the two endpoints of a link. A double arrow indicates a reversible rule. The left hand side of a rule specifies a condition to trigger the rule, while the right hand side specifies changes to agents mentioned on the left. Thus the second reaction says that when the kinase is bound to its target at x, this site may get phosphorylated.

So how does a rule-based approach compares in terms of flexibility? As said ear- lier the number of generated species in the model we have considered is about six hundred (techniques to count the number of reachable complexes have been devel- oped in Ref. [4]). A differential model, were it to take all combinations into account would be already quite large, because such models only know of reactions between structure-less entities. So a variation such as the one we performed would probably be very tedious, and in fact rapidly impossible for larger examples. If, on the other hand, the model was not considering all possibilities, then it could be even harder to modify, since whether what was significant before the variation still is so after is not known, and one would have to guess again. Process-algebra based notations record the behaviour of each agent in the agent itself (the reason why they are called process-centric) and that would also make the kind of variation delineated above less of an easy operation -and the tedium of having to emumerate internal states is still a problem.

