accurate identification is of utmost importance. Cattle identification can broadly be categorized into two types namely contact and non-contact methods [2]. Under the contact method, various techniques have been used manually to recognize animals such as hot iron branding, freeze branding, ear tags, rumen implants, tattoos, etc. [3]. Though conven- tional methods served the purpose to some extent but with a major pitfall of easy circumvention [4]. Contact methods inherent major

drawback of Animal stress due to the painful procedure involved to mark identity. However, these are invasive for the cattle and non-cost- efficient as compared to other more effective processes [5]. Non- contact methods include AI-based technologies using biometric identi- fication and other machine learning models.

During the last couple of decades, with the evolvement of AI tech- nologies such as machine learning / deep learning, human recognition using human biometrics features of the face, iris, fingerprint, etc. It has become quite easy to recognize human beings with greater accuracy [6]. The recognition using biometrics is not limited to humans anymore and now animal recognition has also become a vital segment of this emerging technology [7].

Biometric identification of cattle provides fundamental information for numerous applications. One of the prominent applications is to manage fake livestock Insurance claims [11]. Farm owners who have insured their cattle, unfortunately, tend to make false claims because a non-technical layman who did not stay around the cattle so much, cannot easily recognize the cattle. Only those who stay for a longer period and are appropriately familiar with the cattle can identify which one had been insured. Hence, these fraudulent farm owners successfully deceive Insurers and obtain claim money for the cattle that were not even registered. To overcome this issue of bogus Insurance claims lodged by farm owners, an Automated Intelligent Cattle Identification and Insurance Claim Management System is proposed to overcome the most critical issue faced by the insurers which are fake claims. Just like human fingerprints, cattle muzzle print comprises two unique features recognized as ridge bifurcation and ridge termination which can be used to track accurate Identity by matching relevant information with pre- served datasets.

The system will not only be helpful for the detection of false insur- ance claims but it can also be utilized on farms for monitoring the cattle, for their health, safety, and management. The traditional approaches to recognizing cattle except for the naked eye are tagging the animal using ear tags, and implanting microchips in the animal [13]. While micro- chips like NFC, RFID, etc. are better than ear tags, they can be expensive, and hurtful to the cattle as they will be needed to be implanted inside the cattle and there will be a need for an expert who can safely execute the said procedure, which can be expensive. On the other hand, using ear tags is not very efficient as these tags can be forged or switched from one animal to other pretty easily.

The proposed system offers wide range of potential applications, including the accurate and efficient tracking of individual cattle for breeding or medical purposes, as well as monitoring their behavior and movement within feedlots, and identifying lost or stolen animals. This novel approach has the potential to revolutionize cattle management and tracking, resulting in increased productivity and efficiency within the agricultural sector. By utilizing advanced computer vision tech- niques, the proposed system provides a rapid and precise method for identifying specific cattle based on their unique biometric characteris- tics, offering significant advantages over traditional identification methods.

Section 2 demonstrates the literature review. Section 3 explains the Research Methodology to intelligently identify cattle in real-time. It includes description of all the adopted tools and technologies for achievement of our research objectives. Section 4 elucidates the per- formance of proposed model and experimental results. Section 5 con- cludes the research work and recommend some new avenues for future researches.

During the last couple of decades, numerous research studies have been conducted on biometric features based on Animal identity [8]. The emergence of Precision Livestock Farming (PLF) played an important role in the fourth Industrial Revolution [14]. Owners of big cattle farms are induced to adopt new identification techniques because traditional methods are more expensive, cumbersome to implement, and sometimes inefficient to manage a larger number of animals. Moreover, Artificial Intelligence (AI) has made the task much easier to identify any cattle with greater accuracy, minimal effort, and shorter time [15]. Since ancient times, various techniques have been employed for accurate identifications of cattle. Conventional systems of cattle recognition include Hot or cold branding, ear tagging, ear tattoos, and ear notches [16]. Though these are comparatively cheaper the process is very paining for cattle which often causes severe health issues for the animals [16].

The recent work in cattle face recognition has brought forth multiple techniques to recognize cattle faces. In earlier days of research on cattle biometrics features, Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) technique had been used to extract muzzle patterns features from image print [18]. The implanted RFID chips are also used for tracking and identification of cattle. However, it is challenging for large herds to implement RFID effectively [4]. Researchers used texture fusion techniques for the extraction of muzzle features. Worapan Kusakunniran et al. [19] pro- posed a fusion of Transition Local Binary Pattern with Gabor feature. Convolution Neural Network was proposed for greater accuracy of image recognition. The CNN technology is applied on basis of system training instead of a hardcoded algorithm; resultantly a large number of images can be identified [20]. Kumar et al. [21] proposed cattle face

recognition approach using LBP and SURF feature extractors with Gaussian Pyramid [22] levels 1 through 4. This technique might not work properly with images in different lighting conditions. Also, they are using full face images of cattle which is not very efficient in recog- nizing cattle as mostly the cattle have similar facial features. Zin et al.

all these, other yolov7 models can also be fine-tuned to achieve better results. The final model which is yolov7-tiny, is deployed on the cloud. We trained several object detection models from YOLO object detection family and Detecto, Yolo family include Yolov4, Yolov7, Yolov7x, and Yolov7-tiny. The training was done on NVidia GTX 1050 Ti

The yolov7 model is then transformed to ONNX (Open Neural Network Exchange) and is simplified which further improved inference time and the ONNX model has inference time of 0.04 s and that too on CPU (Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 5122 CPU @ 3.60 GHz 3.59 GHz).

scale-space representation, which is created by applying a number of scale-space transformations. The image is scaled to several octaves, each of which is half the size of the preceding octave, in order to locate the potential feature sites. Within each octave, a scale-space pyramid is constructed by convolving the images with Gaussian blur filters. The blurred images are represented as:

It is pertinent to remember that the computational cost of key-point localization is influenced by the size and complexity of the input image as well as the desired degree of scale-space representation. More octaves and scales are needed for huge photos, which increases computing cost. SIFT is now computationally practical for a variety of real-world ap- plications thanks to developments in technology and optimization approaches.

A region surrounding each key point is specified, often in the form of a square or circular neighborhood, in order to calculate the key-point descriptor. A histogram of the gradient orientations is produced within each of the smaller sub regions or bins that make up this region. The gradient orientations reveal details about the boundaries and texture of the local image structure.

Each pixel within the sub regions has its gradient magnitudes and orientations calculated, and these values are weighted by a Gaussian function centered at the critical point. This weighting prioritizes the gradients nearer the focal point, obtaining the most pertinent local data. The weighted gradient magnitudes are then added together into orientation bins to create the histogram of gradient orientations. The key-point descriptor is formed from this histogram and is often displayed as a high-dimensional feature vector. The number of bins utilized in the orientation histogram and other factors set during the descriptor

Procedures are applied to detect the face and nose area to get the latest muzzle pattern. The system will look up the muzzle pattern with the stored information in the database. In case the pattern is matched, the system will get the concerned Tag ID.

Our system can detect face and muzzle point of cow/buffalo with mAP of 99%, not only that but this system has the capability to differ- entiate cows/buffalos from other cattle as well as humans. The inference time is also remarkable as we have used the state of the art yolov7 object detection model. As far as recognition is concerned, the feature match- ing algorithm FLANN is used for muzzle point pattern recognition. The system was able to recognize the animal with 100% accuracy. The testing was done by registering the animal in the system using an image and then tested with different images in different environments. Images of a total of 500 animals were used to evaluate recognition algorithm and it recognized all the animals with 100% accuracy beating the humans because at one point we were not able to recognize the animal

Recognition Method, the third system achieves an identification accu- racy rate of 70.00%. The YOLO algorithm, which is used by the fourth system, has a detection accuracy rate of 96.00%. However, because they can be switched or faked, ear tags are not a reliable method for identi- fying cows.

The fifth system achieves a 93.30% identification accuracy rate with a 6.70% loss rate by utilizing a Unified Deep Learning Architecture method with BiLSTM and Inception-V3 CNN algorithms. However, after a certain frame length, the accuracy based on video frame length may not improve or even decline.

The sixth system uses YOLO and Few-Shot Deep Transfer Learning algorithms for Automated Muzzle Detection and Biometric Identifica- tion, achieving a 99.11% detection accuracy rate with a 0.99% loss rate. Our proposed algorithm, which uses YOLOV7 and Muzzle Pattern Feature Matching algorithms, achieved exceptional results. It achieved a detection accuracy rate of 99.50% with a 0.50% loss rate and a perfect identification accuracy rate of 100.00% with 0.00% loss rate. The pro- posed deep learning-based systems using YOLO algorithm demonstrated superior performance in terms of detection and identification accuracy

In this paper, we introduced a unique approach based on Yolov7 techniques of object detection. It detects objects more accurately and swiftly than the previous versions. Our dataset includes 9400 images. Total annotated dataset comprises 15,416 class labels representing all the four classes face, nose, dirty nose and not cow. Then had to be split into training ~ 94%, validation ~ 5%, and testing 1%.

