In this paper, the proposed models are compared with the perfor- mances of traditional DL methods on the same dataset. Pre-trained and state-of-the-art models were used with the principle of TL and results were obtained by applying them to our original wound dataset. AlexNet, googlenet, densenet201, mobilenetv2, resnet18, resnet50, resnet101, shufflenet, nasnetmobile, efficientnetb0, vgg16, vgg19, squeezenet, darknet19, darknet53, inceptionv3, xception, inceptionresnetv2, and nasnetlarge pretrained DL architectures were used in this paper based on the results of previous paper of the authors [39]. All methods were re- coded by the authors with the training parameters obtained from the experimental results [40] to make a fair comparison. The best per- forming AlexNet architecture among these methods is discussed in this study. The success of the methods is presented using classification per- formance (or called evaluation) metrics which are accuracy (ACC), sensitivity (SEN), specificity (SPE), precision (PRE), and f1-score (F1SCO).

Determination of granule, necrotic and slough wound types is of great importance in terms of following the treatment stages of the wounds of the patients. In this study, a three-class classification problem as granule, necrotic and slough is solved. In addition, it is aimed to classify the wound images according to tissue type with high accuracy and to investigate the effect of DL models in medical image processing. To provide a solution to this problem, three new architectures with 3, 4, and 6 CNN layers were proposed by modifying the CNN-based AlexNet architecture.  In  addition,  using  the  SVM  classifier  for  these

The proposed model with 6 Convolution layers also showed a per- formance of over 94% when used with the Softmax classifier. In the experiments with both classifiers, it is seen that the 6Conv_Softmax and 6Conv_SVM models obtained by increasing the convolution layer in- crease the success. In addition, similar experimental studies have been carried out for architectures with seven or more layers (max = 10) by increasing the Convolution layer. These methods and their details were not included in this paper, since there was no improvement in the results of the evaluation metrics.

performances of the classifier models. Confusion matrices provide in- formation about whether the images used in testing the classification performance of the methods belong to the real class. The actual class values are shown in each column, and the predicted results by the model are seen in each row.

showing which of the granule, necrotic and slough classes diabetic foot ulcer and pressure ulcer images belong to. Studies have generally inferred on a binary classification that shows whether the wound images considered in the relevant study belong to that type, rather than tissue classification of the wound image. [12] studied which of the venous, diabetic, pressure, and surgical classes wounds belongs to. In the liter- ature comparison, 3-class Classification achievements of this study were discussed.

AlexNet method is used for chronic wound research. It reveals the classification of wounds according to tissue characterization. MobileNet-Unet architecture based on encoder-decoder structure is used for image segmentation. Alexnet architecture, which is one of the deep learning architectures, and its different modifications are discussed and its performance in wound image classification is examined.

In the medical world, wound care and follow-up is one of the issues that are studied more and more every day. Accurate and early recog- nition of chronic wounds can reduce treatment costs. Wound classifi- cation is also used in national reports on quality to analyze clinical, economic and educational outcomes. Nurses and doctors, who are in- tegral members of the healthcare team, must ensure that their data is accurate, consistent and reliable. As in many subjects in the medical field, the evaluation of wound analysis by computer science is of great importance in terms of contributing to the treatment processes. The bed. Recognition and management of wound bed problems, such as necrotic tissue, excessive exudate, results in a well-prepared wound bed and optimal healing. During the Covid process, the number of ampu- tated feet has increased considerably, as he could not come to the hos- pital due to a diabetic foot wound and could not receive the correct diagnosis and treatment.

architecture increases the classification accuracy. The model with 6 Convolution layers (6Conv_Softmax) was the most successful method among the methods recommended with 98.85% accuracy, 98.85% sensitivity, 99.42% specificity. In future studies, it can be aimed to in- crease performance by making modifications or improvements on other methods whose performance is close to the AlexNet architecture.

