With coalgebras usually being defined in terms of an endofunctor T on sets, this paper shows that modal logics for T -coalgebras can be naturally described as functors L on boolean algebras. Building on this idea, we study soundness, completeness and expressiveness of coalgebraic logics from the perspective of duality theory. That is, given a logic L for coalgebras of an endofunctor T , we construct an endofunctor L such that L-algebras provide a sound and complete (algebraic) semantics of the logic. We show that if L is dual to T , then soundness and completeness of the algebraic semantics immediately yield the corresponding property of the coalgebraic semantics. We conclude by characterising duality between L and T in terms of the axioms of L. This provides a criterion for proving concretely given logics to be sound, complete and expressive.

Coalgebras have been recognised as models for a large variety of state based systems (see [18] for an overview). The coalgebraic approach to state based systems calls for a general logical framework, where one can describe and reason about properties of state based systems. This question has been ad- dressed in [14,9,17,12,15]. These investigations are specific to coalgebras on the category of sets and use techniques from modal logic to relate syntactic derivability and semantic validity, notably (variations of) the canonical model construction. The observation that descriptive general frames are in 1-1 cor- respondence to coalgebras for the Vietoris-functor on the category of Stone spaces (see [11]) opens new (algebraic) ways for showing soundness and com- pleteness for certain modal logics over coalgebras: we set up a duality between coalgebras for an endofunctor on Stone spaces and algebras containing the boolean signature. This is similar in spirit to the work of Goldblatt [6], where the duality between descriptive general frames and boolean algebras with op- erators is discussed; as it has been shown in [11] this can also be seen as a duality of functors: Given an endofunctor T (on Stone spaces) and a logic for T -coalgebras, we devise a functor L (on boolean algebras). Viewing formulas of the logic as algebraic terms, the category of L-algebras provides a sound and and complete semantics of the logic.

In the whole paper, Set denotes the category of sets and functions, Stone is the category of Stone spaces and continuous maps. Since the development in this paper can be instantiated to both coalgebras over set and coalgebras over Stone spaces, we develop the theory for both cases simultaneously. The essential ingredient is a functor which assigns boolean algebras to objects of the base category. In the case of sets, this is the contravariant power set

Remark 6.2 The definition of a order-preserving and -reflecting set of axioms given here is not exactly the same as the definition given in [15]: We restrict our attention to maps which have boolean preorders as domain. The proofs and arguments in [15] for proving soundness and completeness of the logic would however also work with our weaker conditions.

