In this paper we introduce WMC, a weighted version of the alternation-free modal mu-calculus for weighted transition systems. WMC subsumes previously studied weighted extensions of CTL and resembles previously proposed time-extended versions of the modal mu-calculus. We develop, in addition, a symbolic semantics for WMC and demonstrate that the notion of satisfiability coincides with that of symbolic satisfiability. This central result allows us to prove two major meta-properties of WMC. The first is decidability of satisfiability for WMC. In contrast to the classical modal mu-calculus, WMC does not possess the finite model-property. Nevertheless, the finite model property holds for the symbolic semantics and decidability readily follows; and this contrasts to resembling logics for timed transitions systems for which satisfiability has been shown undecidable. As a second main contribution, we provide a complete axiomatization, which applies to both semantics. The completeness proof is non-standard, since the logic is non-compact, and it involves the notion of symbolic models.

Our second main contribution is a complete axiomatization of WMC, allowing all valid properties to be derived as theorems. At the best of our knowledge, this is the first complete axiomatization for a fixed point weighted modal logic in the literature. The axiomatization is remarkably simple, combining modal axioms of non-recursive weighted logic with classic axioms of fixed points [20, 28, 30]. The finite model property provides the arguments to demonstrate that the axiomatization is complete for the symbolic semantics and hence, the completeness result can be extrapolated to the WTS-semantics.

In this section, we focus on developing a sound and complete axiomatization for the validities of WMC with respect to the two semantics. Recall that the two sets of validities coincide. In the light of Theorem 5.1, it is sufficient to find such an axiomatization for the SWS-semantics and it is then sound and complete also for the WTS-semantics.

The axioms (A1)-(A3) state simple arithmetic facts. (A4) states that an action- transition has a positive cost. (A5) guarantees that all the resource-variables mea- sure the same resource. The axiom (A6) and the rule (R1) state that all the box-like operators of WMC are normal in the sense of modal logic [8]. The nature of the reset operation is depicted by (A7)-(A11).

