heterogeneous sensor nodes have suggested increasing the net- work lifetime and reliability. In addition, the network cost of heterogeneous nodes is less expensive than the networks that are forced to choose each node mobile, especially for large-scale applications. However, the optimal deployment of the hetero- geneous nodes is the objective of our work.

no arbitrary relation between the sensing and communication ranges in which the communication range is usually chosen to be the double of sensing range. The authors, in [9] and [10], exploited well-known geometrical solution, Voronoi diagrams, and introduced two solutions exploiting the heterogeneity in mobile support which the existence of mobile and static sen- sors is considered to save the network cost. However, that solution was restricted with Voronoi diagrams, which work with the same sensing and communication ranges. Accord- ingly, that solution is constraint to deploy heterogeneous nodes.

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 briefly intro- duces the related works. Section 3 presents preliminaries for our work includes the assumptions and the proposed geomet- rical foundation. The proposed relocation strategy is discussed in Section 4. The basic operations of the proposed strategy are described in details in Section 5. The performance comparisons and simulation results are introduced in Section 6 to evaluate the designed parameters of the proposed strategy. Section 7 concludes this work and emphasizes the future work.

[9] suggested deploying a combination of static and mobile sensors to save the network cost. The mobile sensors move to hail the coverage gaps based on Voronoi diagrams. Such work may consume further energy, which a sensor moves to several positions until reach the final position. Therefore, such work was enhanced in [10], which a type of dynamic clustering is used to reduce the number of movement rounds and directly move sensors to the final destinations. However, such solution cannot be applied to heterogeneous sensors, especially for dif- ferent sensing ranges because Voronoi diagrams as a geometric algorithm is designed to identical sites.

In this work, the center of a circle is a sensor node in which its radius representing its sensing range. When some sensor nodes close to each other, their sensing areas may overlap. Since the sensing areas are represented by circles, those circles can be drawn overlapped. A circle may be overlapped by one or more circles resulting in intersection arcs. The intersection arc is the part of a circle perimeter that is covered by other circle area. The parts of a circle perimeter that are not covered by any other circles are called exposed arcs.

intersection arc. The endpoint class is created in which its attri- butes are the endpoint id, polar angle, intersection arc id and status. The status attribute is used to show the endpoint is either lower endpoint (pj) or upper endpoint (qj). All endpoints are stored in a priority queue in which the priority of a point is determined by the smallest angle, which means that the highest priority point has the smallest angle limited with a range from 0 to 360.

When p2 is visited, which p2 is the lower endpoint of Arc2, p2 is taken as the upper endpoint of the exposed arc and then Arc2 is stored into S. Afterwards, the point q2 is visited, and while q2 is the upper endpoint of Arc2, Arc2 is removed from S and then the queue becomes empty again. Therefore, another exposed arc is discovered which q2 is its lower endpoint. When p3 is

S. When the point p4 is visited, Arc4 is stored into S. When q3 is visited, Arc3 is removed from the list. At this point, q3 cannot start new exposed arc because the list S is not empty. Finally, the sweep radius revisits p1 and terminates the operation.

The Adaptive Relocation Strategy (ARS) is proposed to efficiently deploy heterogeneous sensors for large-scale applica- tions. Heterogeneous sensors may differ in their characteristics such as the sensing and communication ranges, the remaining energy; furthermore, they may be static or mobile. The ARS strategy designs a geometric model, which in turn perfectly de- scribes the coverage gaps through the target field. The proposed solution is mainly based on four types of announcements to plan the communication among sensing nodes.

The unidirectional sensor/sensor announcement is used to enable each sensor to send a broadcast message to its communicated neighbors. This message carries the sen- sor id, current position, mobility status, sensing range, communication range and remaining energy level. When a sensor receives such announcement from its communi- cated neighbors, the neighbor information is registered in its neighbor list.

The mobile sensor may receive from multiple leaders. The mobile sensor creates a list to store the received scores and examine the greatest value. Finally, the mobile sensor moves to the chosen position that achieves the highest score. After finishing this round, the coverage performance clearly in- creases. The Adaptive Relocation Strategy may perform one or two other rounds to slightly increase the coverage perfor- mance. In what follows, the basic operations of the proposed strategy are described.

The Boolean Polygon Operation is also applied at leaders in which a leader needs to estimate the expected score at the se- lected midpoint (p). A leader assumes a mobile sensor (i) at the selected midpoint (p) and discovers the sensors that are ex- pected to overlap with its sensing area. A leader performs the Boolean Polygon Operation, as shown above, to determine the new score of a mobile sensor (i) when deciding to move to the selected midpoint (p). The leader repeats such operation for all selected midpoints. Assuming the maximum number of midpoints computed by a leader is m and the maximum num- ber of mobile sensors discovered by that leader is n, then the total complexity of such operation at a leader is O (nm). It is expected that the maximum value of the term (nm) is about few hundreds at most.

The Polygon Construction Operation is performed at leaders to benefit from the received exposed arcs attempting to construct complete polygons. Initially, the exposed arcs are transformed into line segments (edges) because the first order approxima- tion could facilitate the computations. The edges are stored in doubly linked list to provide with linear search. A node in a doubly linked list is provided with front and rear pointers. The front pointer is used to indicate to the next edge while the rear pointer is used to indicate to the previous edge. It is easy to determine the next edge for the current edge, which the upper endpoint of the current edge is the lower endpoint of the next edge. Similarly, the previous edge is determined. When no node is assigned as a next or previous node for the current node, either front or rear pointers is settled with NULL value.

Such operation searches the doubly linked to initially find incomplete polygons. When the first node having NULL rear is reached, such node is inserted into the first incomplete poly- gon data and deleted from the doubly linked list. According to the front pointer of the current node, the next node is assigned, then inserted into the first incomplete polygon data and de- leted from the list. When a node having NULL front is reached, the first incomplete polygon structure is constructed. As long as there is a node having NULL rear in the list, an incomplete polygon can be discovered as shown above. When there is no node having NULL rear, the polygon construction operation starts to find the complete polygons. Starting with the first node, the next nodes are determined until reach the first node again constructing the first complete polygon and so on. The complete polygons are stored in P List and the incomplete polygons are stored in P List.

(n) is less than the number of midpoints (m). The Triangulation Operation attempts to reduce m to n by choosing the midpoints for triangles having the greatest areas. Accordingly, the Mid- points list size is reduced to n. It is clear that each element in the Midpoints list has several attributes, the midpoint position and different new scores depending on the number types of de- ployed heterogeneous sensors as discussed in Section 5.1.

In the Adaptive Relocation Strategy, the deployed sensors perform different operations according to their characteristics. For example, the mobile sensor performs the Sweep Radius and the Boolean Polygon operations. On the other hand, the static sensor also performs the Sweep Radius operation, and when a static sensor is chosen as a leader, additional opera- tions are performed such as Polygon Construction, Triangula- tion and Fitting. The time complexity is greater in the Triangulation Operation which reaches O(E log E) where E rep- resents the maximum number of edges collected at a leader, and also greater at Boolean Polygon and Fitting Operations which reaches O (nm) where n represents the maximum number of mobile sensors discovered by a leader and m represents the midpoint location (m), Sc(i) is the current score of mobile sen- sor (i), D(i,m) is the distance between the current position of mobile sensor (i) and the midpoint location (m), and r(i) is the mobile sensor (i) sensing range. When SDR ratio is nega- tive, it means that the new score of mobile sensor (i) at (m) is less than its current score. Besides, the mobile sensor move- ment to (m) at such situation leads to decreasing the coverage performance. Otherwise, when the SDR ratio is positive, the midpoint location (m) that gives the highest SDR ratio is cho- sen as a new location for mobile sensor (i).

tions. Furthermore, the proposed strategy is considered a dis- tributed solution with an appropriate communication cost. As follows, the proposed solution performance is compared with the current distributed strategies for mobile sensors to show that the ARS strategy effectively achieves high coverage per- formance with less average moving distance and appropriate communication cost for heterogonous sensors.

terms of mobile/static sensor cost ratio. The proposed strategy performance is studied under several network metrics such as the percentage of coverage improvement, the average moving distance and the designed announcements cost. The percentage of mobile sensors is randomly chosen to vary from 10% to 50%, with an increment of 10%. Another set of experiments based on different initial distributions are applied, and then the average results are considered. Initially, we choose to ran- domly deploy thirty sensors of each sensor type giving a total of 90 sensors. The average of initial coverage for such set of experiments is approximately 83.84%.

od, FitDis, is to fit based on the shortest distance. Such method can be applied at leaders when they decide which mobile neigh- bor is nearest to fit it to certain midpoint. In addition, the Fit- Dis method can be applied at mobile sensors themselves that they receive from multiple leaders; therefore, they can choose the nearest midpoint to move. The second fitting method, Fit- Cov, is to fit a mobile sensor with known score to a midpoint with higher score. The last fitting method, FitSDR, is to fit a mobile sensor to a midpoint based on the score to distance ra- tio. Both FitCov and FitDSR are applied at leaders and mobile sensors similar to the FitDis method.

