While the precise properties of wireless sensor networks vary considerably, it is gen- erally accepted that they typically consist of small, inexpensive, battery-powered sensing devices fitted with wireless transmitters, which can be spatially scattered to form an ad hoc network. While sensors have the ability to communicate through wireless channels, their energy, computational power and memory are constrained. Sensor networks have been proposed for a wide range of different applications, in- cluding disaster relief operations, seismic data collection, wildlife monitoring and military intelligence gathering. Sensors are distributed around the application en- vironment and then attempt to set up a network in order to exchange and forward data.

Sensor networks typically lack infrastructure and sensors typically have limited computational ability. Hence key predistribution is the favoured basis for key es- tablishment, with keying material stored in sensor memory prior to deployment. A comprehensive classification survey of schemes prior to March 2005 is given in [2]. This classification, however, focuses on the mathematical construction techniques employed, rather than on the properties of the networks for which the schemes are to be applied.

Our framework is primarily designed to encompass key establishment schemes based on key predistribution. Thus we assume that sensors have keying material stored in their memories before deployment by a trusted authority, but in general have no further access to this trusted authority after deployment. In particular, schemes relying on the presence of a base station that can always communicate securely with the sensors fall outside the scope of this survey, as do schemes dependent on public- key techniques. Note that relying on key predistribution does not preclude sensors themselves acting as local distributors of keying material and enabling further key establishment through sensor-to-sensor communication.

the ability to compromise any given node and extract any keys or other secret data stored in its memory, and to intercept any wireless communication within the network. Such an adversary is termed a global passive adversary by Anderson et al. [1]. The literature contains examples of schemes based on other attack models, such as [1,13], however in this study we confine ourselves to schemes based on the global passive adversary model.

t-complete: all subsets of sensors of size t. By far the most common com- munication structure within this class is pairwise complete (2-complete). This class of communication structure is particularly appropriate in the case of networks with no control over deployment location.

Having identified which set of categories in Section 3.1 matches a particular sensor network application, the following parameters of sensor networks define particular instances of key establishment solutions. By this we mean that while it is often possible to define a generic key establishment technique based on the first categori- sation, the following parameters tend to form variables that can be set to define a specific scheme.

Range: The communication range over which a sensor can contact other sensors. This is also related to the energy capability since greater communication ranges tend to consume more power. Note that a sensor that has a certain communi- cation range might choose not to use the full range capability, as a power saving measure.

We note that these variable parameters tend to be closely related. For example, in a two-level heterogenous sensor network it is likely that top-level sensors will have larger storage, more power and greater range. However, particular applications may constrain some of these variable parameters more than others.

key; such schemes can support m2 nodes. Increasing the value of m, for instance, would improve the scalability of the scheme, although the connectivity would suf- fer a corresponding decrease. Other schemes based on combinatorial objects can be found in [3][4][23][24][25]. Closely related are the so-called hybrid schemes, in which probabilistic elements are added to an underlying combinatorial structure in order achieve greater flexibility in some of the parameters involved, while hopefully keeping many of the desirable properties of the object in question. Such techniques are used in [3][5][6][7].

In [28] Liu and Ning describe a Closest-Pairwise scheme for a locally 2-complete communication structure. In this scheme each node is preloaded with distinct pair- wise keys shared with the c nodes that are expected to be closest to it after deploy- ment. The fact that keys are only ever shared between two users implies, however, that the number of local nodes with which a given node can communicate securely is limited directly by the number of keys it can store.

The regionally 2-complete schemes appearing in the literature are exten- sions of either probabilistic schemes ([14][21][9][18]) or threshold-based schemes ([10][11][12][38]). In the probabilistic case, separate key pools are used for distinct (although possibly overlapping) regions, and nodes are assigned keys from the pools of each region in which they are contained. Similarly, in the threshold case there is a particular matrix/polynomial associated with each region, and nodes receive keying material corresponding to the regions in which they lie. These schemes differ predominantly in their choice of regions; for instance, in [10,11,12] the regions are based on the cells of a hexagonal grid, whereas in [38] they are based on a triangular grid and in the polynomial-based scheme of [28] a square grid is employed.

The scheme of Traynor et al. [35] can be regarded as a hierarchical version of the probabilistic schemes discussed above. In this case the nodes store varying numbers of keys from the key pool according to their level in the hierarchy.

The majority of applications have no apparent need for a pairwise ideal com- munication structure. A significant number of applications involved a mobile sink communicating with individual sensors. When there is no control of sensor location then designing schemes for pairwise ideal communication structures seems the only option. However, since applications of this type only really

Most of the literature dealing with key management in heterogeneous sensor networks relies on the presence of a base station that can communicate directly with sensors e.g. [36,22]. It would be interesting, however, to see more solutions in the case of a network that has sensors of differing capabilities without access to a base station, as in [35]. In particular there is a lack of solutions in the case of a hierarchical networks with partial knowledge of sensor location.

There is no single, precise, definition of a wireless sensor network. As a result this term is applied to a wide family of networking environments that support a range of applications. This ambiguity has important implications for the design of key establishment schemes.

Patrick Traynor, Heesook Choi, Guohong Cao, Sencun Zhu, and Thomas F. La Porta. Establishing pair-wise keys in heterogeneous sensor networks. Technical Report NAS-TR-0001-2004, Network and Security Research Center, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA, December 2004. Updated July 6, 2005.

