We develop an algebraic foundation for some of the graph-based structures underly- ing a variety of popular diagrammatic notations for the specification, modelling and programming of computing systems. Using hypergraphs and higraphs as leading ex- amples, a locally ordered category Graph(C) of graphs in a locally ordered category C is defined and endowed with symmetric monoidal closed structure. Two other op- erations on higraphs and variants, selected for relevance to computing applications, are generalised in this setting.

Hierarchies of edges in higraphs are exploited in practical applications to produce concise specifications of complex reactive systems. To understand the meaning of higher-level edges we introduce in Section 4 a completion operation on higraphs. This is shown to be an instance of the right adjoint to the inclusion of Graph(C) into Graphopl(C), the latter having oplax natural transformations as arrows. A theorem stating conditions for the existence of such right adjoints is proved.

C. Our motivation arises from the application of higraphs in Statecharts. Specifications of complex reactive systems directly in terms of transition sys- tems become impractical to visualise owing to the large number of states involved. Statecharts deal with this problem by allowing the modelling of reactive systems directly in terms of their identifiable concurrent subsystems:

Again, even in the case of C = Set, a corresponding result does not hold in respect of the cartesian closed structure of Graph(C) as the left adjoint does not preserve the unit, i.e., it does not send 1 to the terminal object of Graph as the latter has an edge.

To state our theorem, it is convenient to use a little of the theory of 2- categories, specifically some finite limits. A convenient account of such limits is [7]. In particular, we need to use the notion of an oplax limit of a map. So we recall it here.

Example 5.6 For graphs in BSup the theorem gives the expected generali- sation of the zoom-out operation on graphs in Poset in the presence of the extra structure given by binary sups. However, zoom-outs do not generalise to graphs in Rel , or the category of posets and relations between their underlying sets, as the terminal object is the empty set (poset).

Our aim is to develop, in an incremental and principled way, structures which bear sufficient detail to model realistic diagrammatic notations. Currently we are working towards providing such a model for a large class of Statecharts, which include features found in higraphs and hypergraphs. The work herein presented lays the abstract foundations for our approach, in which notions of graph and combinations thereof may be studied.

