[10] scrutinized the conventional ED algorithm. The detection capability here, proved to be highly dependable, for an extensive antenna count (which is similar to the transmitter and receiver count), an extended span of the received PU signal, and SNR above 15 dB. However, this approach is not without its drawbacks. For instance, the expenditure rises in tandem with the increase in the antenna count, the PU signal span is constrained by conditions, and when it comes to SNR below 15 dB, the detection capacity is left wanting. In terms of the received PU signal, the researchers in [11] relied on a uniform span and power. According to their findings, the capacity of the ED algorithm for 5G-MIMO communication sys-

tem for detection is noteworthy for 2 transmitter antennas and 4 receiver antennas, as well as SNR exceeding 15 dB, with the QPSK mapper type. Under other conditions, the detection capability was deemed poor. And lastly, the researchers in [12] delved into the ED algorithm threshold effect, with regards to the MIMO communica- tion system. This investigation considered a variety of SNR levels, to scrutinize the threshold effect on performance capacity, derived by way of the ED algorithm. In the context of detection and the likely occurrence of false alarms, the capacity attributed to [12], was observed to be superior to that of [10] and [11]. Nevertheless, in the final analysis, [12] demonstrated a poor performance for SNR below 5.6 dB.

The rest of the paper is arranged as follows: Section 2 provides representations of the 5D signals considered for this paper, which are the F-OFDM, FBMC, and UFMC waveforms. The sensing of the F- OFDM-MIMO, FBMC-MIMO, and UFMC-MIMO signals, achieved through the development of the recommended SS mathematical model, based on the hybrid filter, is described in Section 3. In Sec- tion 4, the obtained results are introduced and discussed. Finally, in Section 5, the conclusion is presented.

tions where there is perfect knowledge with regards to noise power. The sample count (N), considered during the specified false alarm probability concept [21], to distinguish the PU signal, is a significant parameter, for meeting the conditions, of the antici- pated false alarm probability. By referring to relation (18), the least number of samples (N) can be distinguished for the specified detection probability, the false alarm probability, the SNR, and the R receiver antenna count. The expression for the minimum number of samples, which is not a function of the detection thresh- old, is as follows:

extension in the sensing period, which represents the main short- coming of the squaring technique. This is because at depleted SNRs, a substantial sample number count is essential, for an accu- rate detection. An extension in the sensing duration, however, can lead to implementation issues, as certain systems come with a pre- determined sensing period (the maximum sensing duration for IEEE802.22 systems, for instance, is 2 s). Any increase in the sens- ing period will take its toll on the battery life of power-dependent mechanisms (such as sensors) operating in an IoT setting. Deter- mining the appropriate number of samples, for an accurate detec- tion, is among the challenges associated to the optimization process [22].

0.99 for both kind of waveforms F-OFDM and UFMC, respectively. In summary, the detection performance of proposed MIMO sens- ing system for centralized cooperative users is better than that of the proposed MIMO sensing system for only one user. It can be exploited

