Abstract This paper presents a new extension to Fuzzy Decision Maps (FDMs) by allowing use of fuzzy linguistic values to represent relative importance among criteria in the preference matrix as well as representing relative influence among criteria for computing the steady-state matrix in the stage of Fuzzy Cognitive Map (FCM). The proposed model is called the Linguistic Fuzzy Decision Networks (LFDNs). The proposed LFDN provides considerable flexibility to decision makers when solving real world Multi-Criteria Decision-Making (MCDM) problems. The performance of the proposed LFDN model is compared with the original FDM using a previously published case study. The result of comparison ensures the ability to draw the same decisions with a more realistic decision environment.

Many different methods have been developed to solve MCDM. The Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) was first introduced by Thomas Saaty in the 1971, and it is one of the most famous methods of MCDM because it is simple and easy to use [4,5]. AHP has been applied to solve many decision problems in political, economic, social, and management sci- ences [5]. The Analytic Network Process (ANP) was developed by Saaty in 1996 to overcome the problem of dependence and feedback among criteria in AHP method [6]. ANP is consid- ered as the general form of the AHP, which has been used for MCDM. The ANP has been applied in many practical decision-making problems, such as project selection, product planning, green supply chain management, and optimal sched- uling problems [7].

Fuzzy set theory was first proposed by Lotfi Zadeh in the 1965 [8]. It is a methodology to tackle uncertainty and to han- dle imprecise information in real situations. With fuzzy sets theory, information can be expressed by linguistic or fuzzy val- ues rather than by numbers [9]. In this paper, we propose a methodology that extends the FDM method by applying lin- guistic variables and a fuzzy aggregation method. We call this method Linguistic Fuzzy Decision Networks (LFDNs).

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents fuzzy numbers and linguistic variables. Fuzzy Cognitive Map (FCM) is discussed in Section 3. Section 4 presents the FDM method. The proposed LFDN is introduced in Section 5. A case study is given in Section 6. Discussing the results is given in Section 7, and Section 8 concludes the paper.

A Fuzzy Number (FN) is a fuzzy set which has some proper- ties such as being: convex and normal, its membership function is piecewise continuous and it is defined over ffi [9]. FN can take various forms such as Triangular Fuzzy Number (TFN), Trapezoidal FN, and Gaussian FN. TFN is the most popular form due to its simple membership function which is represented by three parameters as (l, m, u). The parameters l, m, and u denote the smallest possible value, the most prom- ising value, and the largest possible value of the fuzzy number, ber into a single crisp representative value. This is called defuzzification operation. There are several available defuzzifi- cation methods for this purpose such as: Mean Of Maximum (MOM) and centroid method (Center Of Gravity (COG) or Center Of Area (COA)) [9].

Lotfi Zadeh introduced the concept of linguistic variable in 1975, which allows computation with words instead of num- bers [10,11]. Computing with words can be achieved when lin- guistic variables take linguistic values (i.e., values in the form of words or sentences from natural language). The concept of linguistic variables is very useful to describe situations that are too complex or not well defined in conventional quantita- tive expression. Furthermore, Linguistic variables allow the translation of natural language into logical or numerical state- ments, i.e., computing with words, which provides the tools for further theoretical application, such as fuzzy control and approximate reasoning which is also referred to as human rea- soning [9,11].

FCMs have advantages such as simplicity, flexibility, and effi- cacy for analyzing and modeling the real world as a collection of concept and causal relationships. This simplicity support experts or decision makers to better understand the underlying formal model and its execution [17]. The main disadvantage of FCMs is the possibility to reach or to settle down in an unde- sired steady state [18]. FCM have been applied in many appli- cations such as, geographic information systems (GISs), fault detection, decision-making, business management, text catego- rization, industrial analysis, and system control [7,16,19].

functions to indicate the various kinds of relationship among criteria, dealing with the direct and indirect influences and the ability to solve both the compound and the interaction ef- fects. However, in the FDM, decision makers or experts must quantify a precise value to judge the ratios of weights between criteria, i.e., the process ignores the problem of uncertainty. Since, in practice, problems are usually complicated and uncer- tain, it is even hard for experts to quantify the precise weight values.

extension of the original FDM to allow handling uncertain- ties in the form of linguistic values. The proposed model is tested using a case study that is also used for testing FDM in [7]. The results give the same ranking of criteria which ensures the ability of LFDN to solve MCDM problems with dependence and feedback in a more flexible and humanistic manner.

