I will provide German data that shows that depicitve secondary predicates may refer to subjects, direct objects, indirect objects, and even more oblique complements. Reference to more oblique arguments is more marked. The markedness corresponds to the oblique- ness hierarchy that was proposed by Keenan and Comrie [13] and others. Based on these observations I will suggest analyzing depictive secondary predicates parallel to control con- structions rather than raising constructions. Since depictives can refer to arguments that do not surface, the analysis makes reference to the underlying syntactic-semantic representa- tion: the argument-structure.

In coherent constructions we have readings with reference to the subject of the embedded verb (schlafen) and to the subject and to the object of the matrix verb (raten). In the incoherent construction only the reference to elements that depend on heads in the respective coherence field is possible. Since nackt zu schlafen is a separate coherence field in (7b), nackt can refer to the subject of schlafen only. Since the subject of the controlled verb schlafen is coreferent with the dative ob- ject of the controllee, the element the depictive predicate refers to is visible at the surface. But it is also possible to omit the dative object of raten:

In (9a) both the reference to the subject and to the accusative object is possible, while the reading with reference to the object is hardly availible in (9b). As Haider notes, this is explained easily by the assumption that the subject of the predicate and the NP it refers to are identical. The fact that in German, NP subjects always have structural case explains why a depictive element cannot refer to a dative NP, because dative is taken to be a lexical case.

In both sentences the reference to the dative NP is considerably better than in (9b) and (10), where another candidate for coreference appears at the surface. Of course both sentences in (12) have a reading where the helper or the nurse is naked, re- spectively. The reference to the dative NP improves considerably if the reference to the nominative is excluded by world knowledge.

Again, we have a passive sentence. The subject of treten was a police officer and therefore the reference of liegend to the logical subject of treten is excluded by world knowledge. The only remaining antecedent is the NP in the PP.

I follow Winkler [31] in assuming that depictive predicates are adjuncts. Appart from prosodic facts that she discussed there is evidence form the linearization of depictives and from partial verb phrase fronting that suggests such an analysis. Depictive predicates can be serialized independently from their antecedent. They can be serialized rather freely in the clause and there is no restriction on the number of depictive predicates per clause. See [20] for data.

means that the rain is cold, not that it is cold in general. It may be cold rain in warm weather. The predicate kalt cannot refer to the expletive nominal complement of regnen. The condition on referentiality cannot be imposed on the subject of the verb that is modified, since verbs with expletive subjects allow for depictives if these do not refer to the expletive element:

of the argument structure is that it is incompatible with the standard approach for coordination in HPSG. In the standard treatment of coordination it is assumed that the cat values of two coordinated elements have to be identical [25]. If we have coordinations of sentences that have arg-st lists of differing length, coordination fails.

Another possibility is to treat adjuncts as complements and introduce them into the subcat list of the head they modify [30]. Since then modification is treated in the lexicon, the combination of depictives and the predicates they modify can be established before argument saturation takes place. See [3] for a discussion and rejection of this approach. Some discussion of examples with depictives can be found in [20].

