To tackle the risk of human while clearing the water surface and improve the cleaning efficiency, the autonomous cleaning robots can be replaced the traditional operation mode. Additionally, autonomous cleaning robots can access hazardous areas where humans are unable to. As a result, the cleaning robot can thoroughly clean the plastic debris. Furthermore, a high degree of automation robot can carry, contain, remove, and steer material without human intervention, greatly increasing cleaning effectiveness. It must completely cover the water surface in order to thoroughly remove plastics and other garbage from the entire waterbody [8] [9]. Therefore, creating a coverage cleaning path is crucial in order to direct the robot. The covered path planning (CPP) techniques, such as boustrophedon cellular and line- sweep-based decomposition algorithm, have been applied in the current system. The created coverage area should cover more irregular boundaries with obstacles instead of the traditional covering path planning. The motion parameters of surface cleaning robots play a significant role in setting more coverage area. The motion parameters are low turning speed and acceleration which are useful for attaining higher cleaning efficiency [10].

In this study, we develop a revolutionary autonomous water surface waste cleaning robot prototype that can clean water surfaces effectively without assistance from humans. Additionally, it can be applied to actual bodies of water, including lakes, ocean, coastal areas, and inland streams. We suggested employing a novel technique for covering path planning to increase the robot's cleaning effectiveness. The suggested CPP strategy should involve active participation in waterways with erratic boundaries and obstructions. Additionally, single shot detection (SSD) was used in the design of this work for greater accuracy.

The detailed composition of this paper is listed as follows: the section 2 discusses the related work about the plastic waste removal robot in water bodies and coverage path planning. Section 3 explains the proposed prototype of robot and coverage area algorithm. The investigational findings and confabulations are offered in section 4, and the study is wrapped up in section 5.

The water garbage waste collecting robots are generally termed as an unmanned surface vehicle (USV). The unmanned surface vehicles can be used for various applications such as for transportation, surveillance and research. The researcher in [11] was designed robot boat aiming at autonomous transportation using multiple urban waterways robot boat. The size and shape of the robot boat has been modified for easiest way for the autonomous transportation. Peng et al [12] creates a USV for doing hydrographic survey in the waterbodies. The invention is mainly for develop a chart at nearshore shallow waters. Similarly, Maawali et al [13] develops an unmanned surface vehicle for managing the oil spill among any waterbodies. Likewise, Shojaei et al [14] initiates a methodology for using a small USV for building management such as structural health monitoring.

been evaluated for small water bodies, such as swimming pools, making it difficult for daily use. The water surface cleaning robot in [18] has been designed without any mechanical design. This robot can be used for checking water quality also. In conclusion, there are still two issues with the water surface cleaning robots that are currently available. One is that the robots have a relatively modest level of automation. For a thorough cleanup of the water area, the path planning is not mentioned. The other is that while the water bodies used for testing are straightforward, the robots have a difficult time adapting to complex real-world environments.

