Although CER can be achieved through SSR and EAF ratio optimization, only when the CSP growth rate remains below 2.2% will the corresponding optimization measures be able to maintain carbon emissions of the industry in 2030 at a level similar to that in 2021. In this case, the SSR and EAF ratio, and the SSR of EAF, would be 50.0%, 14.8%, and 84.0%, respectively.

emissions of PM were estimated to have the opposite trend, with an 8% increase. This is attributed to the fact that PM is mainly generated in the steel scrap pretreatment process, and PM emissions will significantly increase with a growing SSR. SW generation would be reduced from 385 Mt in scenario Sc-1 to 356 Mt in scenario Sc-4.

The results suggest that limiting the volume of CSP plays a fundamental role in reducing carbon and pollution emissions of the ISI. Measures of raw material composition and technological structural adjustment have complementary roles if the limiting targets are to be achieved. At an annual CSP growth rate of approximately 2%, the carbon emissions in 2030 will only be comparable to those in 2021 through the extensive use of steel scrap and EAF facilities. Moreover, CSP growth will also cause a continuous increase in the emission of various pollutants such as PHPs, PM, and SO2. While China issued a legal obligation in 2021 to tightly control CSP, the actual production of that year still exceeded the control target by 35 Mt. The production also reached 0.81 Gt in the first three quarters of 2022, which is 81% of the annual control target and still too high. Therefore, stricter enforcement is essential to control CSP. This can also obviate the new demand for steel scrap, especially for countries and regions with low urbanization rates that do not have enough historical stock to provide the needed volume of depreciated steel scrap.

The results illustrate variability in the synergy between CER and PER via various low-carbon emission measures due to differences in CEI and pollution emission intensity (PEI) in various processes. PM emissions, in particular, may change contrarily to those of the other four pollutants (COD, PM, SO2, and NOx). On the one hand, in terms of carbon emission and PER, it is necessary to optimize the development path of the industry in an integrated manner with multiple objectives due to differences in environmental capacity in different regions.

