Abstract Steganography means how to hide secret information in a cover media, so that other individuals fail to realize their existence. Due to the lack of data redundancy in the text file in com- parison with other carrier files, text steganography is a difficult problem to solve. In this paper, we proposed a new promised steganographic algorithm for Arabic text based on features of Arabic text. The focus is on more secure algorithm and high capacity of the carrier. Our extensive exper- iments using the proposed algorithm resulted in a high capacity of the carrier media. The embed- ding capacity rate ratio of the proposed algorithm is high. In addition, our algorithm can resist traditional attacking methods since it makes the changes in carrier text as minimum as possible.

Obviously the purpose of steganography is to avoid draw- ing suspicion to the transmission of hidden information. A message is a hidden information in the form of plain text, cipher text, images or anything that can be encoded into a bit stream. This message is embedded in a cover-carrier to cre- ate a stego-carrier. A possible formula of the process may be represented as follows:

Furthermore, text steganography depends on the language as each language has its own unique characteristics, which are completely different from other languages. For example, the letter shape in English language does not depend on its posi- tion in the word. At the same time, Arabic letters have differ- ent forms which depend on letter positioning.

One reason of why text steganography is difficult is that text contains little redundancy compared to other media. Another is that humans are sensitive to abnormal-looking text. Text ste- ganographic schemes must be specifically designed to exploit the specific characteristics of the target language, because the grammatical and orthographic characteristics of every lan- guage are different.

In Arabic languages, dot is very important and 14 of 28 Arabic letters have one or more dots. In this method, data are hidden in Arabic texts by using these letters as explained in [8,11]. Using the approach of the vertical displacement of the points, we can hide information in the texts. However, we need to use a special font created mainly for this purpose.

These letters cannot be joined to the succeeding letter, even when they are inside a word. This means that the writer has to lift his pencil, and even if his hand is inside the same word. The next letter will have to be written as if it was the first in a word. The letter comes after these six letters is written as the last one and it must be an isolated letter. If it comes as the first letter it is written as isolated letter.

As we said in Section 3.1, In Arabic there is a group of six letters written isolated in a text on the condition that each letter is the first letter in a word. Any letter succeed them has to be written as an isolated if it is the last letter in this word. We use the isolated letters of this type as hidden keys in Arabic texts written in Unicode format. So the hiding pro- gram looks for these letters in the word displayed in the car- rier text. So we can hide data in the carrier text by using this type of letters without any noticeable change in the target word. Simplifying the complexity of algorithm, one has to consider the isolated letters at the beginning of the words and at the end of the words not all the isolated letters in the words.

In this section we will explain all the experimental results. In the adopted method, the information is hidden in Arabic texts using the Unicode standard. We test our method on some Ara- bic text files downloaded from some Arabic web sites. They include a variety of news like sports, health, science, politics, technology and literature. The files resources are selected for computing the capacity ratio of the method for hiding data. We calculate the capacity ratio as follows:

Urdu (the official language of Pakistan), Persian (the official language of Iran) and Pashto (the official language of Afghan- istan) [22] based on the features of Arabic text which offers high capacity, more security, and good robustness (i.e. we introduce a compromised solution to our problem).

As a future work we can increase the capacity ratio more than 100 bit/kB by considering all the isolated letters in every word in text according to our initial estimation according to our experiments. Beside the electronics text steganography, this method can also be applied to hard copy. For this, we can use a special type of font for isolated letters only to mark the beginning of encoding zeros and ones as we discussed in Section 3.3 beside the normal fonts which is used in the text. After hiding the information we print the documents. To extract data from the hard copy document, first we scan the document and then unhide the information by computer, using the proposed algorithm.

