non-ionizing and has only minor side effects on humans [1]. It has a high rate of absorption in water and a high rate of radiation reflection in metals and is currently used in a variety of fields, including medicine, security checkpoints, postal parcels etc. Despite this, Terahertz images have poor resolutions due to their low power source, resulting in blurred and noised images consti- tuting a defect. Therefore, it is necessary to propose an accurate and efficient intelligent defects recognition method.

[30] advanced a dual-graph attention convolution network (DGACN). Xie L. et. al. [31] also proposed a convolutional Siamese point net (CSPN) for partial-to-partial point cloud registration which embodied feature extraction, matching matrix computation and singular value decomposition (SVD) for optical measurement of blade profile. Yin M. et. al. [32] also advanced an approach in the same domain leveraging deep feature interaction network (DFINet) where a feature interaction module to strengthen infor- mation association between two point clouds during feature extraction is used.

Aside from the use of ML and deep learning techniques, other researchers have explored other techniques. Liu et. al. [40] employed square even-order derivative method coupled with numerical and experimental analysis to detect thermal defects in vehicle cables. To provide spatial location information and real- time tracking and adjusting the spatial position of surgical instru- ments, Liu et. al. [41] utilized 2D/3D multimode medical image registration to aid image-guided surgery using Gaussian Laplacian second-order differential operator. Zhou et. al. [42] also combined a CNN with transfer learning, data augmentation, and a Squeeze- and-Excitation Networks (SENet) for automated ore classification in mining and excavation.

The focus of all the existing THz image detection techniques is on image recognition pertaining to the whole region of the image. However, considering the small proportion of defect area, we adopt a different approach in this work by using differential evolution search algorithm for optimization. Following, we elucidate on our adopted approach.

lateral feature fusion. Considering that the residual network struc- ture can well solve the problems of gradient disappearance and network degradation that are prone to occur in deep networks [25], the ResNet-50 is used as the backbone for feature extraction of FPN. The two subnetworks perform the box regression task and the classification task respectively at each output position of the backbone network. The classification subnet contains four

object detector is based on a two-stage, proposal-driven mecha- nism, such as Faster-R-CNN [48] and Mask R-CNN [49]. Firstly, the region proposal networks (RPN) are used to generate a series of candidate object locations, on which the accurate classification and regression are carried out. The other type of object detector is one-stage. The typical regular one-stage detectors are SSD [50,51] and YOLO [29,30] [52,53]. Since time-consuming RPN are

The image dataset used in the experiment is collected by the terahertz linear scan machine. For this paper, we selected 1209 images in total for training and testing. These images were classi- fied into two categories according to the state of the terahertz low resolution images: defected and normal. By using the labelImg tool, the dataset was created with COCO [68] format. Finally we

Terahertz is a novel technology henceforth the image database is scanty. Therefore the number of terahertz image database sets that individually can collect would not be much as the regular database set for object detection model, such as PASCAL VOC, COCO, etc., hence will reduce the robustness and performance of the model. The images used in this paper are obtained using Tera- sense corporation terahertz linear scan machine. In this experi- ment, we augmented the training by using combination of translation, rotation, perspective transformation, affine transfor- mation, mix-up, dropout of region, blurring, sharpen, contrast change, saturation change, cropping and etc. After augmenting, we had 1566 instances of normal and 1307 instances of defected.

After augmentation, it is evident that the detection model has learned more features about the terahertz low resolution images, which improves the performance of model. Comparing to the results of baseline model, the average precision has been improved by 9.5%, and the average recall (given 100 detections per image) has been improved by 7.8%.

is chosen other than latest models like YOLOv4 and YOLOv5 in that YOLOv3 is still one of the most widely used detectors in industry due to its broad compatibility. Besides, there exist controversies (example short released time after yolov4, invalid benchmark dataset etc.) surrounding the capabilities of YOLOv5 [69].

belongs to the two-stage detector, its training time is longer, which is 2.4 times that of YOLOv3 model. This experiment also verified that the RetinaNet model has certain advantages in the terahertz low resolution images detection task, mainly because the focal loss for classification alleviates the problem of imbalance between pos- itive and negative samples during the training process.

To solve the problem of low precision and recall for detecting blurred images, we used generative adversarial network to recon- struct blurred images. Before doing this, we need to prepare clear- blurred image pairs for training GAN. Considering that the tera- hertz power source is the main reason for the low sharpness of such images, we used the method introduced by Kupyn o.et al.

[56] to generate synthetic clear-blurred image pairs. Firstly, the trajectory vector was generated through Markov process. Then, the sub-pixel interpolation was applied to the trajectory vector to generate the blur kernels. Finally, the different types of blur ker- nels were applied to clear images to generate corresponding

Xie L, Zhu Y, Yin M, Wang Z, Ou D, Zheng H, Liu H, Yin G. Self-feature-based point cloud registration method with a novel convolutional siamese point net for optical measurement of blade profile. Mech Syst Signal Process 2022;178:. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2022.109243109243.

Ledig C, Theis L, Huszar F, Caballero J, Cunningham A, Acosta A, Aitken A, Tejani A, Totz J, Wang Z, Shi W. Photo-realistic single image super-resolution using a generative adversarial network. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).

