delay, the packet loss percentage, and the throughput, and proposes a modified protocol enhances its performance. Simula- tion showed that the modified protocol outperforms EAP in terms of packet loss percentage by on average 93.4%, and also its performance is better in terms of throughput and delay.

[12]: is a protocol that improves LEACH in terms of lifetime. This is achieved by selecting a proxy node which can assume the role of the current CH of weak power during one round. PEACH is based on the consensus of healthy nodes for the detection and manipulation of failure in any cluster head. It al- lows considerable improvement in the network lifetime by reducing the overhead of re-clustering.

Energy-Efficient Clustering Scheme (EECS) [13]: A con- stant number of candidate nodes for CH role are elected with a probability T and compete according to the residual energy within range Rcompete. The candidate will be a head if it did not find another higher energy candidate, otherwise, it will give up competition with the first found higher energy candidate. The cluster size should be justified such that, the larger the dis- tance between the CH and the BS is, the smaller cluster size the CH should accommodate. It is true that the CH selected is the candidate with larger residual energy in range Rcompete, but the set of candidate nodes in the competition are selected randomly before the competition, this may result in non-opti- mal CH selection.

It should be mentioned that the most common overload case is the first one, this means that the constructed tree is not ideal, it does not aid in balancing the load of relaying data among the CHs. To eliminate or decrease EAP losses, we can directly use a recovery method from CH (child, parent, or root) death or failure, but this method will exhaust a lot of en- ergy and reduce lifetime and may also affect the other good performance metrics of EAP. So, the protection from loss cause is better than the cure from it. The protection manner used in the modified protocol Low Loss Energy-Aware routing Protocol (LLEAP) consists of two techniques, the first tech- nique is used to increase the lifetime, so that if a loss occurred, the recovery method does not significantly affect the character- istic of LLEAP with respect to the lifetime, and after the recovery, LLEAP lifetime remains on average as EAP lifetime. The lifetime is increased by developing a schedule for nodes to sleep and wake up to save their energy. The second technique is used to reduce the number of occurrence times of the previ- ously mentioned common cause for loss in EAP to reduce losses and the energy consumed in the recovery from it.

value of one of the metrics defined in Section 6.2.1 is calculated for each protocol. Most of the results obtained in this paper were obtained by averaging multiple independent simulation runs with a 95% confidence interval, where each run uses a dif- ferent randomly-generated topology of sensor nodes.

