All the aforementioned techniques are based more or less on the same assump- tions: a continuous (or fluid) approximation of counting process that computes the number of objects in each of the possible states. Although all these techniques are approximate, they provide very accurate solution as the population increases. A detailed study on the accuracy of such approximations as function of the population size can be found in [5] and [6].

In this paper we will use Mean Field Analysis to study the behavior of the users in two different contexts: cinema and television. We will use Generalized Stochastic Petri Nets (GSPN) [4] to specify the behavior of different agents involved in the models. For what concerns cinema, in Section 3 we will focus on the evolution of the number of spectators and seats available in theaters after the release date of a new movie. In Section 4 we will focus on the evolution of the audience of a TV Series, depending on the improvements effected by the production.

In this work we will mainly use results from the mean field analysis [6] to consider a very large number of interacting components. In order to simplify the presentation of the agents involved in the models, we will describe their behavior using GSPN instead of Continuous Time Markov Chains (CTMC). A detailed description of a procedure that transforms a GSPN in a CTMC can be found in [4]. In our case however, the computation of the transition matrix of the CTMC associated to the GSPN must be done symbolically, in order to preserve the dependency on the state of the system.

When specifying the state dependent transition rate, we will use r(Ti) to denote the rate of transition Ti. We will call n(P) the number of objects that are char- acterized by marking P, and in particular n(Pi) will denote the number of agents that have place Pi marked. When expressing dependencies from the controller, we will call #(Pi), the number of tokens in place Pi (in this case Pi must be a place of the GSPN of the controller).

The first considered model aims at analyzing the behavior of the spectators of a newly released movie. Firstly we present some statistical data that characterizes this system, and then we describe the proposed model. Finally we compare the results and the data to discuss the effectiveness of the proposed model.

In the last tendency, that we called C, there is a reprise in the income after the usual initial decay. This can be justified by the positive feedback received from those who watched the film. Many people, who are not initially interested in the movie, change their mind and may decide to watch it thanks to the positive comments heard about it. We believe that this reprise is a form of positive enforcement due to the unexpected great matching of the movie features with the audience expectations.

through cinemas. When place P6 is marked, the distributor is idle for W1. This is represented by transition T5, whose firing rate is r(T5) =  1  . In place P7 the distributor decides after a W2 time, moving the token to place P8 (firing of T6 transition, with rate r(T6) =  1  ). The decision is performed by two immediate transitions t1 and t2, whose weighting is

the number of spectator to the actual income. As we can see, results show some reasonable match. Some problems are visible in the beginning of the curves. We believe these are connected with the non-Markovian nature of most of the considered transitions that the exponential approximation (even if non-homogenous) is not able to capture.

Advertise improvement). We also assumed that about every 6 days people decide if their Quality expectancy can be satisfied by the next episode (VQ = 6days), about every 3 days the advertising of the show can influence their decision (VL = 3days) and about every day the word-of-mouth influence can persuade them (Vpp = 1day). After the 60% of the total number of episodes, a given spectator is presumed to became disaffected to the show.

We choose to focus on the 6.00pm to 8.30pm time frame, just before the starting of the primetime in Italy[2]. Being the primetime a period of strong competition between networks[11][12], the audience data are less dependent on the outcome of a single channel.

our model, when priority is given either to quality (Gq) or advertisement (Gl). The results provided in the previous section have been adapted to take into account days instead of weeks. In both cases we assumed an evolution time for the system of 28 days.

