DMF is rapidly metabolized in the gastrointestinal tract by ester- ase enzyme into monomethyl fumarate (MMF) which is the main metabolite exerting the therapeutic effects. Half-life of DMF is about 12 min while that of MMF is 36 h. Therefore, orally administered DMF is not detected in the blood stream [7]. DMF has been reported to exhibit an antioxidant effect due to its ability to enhance expression of multiple antioxidant enzymes, including superoxide dismutase  (SOD),  heme  oxygenase-1  (HO-1),  glutathione- S-transferase (GST) and catalase (CAT), resulting in reduced oxidative stress possibly via activation of the nuclear factor (erythroid-derived2)-like2-Nrf2 transcriptional pathway, which is the principal regulator of antioxidant enzymes [8] . In addition to possessing antioxidant effect, DMF has anti-inflammatory effect as

Rabbits were randomly distributed into four groups each con- taining 6 rabbits as the following: Group I (control), rabbits received standard rabbit chow; Group II (HCD), rabbits received 1% cholesterol-enriched chow for 4 weeks [12]; Group III (HCD- DMF), rabbits received 1% cholesterol-enriched chow and adminis- tered DMF (12.5 mg/kg/day, orally) for 4 weeks, the dose was con- verted from rat to rabbit according to Paget and Barnes [13,14], Group IV (DMF), rabbits received standard chow plus DMF (12.5 mg/kg/day, orally) for 4 weeks. DMF was given to rabbits as a suspension in 0.5% carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC). Both control and HCD groups received 0.5% CMC (1 mL/kg/day, orally) during the treatment period.

Blood samples were collected at the end of experiment (day 30) from marginal ear vein for measurement of serum triglycerides (TGs), total cholesterol (TC), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) and C-reactive protein (CRP). To obtain serum, blood sam- ples were allowed to clot for 90 min before centrifugation at 3000g. Rabbits were euthanized by an overdose of sodium pentobarbital and exsanguinated for aortic assessment. Aorta was removed for measurement of aortic malondialdehyde (MDA), superoxide dis- mutase (SOD), histopathological examination, intima/media (I/M) ratio and mRNA expression of cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP).

According to the method of Marklund, the enzymatic activity of SOD was assessed. SOD activity was measured by the degree of inhibition of the auto-oxidation of pyrogallol at an alkaline pH by SOD. The change in absorbance was measured at 420 nm and activ- ity was expressed as U/g tissue [20].

stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain. Both the intimal cross-sectional area and the medial area were determined then the mean areas were calculated to obtain I/M ratios. The patholo- gist performing histopathological evaluation was blinded to the study treatment assignment.

a rabbit model of atherosclerosis and increased plasma HDL-C con- centration [25,30]. DMF has been significally decrease CETP expression in comparison to HCD-fed rabbits. Moreover, the antioxidant activity which mediated via Nrf2 activation may plays a role in hypolipidemic activity of DMF.

lesions [39]. In this study, HCD induced inflammation was mani- fested by increased serum CRP. This result agreed with previous study, which reported that there is a positive correlation between high cholesterol levels and CRP production [40]. CRP is a pro- inflammatory protein that can be produced by monocytes and smooth muscle cells in atherosclerotic lesions. CRP has been shown to promote atherosclerosis by increasing the expression of adhe- sion proteins on endothelial cells [41], recruiting monocytes into the arterial wall and increasing the production of inflammatory cytokines by monocytes [42].

Additionally,  DMF  has  been  reported  to  attenuate 7-ketocholesterol (7KC)-induced oxidative stress on 158N murine oligodendrocytes [47]. 7KC, which is formed by cholesterol auto- oxidation, is the main oxidation product of cholesterol found in human atherosclerotic plaque. 7KC could induce atherosclerosis, possibly via reverse sterol transport disruption [48]. It has been reported that 7KC stimulates overproduction of superoxide anions and enhances inflammatory cytokines release [49]. These findings could explain the role of DMF in atherosclerosis.

