Cancer related morbidity and mortality is a major health care concern. Developing potent anti-cancer therapies which are non-toxic, sustainable and affordable is of alternative medicine. This study was designed to investigate the aqueous natural extracts mixture (NE mix) prepared from common spices tur- meric, ginger and garlic for its free radical scavenging potential and anti-cancer property against human breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7, ZR-75 and MDA-MB 231). Qualitative analysis of their bioactive con- stituents from turmeric, ginger and garlic were done using liquid chromatography-ESI- mass spectrom- etry (LC-ESI-MS/MS). To the best of our knowledge, NE mix with and without Tamoxifen has not been tested for its anti-cancer potential. We observed that the NE mix induced apoptosis in all the breast can- cer cell lines, but it was more prominent in MCF-7 and ZR-75 cell lines in comparison to MDA-MB 231 cell line. The extent of apoptosis due to combined treatment with NE mix-Tamoxifen was higher than Tamoxifen alone, indicating a potential role of the NE mix in sensitizing the ER-positive breast cancer cells towards Tamoxifen. In support to MTT assay, cell cycle analysis, our RT-PCR results also prove that the NE mix 10 lg, Tam 20 lg and combination of NE mix 10 lg-Tam 20 lg altered the expression of apoptotic markers (p53 and Caspase 9) leading to apoptosis in all three cell lines. Our data strongly indi- cate that our NE mixture is a potential alternative therapeutic approach in certain types of cancer.

Breast cancer is one of the leading cancers affecting women globally. Incidence of breast cancer is on the rise in countries like India, Japan and other Asian countries. In India, over 50,000 women die of breast cancer every year [1]. Even in western countries, where the rate of incidence is reported to be either stabilized or declining, breast cancer still continues to contribute significantly to cancer-related mortality and morbidity. Adding to existing healthcare concerns of breast cancer, its rising incidence in younger (pre-menopausal) women worldwide [2] and its overall morbidity and mortality underscores a need for developing alter- native breast cancer preventive and intervention strategies.

that p53 might be involved in preventing tumor development especially in humans. The suppression of tumorigenesis is exerted mainly by initiating the apoptosis [7]. Attardi and Jacks [8] demonstrated that loss of p53 activity has accelerated the tumor formation in transgenic mice as a result of apoptosis dysfunction. The integrity and mutation status of p53 decides its qualitative and quantitative activity in different stress-induced signalling pathways. The fact that p53 function is lost due to mutation in breast neoplasia, but its mutation rate is significantly low in other solid tumours [4,9].

Acetonitrile ULC/MS Grade purchased from Biosolve Chimie SARL (Dieuze, France) and formic acid (Optima LC/MS grade) was purchased from Fisher Scientific (Geel, Beljium, Germany). Metha- nol (LiChrosolv) was purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). Deionized water was prepared by passing distilled water through a Milli-Q water purification system (Millipore, Milford, MA, USA).

Hydroxyl radical scavenging activity was measured by the abil- ity of the different fractions of plant extracts to scavenge the hydroxyl radicals generated by the Fe3+-ascorbate-EDTA-H2O2 sys- tem (Fenton reaction) [32]. The reaction mixture contained; 500 ll of 2-deoxyribose (2.8 mM) in phosphate buffer (50 mM, pH 7.4), 200 ll of premixed ferric chloride (100 mM) and EDTA (100 mM) solution (1:1; v/v), 100 ll of H2O2 (200 mM) with or without the extract solution (100 ll). The reaction was triggered by adding 0.5 ml of the reaction mixture was added to 1 ml of TCA (2.8%; w/v; aqueous solution), then 1 ml of 1% aqueous TBA were added to the reaction mixture. The mixture was heated for 15 min on a boiling water bath. After the mixture being cooled the absorbance at 532 nm was noted against a blank (the same solution but with- out reagent). The scavenging activity on hydroxyl radical was cal- culated as follows:

Cells at 60% confluency were serum starved for 24 h and the serum-free media was replaced with appropriate media containing 10% FBS. Various amounts of natural extracts mix (5, 10 and 20 mg/ mL) and Tamoxifen (Tam 20 mg/mL) were added to the cells and total volume of each well was made up to 2 ml, using correspond- ing media. Control cells were only treated with respective vehicle solutions without the agents. Experiments were carried out in trip- 20 min. After the incubation cell suspension was analysed by TALI-Image based cytometer (Thermo Fisher). The number and percentage of apoptotic and dead cells were assessed by Annexin-V and PI staining, respectively. For the fluorescent imag- ing of dead and apoptotic cells was done using EVOS Digital inverted fluorescence microscope (Invitrogen) with a 10X LPlanFL PH fluorescence objective was used to image the labelled cells in the plate.

Expression of p53 and Caspase-9 genes was performed by a semiquantitative Reverse transcriptase-PCR technique. Total RNA was extracted from immortal cell lines i.e. MCF-7, ZR-75 and MDA MB 231 using the RNASure mini isolation kit (cat no: #NP- 84105, Nucleo-pore, Genetix Biotech Asia Pvt Ltd, New Delhi), as 20 mg). However, such a dose dependent increase in cell death was not found in MDA-MB 231 cells. Cell death induced by Tam was lesser across the cell lines when compared to the effect of NE- Tam combination. However, combined treatment of the cells with

In India, different natural extracts including turmeric, ginger and garlic are used in cooking on a daily basis. These spices contain bio-active components such as; curcumin from Curcuma longa L. (turmeric), allicin from Allium sativum L. (garlic), 6-gingerol and oleoresin from Zingiber officinale R. (ginger). These natural extracts have been a part of Ayurveda, an ancient system of Indian medi- cine. Curcumin, a bio-active component of turmeric which is an important constituent of natural extracts powder is used in Indian culinary dishes [36,37] and extracts of ginger [38] or garlic [39] have been shown to induce apoptosis.

75 cells appeared to be more sensitive to natural extracts and Tam-induced apoptotic cell death as compared to MCF-7, though both the breast cancer cell lines are positive for ER. The underlying mechanisms need to be investigated. The apoptosis induced by the natural extracts was more prominent in MCF-7 cells than in ZR-75 or MDA-MB 231 cells.

The hormone therapy drugs raloxifene and tamoxifen are used to treat breast cancer. Reported studies support an explicit role of selected phyto and dietary products in the prevention and treat- ment of cancers by targeting different signal transduction path- ways. Additive or synergistic effect of natural compounds combined with chemopreventive agents has been reported and it is also helping in mitigating drug-associated toxicities [49]. Genis- tein which is used for its chemopreventive effects in human breast cancers has also shown anti-proliferatory effect in both ER-positive and ER-negative breast cancer cells [56]. According to literature, it is found that genistein was sensitizing the prostate cancer to radi- ation, and similarly iso-flavones from soya were able to reduce the

We have examined the anti-proliferative, apoptotic properties of the natural extract mix against both ER-positive and ER- negative breast cancer cell lines (MCF 7, ZR-75 and MDA-MB 231) with or without Tamoxifen. Our results show increased effects of tamoxifen when combined with the natural extracts. In conclusion, our findings indicate that commonly used aqueous nat- ural extracts can induce cell death and lower the number of divid- ing cells. In addition, our data also suggest the possibility that the extracts may be sensitizing the cancer cells to Tamoxifen, which needs further study. Our results open up the possibility to develop natural extracts that can target breast cancers and also give under- standing of the exact mechanism of action i.e. which signalling molecules are getting activated or repressed.

Liu CY, Hung MH, Wang DS, Chu PY, Su JC, Teng TH, et al. Tamoxifen induces apoptosis through cancerous inhibitor of protein phosphatase 2 A-dependent phospho-Akt inactivation in estrogen receptor-negative human breast cancer cells. Breast Cancer Res 2014;16(5):431. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/ s13058-014-0431-9.

