Anyway, as previous works seem to show, for long time security had ap- peared a restricted paradigm w.r.t the variety of approaches available in de- pendability. Most of the discussions in the literature have been based more on finding intuitions for security starting from the dependability background and experiences than the opposite. Along the last decade security has been studied in so deep details that contributions of security theory into dependability can be now more than in the past. For example we think that the non-interference notion, widely used in security analysis (e.g., see [4,3,13,20,24]), could be re- viewed in the dependability framework by considering the analysis techniques developed so far, for non-interference, in the security area.

Following this direction this paper intends to inquire about the application of the Generalized Non-Deducibility on Compositions (for short, GNDC ) for the analysis of dependable systems, with particular attention to fault tolerant ones. GNDC was first introduced in [6] as a framework where a family of security properties could be uniformly expressed and verified. It has never been applied to dependability so far. Anyway GNDC finds its roots in non-

In this paper we will show how such a GNDC formulation can be exploited for expressing safety properties peculiar of the dependability analysis: fail stop, fail safe, fail silent. It constitutes a step towards a formal classification of dependable properties, similarly as it happened in security [5]. Moreover we will show how some of the theoretical results of GNDC , (e.g., compositional reasoning) originally stated for security analysis (e.g., see [5]), can be re-stated and re-used in the analysis of dependability.

Using process algebras it is possible to provide a uniform framework for spec- ifying fault tolerant systems. For example in [1,2], a variant of the CCS was used to model a system, its failing behavior, its recovery strategies and its fault assumptions (i.e., assumption on the occurrences of faults); fault toler- ant properties expressed as logic formulas are verified on a finite state model of the system through model checking.

A fault tolerant (candidate) system model is a CCS process P # obtained by adding to PF some processes realizing error-recover strategies in accor- dance to some fault tolerant design strategy (e.g., copies of component, triple modular redundancy, voting etc.). In general the application of fault

Note that, differently from other approaches (e.g., [1]), we assume the faulty behavior is described in the system PF #, rather than also in the fault injector FF . This is the technical trick to encode fault tolerance analysis as non-interference analysis and, eventually, as the GNDC one.

representing the behaviour of a flashing torch Torch using the fault tolerant energizer of Example 2.1. The energizer is expected to furnish one units of energy, even in case of fault. The flashing torch Torch emits a flash action whenever it receives exactly one unit of energy, no flash otherwise. What

Once characterized as GNDC property, fault tolerance can benefit of vari- ous of theoretical results and analysis techniques. Those results and strategies are peculiar of the research background in security analysis. Specifically when either a trace or a simulation relations are used to characterized fault tol- erance properties, the GNDC theory assures efficient analysis procedures to exist. Specifically it benefits both of a static characterization (which gets rid off the universal quantification over all the possible fault scenarios), and of compositionality proofs. Another advantage of our uniform characterization is the possibility to compare dependability properties as done for the secu- rity ones in the GNDC framework. Potentially, this could be a preliminary step towards a formal and uniform taxonomy of dependability and security properties.

