In this paper, we deal with editing tabular forms for program speci cations based on a particular graph grammar HNGG [2]. First, we formalize syntax-directed editing methods by extending of the notion of the Cornell Program Synthesizer [8] to attribute NCE graph grammars (cf. [1]). Next, we discuss the algorithms of the editing methods.

Mechanical editing of tabular forms is one of the important issues in software engineering methodology. The Cornell Program Synthesizer is well-known and is often referred to as a structured and text-based editor which uses an at- tribute grammar successfully [8]. Tabular forms are represented by several di erent models (e.g., Pane [6]). We assigned each item in the tabular form to an attributed node. This assignment naturally represents the order of items and location of items in the tabular form. Since the number of items in the form is generally unbound and the order of items has some valid meaning, tab- ular forms are denoted by a graph grammar [2]. Accordingly, the mechanical

It is supposed that a mechanical processing of tabular forms can be realized e ectively by syntactic manipulation of graphs. In [2], the inner structure of each form in Hiform is de ned by an attribute NCE graph grammar. Hiform forms are speci ed by graphs that are generated its grammar.

We proposed an editing method, based on attribute NCE graph grammar of tabular forms with a homogenous cell size. This method includes attribute rules for mechanical drawing. It can exactly edit valid tabular forms de ned by edNCE graph grammar. A linear time editing algorithm with attribute rules for primitive drawing exists.

These syntactic editing methods could be applied to syntactic manipula- tion of spreadsheet languages. We are reconstructing attribute rules for more sophisticated drawing. We are investigating other edit manipulations such as a division manipulation, a combination manipulation and so on. Furthermore we are now developing a tabular-form editor system.

