In this paper we present approximation preserving reductions from the Budgeted and Generalized Maximum Coverage Problems to the Knapsack Problem with Conflict Graphs. The reductions are used to yield Polynomial Time Approximation Schemes for special classes of instances of these problems. Using these approximation schemes, the existence of pseudo-polynomial algorithms are proven and, in more particular cases, these algorithms are shown to have polynomial time complexity. Moreover, the characteristics of the instances that admit these algorithms are analyzed.

The existence of a ptas or pseudo-polynomial algorithms for the two mentioned problems is unlikely (unless P= NP). It is possible, however, that such algorithms exist for special cases of the problems. In the current work we are going to show that such group of instances do exist and give necessary and sufficient conditions to identify subsets of these instances.

In the next sections we are going to present the polynomial time approximation preserving reductions from bmc and gmc to the Knapsack Problem with Conflict Graphs (kcg) and prove that they yield approximation algorithms for restrictions of these problems (Section 2). In Section 3 the characteristics of subsets of the instances of bmc and gmc that satisfy the conditions of the algorithms are displayed. Section 4 describes exact algorithms obtained from the approximations for special cases. Finally, in Section 5 we present some conclusions and future directions of research.

From Proposition 2.3 we know there is an approximation algorithm for bmc when- ever the corresponding kcg instance is weakly chordal or have bounded treewidth. However it would be far more useful to know the characteristics of bmc instances that have corresponding kcg instances of these classes. In the current section we define what a bmc instance should look like for having a corresponding instance of kcg with weakly chordal conflict graph.

vertices in V3 and part of an anti-hole. We have that v1 and v3 must be in the same clique and v2 in a different one. Let v4 be a fourth vertex in the anti-hole, following v3 in the anti-cycle. Since it follows v3 it must be from a different clique but since it is not a successor nor a predecessor of v1, v4 and v1 must be adjacent and therefore, must be in the same clique, but v1 and v3 are in the same clique. Contradiction.

The ptas obtained from the reduction in Section 2 can be used to produce a pseudo- polynomial time algorithm for a restriction of bmc, i.e. instances of bmc with corresponding kcg instances with graphs that are weakly chordal or have bounded treewidth. This fact is described by Proposition 4.1.

Proof. Let I2 = R(I1) be an instance of kcg obtained from the application of reduction R to an instance I1 of bmc. Let OPT (I1) be the value of an optimal solution for I1 and OPT (I2) be the value of an optimal solution for I2. From the bounded by some constant k that is independent of the instance. If this restriction applies, then the algorithm is actually polynomial in |I1| as shown in Proposition 4.2. This case has application, for instance, in the time-aware test-case prioritization problem [12] where the weights are unitary.

Proposition 4.2 If the weights of the elements in a instance of bmc are bounded by some constant k that is independent on the instance, then the algorithm from Proposition 2.3 can be used to produce a polynomial time algorithm for that restric- tion of bmc.

