World wide web provides explosion of information related to medical and health in the form of medical resources, bibliographic databases and blogs. To diagnose a condition of a patient, physi- cians increasingly rely on the information available in the medical resources [4,12,20]. Unfortunately, physicians face difficulties when trying to search the information from the research articles. In most cases they end on retrieving large number of irrelevant articles. Biomedical articles have complex technical contents and structures, which can create significant difficulties for a retrieval system for searching relevant documents. Medical research articles are usually very long which create challenges for the information retrieval (IR) system for capturing the real content of a topic. These factors make biomedical articles retrieval significantly different to web search.

Furthermore, in this paper, we compare many different search features extracted from the article, including words or noun phrases from different fields by applying different weights. Results of our experiments show that the words and noun phrases from the introduction field provide more effectiveness than those from the title or abstract field when used for generating queries for retrieving biomedical articles. Furthermore, after combining differ- ent features, retrieval performance can be significantly improved over single features.

[25] proposed two query reformulation techniques for medical professionals for retrieving relevant information from medical lit- erature. In their first technique, they used unsupervised query expansion and pseudo relevance feedback. Their unsupervised query expansion approach only includes health related terms. In

dominant (AD) hyper IgE syndrome (HIES) and autosomal recessive (AR) autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type I (APS-I), display fewer other infections. Patients with isolated CMC (CMCD) rarely display any other severe disease. We review here recent progress in the genetic dissection of these three types of inherited CMC.

This set of features includes most of those features we consid- ered for this paper. The main focus is how to convert a full length query article into an efficient search query. Each high level feature is issued to retrieval function and retrieval score is used as the value of the feature. The queries considered for retrieval function are Indri queries [16]. Indri a well-developed query language, it provides many operators to complete different types of search

For the third factor, any techniques that measure the impor- tance score of a word or phrase can be used. Here, we only consider some standard statistics like tf and tfidf. For the fourth factor, the retrieval system can search either the whole biomedical article (all) or specific fields. Here, we consider the six fields with the explicit tags. A general algorithm is provided to transform the biomedical article (query) to an effective search query, where the values of the parameters reflect the four factors mentioned previ- ously. The details of the algorithm can be found in Algorithm 1.

In this section, we explore combining different types of features. Although the focus of this article was to retrieve related articles of biomedical domain. However, we also test our approach on a related domain. We select priori art patent retrieval task for this purpose. Prior-art search in patent retrieval is to find previously published patents on a given topic. The goal of searching a patent database for the prior art search task is to find all previously pub- lished related patents on a given topic [15,7,14]. It is a common task for patent examiners and attorneys to decide whether a new patent application is novel or contains technical conflicts with some already patented invention. They collect all related patents and report them in a search report.

