Over the past decades, the Electronic Health Record (EHR) tech- nique is developed; vast volumes of digital clinical data are generated, making it possible for Clinical Decision Support Systems (CDSSs) to make better decisions. For example, public databases such as MIMIC- III [1] have promoted the research in clinical predictions. Based on those databases, different severity scoring systems, traditional ma- chine learning algorithms, and DNNs are developed and continuously improved to achieve better clinical prediction tasks such as patient mortality, disease classification, and length of hospital stay.

Traditional severity scores like Simplified Acute Physiology Score (SAPS-II) [2], the Sepsis-related Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) [3], and Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE) [4] are standard for mortality prediction in practice. Clinicians usually choose the patient-specific events they used based on their experience. Then a standard process is implemented. First, a severity score is calculated based on the relative events, usually measured within the first 24 h after ICU admission. Second, a simple model such as logistic regression is applied to the score to predict the final death probability.

For benchmark, we select three clinical prediction tasks which are important in critical care research and are commonly studied by machine learning researchers. The first is in-hospital mortality which is important for doctors to take effective actions for patient care in Intensive Care Units (ICUs) [9]. The second is ICD-9 code group predic- tion, where we divide the ICD-9 codes into 20 groups according to [6] and treat it as a multi-classification problem. The third is length of stay prediction, which is to predict the hospital stay after admission.

We extract 136 time-series features and five non-time series features as our full feature set according to [6]. Those features are selected based on clinical significance and missing rate while containing all fea- tures used in severity scoring systems such as SAPS-II and SOFA. Based on this feature set, different feature selection methods are evaluated including GA based methods, scoring methods and machine learning methods.

For scoring methods, we choose two popularly used severity scores, namely SAPS-II and SOFA. SAPS-II [2] is designed to predict the prob- ability of hospital mortality. It can be calculated based on 17 variables which can be expand into 20 raw features of our complete feature set. SOFA [3] score can be calculated based on 6 variables which can be expand into 17 raw features of our complete feature set.

From the above results, we can see that GA always performs better than other feature selection methods. We think this is because as the number of iterations (epochs) increases, GA can reach the local optimum. If there are enough iterations, GA can even reach the global optimum. The price of high precision is time overhead. However, this feature selection method only need to be trained once offline and in actual application doctors can quickly make a diagnosis with a few features.

