where after successful mutual authentication they compute a session key by using cryptographic techniques and pre-loaded information. The computed secret session keys are used for ensuring secure communications in future between two vehicles in a cluster as well. Informal security analysis along with formal security verification using the broadly-used Automated Validation of Internet Security Protocols and Applications (AVISPA) show that our access control scheme is secured against various potential attacks. We also show the competency of our scheme by comparing it with other existing schemes in terms of computation and communication costs.

In this paper, we focus mainly on access control mechanism. An ac- cess control scheme ensures a secured environment to provide uninter- rupted services. IoV is a dynamic network where the location of the ve- hicle keeps changing every instant so does the nearest neighbors. Also, due to increasing population, the number of vehicles bought and reg- istered are increasing drastically everyday. Therefore, the need of an hour is to have an access control scheme which ensures that the mem- bers joining the cluster are authenticated and legal. On the other hand, an adversary can even deploy malicious nodes in the network to harm the integrity network. So it becomes necessary to be able to differen- tiate between a genuine and a malicious vehicle. Therefore a success- ful access control mechanism controls the flow of false, invalid, illegal and unauthorized information within the network. It also manages ac- cess permissions, monitors the scalable IoV architecture, handles huge amount of data stream, and also keeps a track of allocation and utiliza- tion of resources in the network.

A general IoV network comprises of vehicle, RSU, TA. Vehicles are installed with sensors like location based system, monitoring/warning systems, analytic systems, partner systems, speed control, camera, mul- timedia settings, mass airflow sensor, engine speed sensor, spark knock sensor, coolant sensor, fuel temperature sensor, voltage sensor, smart card device, finger print device etc. The sensors of the vehicles collect the data from the surrounding via on-board unit (OBU) through a data collecting agent. The data collected is processed via inference logics to make decisions and is saved in tampered proof device (TPD). In our [27] also proposed an authentication-based secure data dissemination protocol and framework for 5G-enabled VANET. The authenticated vehi- cles are allowed to exchange messages only after validating each other. The message integrity is checked by calculating the disparity in the com- munication bits.

scheme also facilitates password update phase which allows vehicles to change their passwords if it is stolen or breached. Later, we analyze the security of our scheme informally and formally using AVISPA simulation to show that it can resist various well known attacks. Finally, a com- prehensive performance analysis shows the competency of our scheme against other existing schemes in terms of computation, communication costs. The comparison in security and functionality features shows that our scheme is superior to most of the existing schemes.

This work was supported by FCT/MCTES through national funds and when applicable co-funded EU funds under the Project UIDB/50008/2020; and by the Brazilian National Council for Research and Development (CNPq) via Grant No. 313036/2020-9. The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers, associate editor and editor-in-chief for their valuable feedback on the paper.

