Bound variables have puzzled computer scientists and logicians for decades. Al- though fairly simple to handle in informal pencil-and-paper calculations, they can be surprisingly complex to manage in algorithms and mechanized proofs, where the mostly uninteresting formal details of variable binding cannot be overlooked. Research on the subject has led to various promising approaches for tackling this complexity [6,12,14], among which we can mention the theory of nominal sets [5].

Although some of the notions above are more general than others, none of them proposes to offer a clear, unified picture of what binding means for nominal sets. In this article, we attempt to look at the problem from a more foundational per- spective, by introducing binding operators: a novel construction on nominal sets that unifies and generalizes many forms of variable binding proposed in the liter- ature. After briefly recalling basic notions of nominal set theory (Section 2), we introduce binding operators in Section 3, showing how to use them for defining a variety of nominal sets representing binders in Section 4. Section 5 gives an al- ternative characterization of these nominal sets defined by binding operators, used in Section 6 to encompass variable scope within our framework. In Section 7, we discuss category-theoretic properties of binding operators, which provide sufficient conditions for defining nominal sets inductively. We conclude and review related work in Section 8.

Later, in Lemma 6.14, we extend this result to describe the finitely supported functions that can be defined on such quotients. It would be possible (and not too difficult) to state this extension right away and prove it directly, but the tools developed in Section 6 provide more structure for attacking the problem.

By iterating this process, we can combine any finite number of independent re- naming operations. For simplicity, we restrict ourselves to the case of two indepen- dent operations in what follows, but the theory developed here can be generalized without difficulty to the case of a finite number of renaming operations that are pairwise independent. Whenever a set has multiple nominal structures, we consider the compound one defined in the above lemma as canonical.

ment x cannot change the status of the atoms in supp(x) from bound to free, or vice versa. Note, however, that applying f may still remove atoms from the support of x entirely, both bound and free. This restriction guarantees that every such f can be lifted to quotients, as shown in the following result.

