In this work we introduce Bio-PEPA, a process algebra for the modelling and the analysis of biochemical networks. It is a modification of PEPA to deal with some features of biological models, such as stoichiometry and the use of generic kinetic laws. Bio-PEPA may be seen as an intermediate, formal, compositional representation of biological systems, on which different kinds of analysis can be carried out. Finally, we show a representation of a model, concerning a simple genetic network, in the new language.

In recent years there has been an increasing interest in the application of process algebras in the modelling and analysis of biological systems [19,11,12,18,9,17,6]. Process algebras are appropriate for describing formally and analysing a biological system as a whole and for reasoning about the interactions among genes and pro- teins. Indeed, biological systems can be abstracted by concurrent systems described by process algebras: species may be seen as processes that can interact with each other and reactions may be modelled by using actions.

The process algebra PEPA, originally defined for the performance analysis of computer systems, has been recently applied in the context of signalling path- ways [6,7]. Two different approaches have been proposed: one based on reagents and another based on pathways. In the present version of PEPA, not all the features of biochemical models can be represented. The main drawbacks are the definition of stoichiometry and the representation of kinetic laws. Indeed, stoichiometry is not

In this paper we present a first version of Bio-PEPA, a language for the modelling and the analysis of biochemical networks. This is a modification of PEPA in order to represent explicitly some features of biochemical models, such as stoichiometry and the role of the different species in a given reaction. It allows us to model a general biochemical network. Broadly speaking, biochemical networks consist of some biological species, which interact with each other through chemical reactions. The dynamics is described in terms of some kinetic laws. The level of abstraction proposed is high, species are seen in terms of their interactions and the structure of the elements are unknown. A major feature of Bio-PEPA is the introduction of functional rates to express general kinetic laws. Each action type represents a reaction in the model and it is associated with a functional rate. The rate is evaluated at the moment of the reduction of the system.

Biological information is often collected in terms of biochemical networks. Accord- ing to the different kinds of species and interactions involved, we can have gene regulatory networks, signalling pathways and metabolic pathways. In our work we consider a general approach that is valid for most of these networks. A biochemical system M is composed of: e.g. the reaction rates of elementary steps, or when there are different time-scales for the reactions. Generally these laws are valid under some conditions, such as the quasi-steady-state assumption (QSSA). This describes the situation where one or more reaction steps may be considered faster than the others and so the intermedi- ate elements can be considered to be constant. There is a long list of kinetic laws, for details see [20].

PEPA was originally defined for the performance modelling of systems with con- current behaviour [15]. Systems are represented as the composition of components or agents which undertake actions. In PEPA actions are assumed to have a du- ration, that is represented by a random variable with an exponential distribution.

Choice The component S + R represents a system which may behave either as S or as R. The activities of both S and R are enabled. The first activity to complete distinguishes one of them and the other is discarded.

for further synchronisation. For action types not in L, the components proceed independently and concurrently with their enabled activities. In the context of performance evaluation the rate for the synchronised activities is the minimum of the rates of the synchronising activities.

that are not actively involved in the reactions. They are basically containers where species are. We do not represent them explicitly. The transport of a species from one compartment to another one is modelled by introducing two components for representing the species in the two compartments. The reaction is simply abstracted by a transformation of one species into another one.

final result of the network, has an inhibitory effect on this process. The second reaction (2) is the transcription of the protein P from M . Another two reactions represent the degradation of M (3) and the degradation of P (4). Finally there is the dimerization of P and its inverse process (5,5i). All the reactions are described by mass action kinetics with the exception of the first reaction, that has an Inhi- bition/Michaelis Menten kinetics. In order to translate the degradation reaction and the translation, the two auxiliary components CF and Res are introduced, as described in Section 4.3.

In this paper we have presented Bio-PEPA, a modification of the process algebra PEPA for the modelling and the analysis of biochemical networks. Bio-PEPA allows us to represent explicitly some features of biological networks, such as stoichiometry and general kinetic laws. Stoichiometric coefficients are added to the syntax as ad- ditional information. They are used in the calculation of the rate and are necessary for the further analysis of the system. However, stoichiometry does not influence the number of levels. Indeed stoichiometry is at a different level of abstraction with respect to the concentration levels.

but to pay attention to the interpretation of the results. One topic for the future concerns a deeper investigation into the relation between Gillespie simulation and general kinetic laws. Another area for future work will concern the application of model checking techniques for the analysis of the properties of a Bio-PEPA system.

