Bilattices and d-frames are two different kinds of structures with a four-valued interpretation. Whereas d-frames were introduced with their topological semantics in mind, the theory of bilattices has a closer connection with logic. We consider a common generalisation of both structures and show that this not only still has a clear bitopological semantics, but that it also preserves most of the original bilattice logic. Moreover, we also obtain a new bitopological interpretation for the connectives of four-valued logic.

Later on Jung and Moshier studied bitopological spaces (or bispaces for short) to clarify the interplay of various topologies arising in domain theory. They discovered that bispaces actually also give a very natural semantics to a four-valued logic. The fact that the first topology can represent the observably true predicates and the second the observably false ones gives a good four-valued interpretation/reading and this is even more transparent in the algebraic duals of bitopological spaces, dubbed d-frames in [10].

In this paper, we are trying to tackle the obvious question of whether there is a reasonable generalisation of both theories that would give us some better insight into the similarities and differences between bilattices and d-frames. We claim that the answer to this question is yes. As a starting point we take d-frames and we will show that they can be very naturally extended into a new structure which we call nd-frames. It seems that this way we get the best from both worlds: We have a clear bitopological semantics while still preserving most of the original logic of bilattices. Moreover, in the nd-frame context the negation of four-valued logic has a new and clear bitopological realisation via interior operators.

This paper contributes to both the study of bilattices and the study of d-frames. For the former, it shows how to generalise bilattices to get four-valued structures where the components are not isomorphic. Contributions to d-frame theory are by giving an explanation of proof-theoretic negation and, moreover, extending this negation to the whole d-frame. By this we also show another connection between geometry (interior operators) and proof theory (cut rules). Moreover, nd-frames allow a finer distinction of bispaces as the class of their spectra is broader than the class of spectra of d-frames. Having a generalisation of both structures allows us to compare partial implication in d-frames with the implication of bilattices and to show that the former is much stronger than latter.

It is a good sign that extending Stone duality for d-frames to nd-frames is quite straightforward as it points towards the robustness of the theory. All the additional assumptions make sense topologically given that p and m should correspond to interior operators. The only difference with d-frame duality is that we added the conditions (dpp) and (dpm). Similarly, in the characterisation of spatial nd-frames we needed to assume (sp) and (sm) in addition to the original conditions for spatial d-frames.

