common behaviors in business processes and exploiting intuitive notations for property representation. It also serves as a key component of our method for model checking business processes. Important ideas and features of BPSL modeler are provided in this paper to help understand its effectiveness.

The complexity of business properties in traditional temporal logics can be eas- ily understood from the example. Therefore, the primary contribution of this work is the proposal of an easy-to-use visual notation language called BPSL and its sup- porting tool BPSL modeler that are tailored for the application in business domains. BPSL modeler enjoys the advantage of maintaining good usability and understand- ability for specifying business properties while still preserving their strict formal semantics to support the formal verification. These advantages are enabled by tai- loring BPSL for specifying common behaviors in business processes and absorbing

An important working direction for facilitating temporal property specification is to provide visual extensions for existing logics [3][5][11]. This benefits users by helping understand different semantics of temporal operators with their visualized formalisms. On the other hand the Property Specification Language(PSL) [6], an IEEE standard in digital circuit community, focuses on reducing the complexity in property specification by providing a more flexible choice of temporal operators. When taking a close investigation in business domain, in REALM (Regulations Expressed as Logical Models) [7], an extension of propositional temporal logics is contained to specify compliance rules in business models. A domain specific model checking language tuned for business applications named Strix is proposed in [1]. The property specification in Strix directly uses CTL connectives to explore the business process model.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2 the framework and basic concepts in BPSL modeler are introduced to help understand its ideas. In section 4, the features of BPSL modeler are explained in detail together with the analysis of corresponding characteristics in business property specification. Section 5 illustrates how BPSL modeler plays the role in our method of model checking business processes. Section 6 concludes the paper.

Boolean Block(BB): Represented by an octagon, a BB is a three-tuple consists of its name (e.g. Report ), stereotype (e.g. Activity ) and a set of atomic attributes (e.g. whether it is finished). It can thus be used to identify specific business entities that are qualified by the pre-defined conditions in BB. For example, the above BB of Report indicates a Report activity that has already been finished.

Abortion: The abortion condition in a TS indicates the circumstance in which the evaluation of a TS should be forced to stop (e.g. by an external cancel event). In the above case, the question mark indicates that no abortion condition is explicitly specified.

Business property specification is a major step in reasoning business process models and ensuring its reliability. In this paper, the visual notation language of BPSL and its supporting tool BPSL modeler are proposed to enable the intuitive specifi- cation of business properties and facilitate the reasoning of business process models. BPSL modeler simplifies the complexity of business property specification by taking different business characteristics into consideration, e.g. the visual representation, property compensation and filtering, etc. It exploits existing knowledge in the prac- tices and researches in business domain to make property specification of minimum efforts. In BPSL modeler, both the logics of LTL and CTL are supported and formal semantics can be auto-generated for each business property template and business property so as to ease the integration between BPSL modeler and existing formal verification tools. Our future work will include extending the application of BPSL modeler into more real cases to enlarge its values.

