The notion of branching bisimulation for the alternating model of probabilistic systems is not a congruence with respect to parallel composition. In this paper we first define another branching bisimulation in the more general model allowing consecutive probabilistic transitions, and we prove that it is compatible with parallel composition. We then show that our bisimulation is actually the coarsest congruence relation included in the existing branching bisimulation when restricted to the alternating model.

The notion of branching bisimulation in the probabilistic framework was first introduced in [18] for the non-alternating model (a transition system in which ev- ery action transition leads to a probability distribution of states instead to a single state [17]). Branching bisimulation was also defined for the fully-probabilistic model in [4]. This model, however, disallows any non-determinism by attaching proba- bilities to action labels so that the probability of all outgoing transitions from a state sums up to one. For the strictly alternating model a definition of branching bisimulation was given in [2]. By using colored traces, as in the original definition of non-deterministic branching bisimulation [8], they proved that their notion relates exactly those states that are intuitively branching bisimilar. Although originally defined for the strictly alternating model only, the same definition applies in the (non-strictly) alternating setting, too. They also point out that their branching bisimulation is incomparable to the one of [18].

The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we introduce proba- bilistic transition systems as the generalized alternating model, and we define the notion of branching bisimulation. In Section 3 we define parallel composition with- out synchronization for our model, and prove that our branching bisimulation is a congruence relation with respect to this operator. In Section 4 we show that our bisimulation is the smallest congruence in the branching bisimulation from [2]. Finally, the last section gives some conclusions and some directions for future work.

Proof. Note that the probabilistic transition matrix of the merge is just the Kro- necker product [9] of the probabilistic transition matrices of the parallel compo- nents. The proof then easily follows from the fact that matrix powers distribute over Kronecker products.	2

We have defined a notion of branching bisimulation for a general alternating model of probabilistic systems that allows successive probabilistic transitions. We have proved our notion to be compatible with parallel composition without synchroniza- tion. We have also shown that our bisimulation is the coarsest congruence included in the branching bisimulation of [2] (when restricted to the alternating model), thus properly solving the congruence problem of [2].

In this paper we worked with the (generalized) alternating model of probabilis- tic systems, and we did not consider e.g. the non-alternating model of [17], for which branching bisimulation exists and is a congruence [18]. In [19] an embed- ding from the (general) alternating to the non-alternating model is proposed, that

In [19] there is also another type of mapping proposed, that does preserve par- allel composition. This transformation can be applied only in one version of the alternating model, and is simply based on combining probabilistic transitions with action transitions that pass through them (if any). For future work we schedule to investigate how our branching bisimulation is related to the notion that is naturally obtained by propagating the notion of [18] to our setting.

