gritting ([8]), urban waste collection([6]), or street maintenance ([25], [30]). CARP has been shown to be NP-Hard([12]). Several heuristics and exact algorithms have been proposed for it. Heuristics were able to provide solutions at a low computa- tional cost and the use of metaheuristics ([22]) techniques improved results obtained by traditional heuristics.

This paper is organized as follows: section 2 presents a mathematical model for CARP and a review of the literature. At section 3 Biased Random Key Genetic Algorithms (BRKGA) are described. Our BRKGA algorithm for CARP is pre- sented at section 4. Computational experiments carried on in order to evaluate the performance of the method are presented in section 5. Finally, section 6 is devoted to concluding remarks and future work.

[21] presented a branch-and-bound method. They obtained optimal solutions on instances that have 15 to 50 arcs. Belenguer and Benavent [2] developed a cutting plane algorithm that was tested on the instances of Benavent, Golden, Kiuchi y Eglese. The gap with the best known solution on the first three sets of instances with up to 50 nodes and 97 arcs, was less than 1%. On the instances of Eglese (up to 140 nodes and 190 arcs) this gap was less than 3%.

A population of solutions evolves over a number of iterations or generations in order to explore the space of solutions and trying to avoid getting entrapped at local optima. Probabilistic transition rules are used. A solution of the optimization problem is called an individual or chromosome. Usually solutions are coded by a finite chain of bits or integers called genes. Each gene can take a value called an allele from a finite alphabet. This coding allows to represent the reproduction between parents. The objective function of the combinatorial optimization problem is used as fitness criteria to select good individuals.

At each iteration of a GA, that is at each generation, a new population is created by combining elements of the current population. Three operators are applied: reproduction, crossover, and mutation. That is, a small percentage of the best individuals in terms of fitness is directly copied to the next population. Next, crossover operators (deterministic or probabilistic) are applied to random selected parents to produce offspring for the next generation. Then, random mutation of some alleles is carried on in random selected individuals as a mean of escaping from local optima.

population and the other from the Non-Elite set of individuals. Repetition in the selection of a mate is allowed. This way and also because the mechanism of imple- ment mating is the Parameterized Uniform Crossover operator with pe >0.5, the probability that an individual inherits the allele from the Elite parent is increased. BRKGA has been successfully applied to several combinatorial optimization problems as Packing [13], Scheduling, Resource Constrained Project Scheduling [17], Assembly Line Balancing [14],Manufacturing Cell Formation [15] and the Ge- neralized Traveling Salesman Problem ([27], [26]). A recent survey on BRKGA is

Feasible CARP solution: applying the heuristic Iterated Tour Partitioning proposed by Haimovich and Kan[18], the tour obtained in the previous step is partitioned in subtours and a feasible solution is obtained. This procedure is applied several times starting at a diferent position each time. The best solution is kept.

Each individual obtained this way is decoded and problem feasibility is checked. If it is not feasible some tours are divided in order to fulfill capacity constraint. The decoded solution is then improved using local search operators and finally it is encoded again as a random key vector.

Generation of mutants in RKGA/BRKGA is a simple mechanism to reduce proba- bility of getting trapped in local optima. We propose another alternative to do this. At every generation, classic mutation operator over individuals previously selected is applied. However, this action is not enough to skip poor solution regions.

This paper presents an algorithm for CARP based on BRKGA metaheuristic and local search. Computational results on instances from the literature have shown that this is an effective heuristic, competitive with the best algorithms reported so far. Optimal or near optimal solutions were obtained in a robust way using low CPU effort. This is due to several facts. The way the initial population was generated allowed intensification of the searching in different regions. The Parameterized Uniform Crossover operator employed to mate Elite with a NonElite individuals and the improvement phase after crossover and mutation showed to be very effective. The neighbor list and classical local search methods permitted intensification of the search process in attractive regions.

Anyway there is still place to improve the algorithm. The initial population could be generated using other heuristics to better explore the solution space. Fitness is a simple way to measure quality of solutions. However, a mechanism to analyze diversity of solutions could be considered. This would allow exploring different solution regions in a systematic way.

