Despite the availability of trust management and reputation attack detection systems, cloud computing systems still experience targeted attacks from a variety of sources [4,5,6]. The literature reveals a gap in the availability of detection strategies targeted against reputation attacks [7,8]. This study will therefore provide essential insights on how reputation attack detection can be effectively used for effective assessment in cloud services, and particularly in addressing the reputation attacks that undermine trust assessment in cloud computing. This research will contribute significantly to the existing literature on how consumers and pro- viders of cloud services can enhance the security and privacy of the services, hence improving the overall user experience.

tained as public platforms that can be accessed by a wide range of users [9,10,11]. The invention of cloud data storage is certainly rev- olutionary, as it has eliminated the costliness, inconvenience, and need for more space that additional hardware brings. It allows sig- nificantly large amounts of data to be stored at a low cost [12,13]. This has dramatically increased the number of cloud services offered online as well as the number of consumers of such services. However, privacy and security have always been a challenge for digitally available data, as most of the data resides in the public domain, where every model of trust management service is endan- gered by some security threats [14]. These threats may either ele- vate the reputation of a specific entity with malicious intentions or entirely ruin it. Security threats that endanger a trust management service may sometimes arise from the consumers of the service themselves. However, in such cases, it can be very difficult to determine which kind of activities are malicious.

According to Mahajan, Mahajan, Jadhav, and Kolate [35], a Sybil attack involves the emulation of multiple behaviors by a single entity [36], typically by multiple accounts using a single entity/ node. The multiple identities can be stolen or fake, or even obtained through a Sybil attack. Sybil attackers can use multiple entities to either damage or build the reputation of an online sys- tem by giving either negative or positive feedback, respectively. The literature will be systematically reviewed for the effectiveness of detecting reputation attacks so as to prevent Sybil Attacks.

TMS will be the component of the proposed design that evalu- ates the extent to which providers of the cloud services are willing to depend on the consumers of the cloud services. It will also be entitled to the provision of certain cloud services as promised by the cloud service providers. The trust management system is com- posed of various subsections entitled with different tasks, all of which are aimed at ensuring the security and the privacy of the data in the cloud storage systems. It evaluates the rules that are determined within the level of trust depending on feedback from service providers. There is a need to specify the identity of the user and track the activities of this entity for easy tracking of unautho- rized consumers or attackers and issuance of proof of any form of data leakage. Through the TMS, the accounts of registered as well as recognized consumers are updated and all the incidents in which a consumer is involved are also determined. This component will also oversee the authorization of whoever uploads the feed- back into the system. It is capable of identifying invalid feedback as well as discarding such invalid feedback from the system.

Role Behavior Analyzer: This serves to analyze the functions and roles associated with minimum levels of trust regulations in relation to shared resources. Its role is to evaluate rules that are determined within the level of trust depending on the feedback that arises from service providers in the central repository. The role behavior analyzer entity links the roles in order to collect informa- tion concerning them and report any form of leakage if it arises. This entity fills the need to specify the identity of the user and track the activities undertaken for easy tracking of unauthorized consumers or attackers and issuance of proof of any form of data leakage. The role behavior analyzer also updates the accounts of registered as well as recognized consumers and assesses all of the incidents in which a consumer is involved.

The issue of cloud service trust has attracted many researchers, but there are still many concerns that must be addressed. In future work, we will introduce additional criteria that increase the secu- rity of the trust model. In addition, we will seek other types of rep- utation attacks that threaten the security of the cloud computing environment and propose solutions to avoid these attacks.

