Waterpipe smoking is among the most popular methods of tobacco consumption world-wide especially among youth [1,2]; which cause more than 5 million deaths each year [3]. Tobacco is smoked in cigarette, cigar and waterpipe (shisha or narghile). Many people consider the waterpipe is less harmful than cigarette smoke [4]. In addition, the occasional waterpipe tobacco smoking may lead to tissue inflammation.

Chronic tobacco smoking is associated with cognitive flexibility and intellectual abilities. In addition, it affects mood, learning and/ or memory processing speed and working memory. Moreover, chronic smoking induces allover brain atrophy, abnormal decline in reasoning, structural and biochemical abnormalities in anterior frontal regions. Generally, it is associated with an increased risk for various forms of neurodegenerative diseases [9].

Carob pods were obtained from Egyptian herbal markets, Cairo, Egypt. The pods were grinded and weighted. Thereafter, the rotary evaporator was used to prepare the aqueous extract according to Ayaz et al. [19]. Rats were received daily oral gavage of 600 mg/ kg b. wt. [20].

Finally, the remaining two groups (5th & 6th) are protective and therapeutic groups respectively. In protective group; rats were daily gavaged aqueous extract of carob (600 mg/kg b. wt.) then 30 min after rats were exposed to waterpipe smoke (15 min) for 8 weeks. However, rats of therapeutic group were daily exposed to waterpipe smoke 10 mg (15 min) then 30 min afterwards rats were daily gavaged carob aqueous extract (600 mg/kg b. wt.) for 8 weeks.

To all 5-HT tubes 1.2 ml of OPT (4 mg/100 ml, 10 N HCl) was added and mixed well. The tubes placed in a boiling water bath for 10 min, all tubes were cooled by tap water and read the flo- rescence in a fluorometer. Excitation and emission were 355 and 470 nm, respectively [22].

The external standards were prepared for DA using three differ- ent concentrations in 0.1 N HCl and completed to a final volume of 1.6 ml and followed by adding 2.5 ml n-butanol and 5 ml n-heptane to the tubes. Thereafter; to be acted as samples to get the aqueous phase.

The level of NO was determined in pulmonary tissue according to Green et al. [25]; where, nitrous acid diazotize sulfanilamide was formed in an acid medium and in the presence of nitrite. Then nitrous acid diazotize sulfanilamide is coupled with N-(1- naphthyl) ethylene diamine forming Azo dye (a bright reddish- purple color) and it can be measured at 540 nm.

The pulmonary CAT activity was determined by the method of Bock et al. [26], where; CAT decomposes H2O2 which can be fol- lowed directly by a decrease in the absorbance at 240 nm. The dif- ference in the absorbance per unit time is a measure of the CAT activity.

The waterpipe smokers had increased cough and biologic abnormalities in several anatomic components in the lung com- pared to nonsmokers [35]. The cough reflex can be initiated by a wide variety of stimuli [36]. The vagal fibers for cough enter the brainstem (cough center) and relay in the nucleus of the solitary tract with connections to second-order neurons [37,38]. Afferent impulses travel to the dorsal medulla where the reflex is subject to cortical control where cerebral cortex has a role in influencing cough. The brain then sends signals back to the lungs and respira- tory muscles [39,40]. Neurotransmitters which involved in the cen- tral cough complex are tachykinins, glutamate, g-aminobutyric acid, N-methyl-D-aspartate, 5-HT and DA [37,38,41]. Increased release of substance P is involved in the development of cough and inflammation of the airway, and its production is regulated by dopaminergic neurons in the brainstem.

Previous study indicated that L-dopa (a precursor of DA) strengthens the coughing reflex [42]. So, the increment in DA con- tent in the present study after exposure to waterpipe smoke after 4, 6 weeks in brainstem and after 6, 8 weeks in cerebral cortex may be due to increase its synthesis from L-dopa. In addition, Long-term use of nicotine can produce tolerance and dependence [43,44]. Neuroadaptation of the mesolimbic system in smokers occur. So, long term use of nicotine can produce tolerance and dependence [44], which may explain why there was a non- significant change in DA content in brainstem at the end of exper- iment in the present study.

Previous studies indicated that carob has some medicinal uses where it is used in cough syrup [45,46] which may be due to decrease in DA synthesis via decrease in L- dopa to inhibit cough reflex as a result its content is decreased. Agrawal et al. [47] demonstrated that carob exhibited significant antidepressant effect in both tail suspension test and forced swim test. It also inhi- bits haloperidol-induced catalepsy and potentiates apomorphine- induced sniffing in rats. Grabowska et al. [48] indicated that apo- morphine has been found to elevate 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid content in rat and mouse brain. These findings were confirmed by the study of Scheel-Kriiger and Hasselager [49] which indicated that the turnover of brain 5-HT is increased under the influence of apomorphine [48,50,51]. So, the decrement in 5-HT content after oral administration of carob extract in the present study may be due to increase in its turnover or inhibit its reuptake.

The most serious side effect of amiodarone is pulmonary toxic- ity [52]. So, it is used in this study as a model for pulmonary tox- icity [53,54]. The present results revealed that the oral administration of amiodarone and the exposure to waterpipe smoke caused an increase in lung MPO activity. It is known that MPO was suggested as an early marker of systemic inflammation in smokers [55]. It is one of the most abundant proteins in neu- trophils [56]. It stored in granules and released when neutrophils

Also, Anderson et al. [69] demonstrated that passive cigarette smoking has been associated with increasing peripheral blood leu- cocytes counts and enhancement the release of ROS which directly damage the surrounding tissues and participate in inflammatory disorders [70]. In addition to the ROS production, the cytoplasmic granules of the neutrophils discharge hydrolytic, proteolytic enzymes and MPO [71]. So, the activation of neutrophils as a result of inflammation occurred by administration of amiodarone or exposure to waterpipe smoke may cause the increment in the activity of lung MPO as shown in the present study.

Moreover, the present results demonstrated that both amio- darone administration and exposure to waterpipe smoke increased pulmonary hydroxyproline content. These results are consistent with the previous study which demonstrated that amiodarone ele- vated hydroxyproline content in rats [64]. Oxidative stress, in par- ticular lipid peroxidation, induces collagen synthesis [72]. Collagen constitutes measured by hydroxyproline, might serve as an index of lung tissue damage in the rat exposed to the various irritants present in waterpipe smoke for a period of time [73]. So, the incre- ment in hydroxyproline content in the present results may be due to its mobilization for collagen formation by the fibroblasts which surrounding the injured lung tissues.

In the present study; NO level was significantly increased after amiodarone administration and the exposure to waterpipe smoke. Verifying that both amiodarone and waterpipe smoke induce markedly excessive ROS production that lead to serious oxidative damage. Punithavathi et al. [64] reported that amiodarone increased cellular oxidant production in treated rats. Moreover, amiodarone impaired lipid metabolism in lungs which damaged the endothelium and increased ROS production [62].

Nicotine, a major toxic component of cigarette smoke, is a well- established procarcinogen. In addition; it disrupts the mitochon- drial respiratory chain leading to an increase in generation of superoxide anion and H2O2 [74]. This may lead to oxidative dam- age of macromolecules including lipid, DNA and RNA [75]. More- over; the heavy metals such as lead and cadmium which present in smoke are also capable of inducing lipid peroxidation and hence provokes damage of organs [76].

In the experiment described by Baskaran et al. [84] showed that the limited time exposure of rats to tobacco smoke resulted in the induction of CAT and super oxide dismutase as adaptation to the oxidative insult. In the same line, Luchese et al. [85] demonstrated that the reduction of CAT activity may be related to excess H2O2 pro- duction. Also, Mahapatra et al. [86] attributed the decreased the antioxidant enzymes activity to increase in their utilization to scav- enge the free radicals generated from cigarette smoke. So, these may explain the decrement in CAT activity in rats treated with amio- darone and exposed to waterpipe smoke in the present study which may be due to its utilization to scavenge generated free radicals.

In the present study; the oral administration of aqueous extract of carob pod caused a significant increase in CAT activity while, it caused a non-significant change in the other studied parameter. Pre- and post-treatment with carob aqueous extract protected and ameliorated the variations in the levels of different investi- gated parameters in rats exposed to waterpipe smoke. These results are agreement with the study of Gulay et al. [15] which demonstrated that carob bean extract is non-toxic and have no sig- nificant adverse effects with its traditional use in male rabbits.

Previous studies indicated that carob possess antioxidant activ- ity, where; Kumazawa et al. [87] reported that carob pod crude polyphenol had high antioxidant activity which acting as scav- engers of singlet oxygen and free radicals [13]. It was reported that the carob powder is considered as a rich source of Fe, Ca, Na, K, P and S [88] and the trace element Cu, Zn and Se which act as cofac- tors of antioxidant enzymes to protect the body from oxygen free radicals that are produced during oxidative stress [89].

It is clear that the exposure to waterpipe smoke (passive smoking) caused serious side effects on brain and lung nearly like amiodarone which is used as a model for lung toxicity in rats. The pre-and post-treatment with carob aqueous extract ameliorated these effects due to its antioxidant effects. Moreover, the aware- ness about the usage or exposure to waterpipe smoke for all ages must be increased by Ministry of Health, the media and Schools. Also, the Government must be put hard rules for smoking in open areas. Carob is being acclaimed as an ingredient with a marked nutritional value due to its antidepressant, anti-inflammatory effects and its high levels of dietary fiber and phenol compounds as well as inhibit caugh reflex which carob exert a preventative role against many diseases. So, carob powder should be increasing as an ingredient in the healthy food industry such as biscuits, bread and cakes.

