Written communication that employs the use of computers is re- ferred to as computer mediated communication (CMC), and email is one of the most important and widely used forms of CMC. Other types of CMC include online messages, blogs, for- ums and instant messaging services. Among all CMC, email has remained a key source of written communication, especially in the last few decades. Due to its salient features, it is the preferred source of written communication for almost every population connected to the Internet. It is a very quick, asynchronous writ- ten communication channel that is used for various purposes ranging from formal to informal communication. Formal [4] reveals that a number of emails were sent by the terrorists before the event took place. The investigations of the Mumbai attacks in 2008 [5] show that some emails were discovered revealing hard evidence of the attacks. This motivates us to put into place such a system that can reveal the identities of those criminals who intend to commence crimes using com- puter technology.

where E is a set of emails in the dataset, A is the set of authors of the emails in the dataset, and EAI(F,E,A) is a mapping function of email ei to author aj, defined over F, E and A, while F is a set of features. Initially, during training, the emails of each author are analyzed and unique features are extracted while a training model is constructed. At testing time, the test email is checked against the features of all users. It is assigned an author who has greater similarity with the email being tested. The whole pro- cess is discussed in Section 3 and illustrated using algorithms.

Authorship analysis [10] can be characterized as regarding a section of writing based on its writing style to identify its true author. This analysis includes linguistics techniques, statistical analysis and machine learning techniques to draw a conclusion regarding the author of a particular writing. The authors [22] described some characteristics of authorship analysis, that are applicable to software forensics. Broadly, authorship anal- ysis can be researched into three dimensions, namely; author- ship identification, authorship characterization, and similarity detection.

Authorship analysis research can be found early in its his- tory, when Mandenhal [11] conducted a study to compare the writing styles of English authors Bacon, Marlowe and Shakespeare. Mosteller and Wallece [12] conducted experi- ments to identify the true authors for the disputed Federalist5 articles that promoted the ratification of the U.S. Constitution. The research conducted by de Vel et al. [24] considered the email authorship as a topic authorship categorization problem. A corpus of emails taken for the study was very small; only 156 emails were taken, all of them belonged to a newsgroup. Three authors and three topics were used in the study, as it was pre- liminary work in the email authorship area and showed prom- ising results. The authors also proposed structural features that have since become a part of stylometric features for the

The author [26] presented a detailed survey on authorship identification tasks. The study explored various aspects of the authorship task and research advances in the area. The sur- vey first investigated the use of stylometric features for the task in various studies, then presented a detailed analysis of author- ship attribution methods.

A framework for authorship identification for online mes- sages was presented by Zheng et al. [10], in which authors ex- tracted four types of writing style features for example: lexical, syntactic, content specific and structural features and applied a machine learning classification algorithm for authorship iden- tification. Authors considered authorship identification as a classification problem. High accuracy was achieved using a support vector machine [29] classifier; however, experiments were also conducted using a decision tree [30] and back prop- agation neural network [31].The authors conducted the series of experiments on English and Chinese online messages with a maximum of 600 messages used for experiments for both English and Chinese datasets. The study achieved promising results on the English dataset, and satisfactory results on the Chinese dataset. However, this dataset was very small.

If we look back to the earlier developments for authorship identification, Yule [32] identified that sentence length would be a useful feature for the authorship identification task. Yule [33], in his later work, also suggested the richness of the vocab- ulary features to support the task. These features are still con- sidered very useful for identifying a writing style.

authors only. The accuracy achieved was 90% for 5 authors and 80% for 10 authors respectively, where for each author, 100 messages were used. In another study of email authorship identification, Iqbal et al. [2] which is extension of Iqbal et al.

The stylometric features are the unique features found into the writing style of an individual. These features reveal the writing patterns of an individual. The stylometric features have been divided into three main categories, namely; lexical, struc- tural and syntactic features.

When the emails of different authors were manually ana- lyzed, it was realized that the ending punctuation mark fea- ture, in combination with other features, could be helpful for identifying the author of an email. Algorithm 2 describes the steps for extracting the last punctuation mark of the email body. In the algorithm, Steps 4 through 14, check and extract the various punctuation marks at the end of the email body.

In addition to our extended features, the baseline features used in the study are similar to Abbasi and Chen [9]. It was ob- served that these unique features, found in the emails written by one author but not found in the emails written by other authors have positive impact on the authorship identification task. The extended features include stylistic as well as con- tent-based features. After cleaning and preprocessing, we ex- tracted the features, then applied the feature selection and applied CCM for the EAI task. Algorithm 3 has been designed to extract different feature types. Initially the feature set is empty, then various feature types are extracted by separate functions such as the Construct_Lexical_features(),Con- struct_Structural_features() Construct_Syntactic_features(), which are used to extract lexical, structural and syntactic fea- tures respectively. The Extract_Content_features() function extracts the content-based features. Finally, all the features are added to the feature set and saved to an ARFF file format. Among other features listed in Section 3.2, we present Algo- rithm 2 which extracts the last punctuation type feature.

Once cleaned data is available, features regarding the EAI task are extracted by the feature extractor sub-module. The lex- ical, structural and syntactic features are extracted using Java code, while the content features are extracted using WEKA pre- processing module. Once all feature types are extracted in pre- processing module, all the feature types are then combined and converted to a feature vector. The feature vector is then gi- ven as an input to authorship identification module which uses CCM-based approach for email authorship identification.

The evaluation criteria used in our experiments is stratified 10- fold cross-validation, as the same is used in study [2]. The 10-fold cross-validation is a method by which the dataset is divided into ten subsets. Algorithms run for ten rounds; in each round, one subset is used for testing while the other nine are used for train- ing. In each round, a different subset is taken for testing. Finally, the average of accuracy rate is calculated to find the final accu- racy rate. This method of evaluation is considered to be more effective because each email is considered for its author to be predicted, thus every email is used exactly once in test set and nine times in the training set for each set of experiments. The fi- nal accuracy of all the runs is returned as average.

