Hortaea werneckii was identified as an extreme halotolerant fungus [6] that belongs to the black yeast group and was iso- lated from different marine habitats. H. wernrckii was reported to inhibit the afore-mentioned extreme conditions. Hortaea sp. belongs to the Capnodiales order in the Ascomycota phylum [7]. Based on the state of the niche (static or dynamic) [5], endoconidia. Buds are enteroblastic annellidic ones [8] and they emerged as polar, lateral, and bipolar from yeast-like forms [9]. Conidiogenesis and budding mode are the same as both buds and conidia are released by the complete separation of the de- veloped abscission line in a septum [3]. When cells are successively generated from the same locus, the remnants of the outer layers of the cell wall are arranged consecutively around the tip, an increase in neck (collars) of the mother cell results in bottle-shaped cells marked by many rings directed toward the pole and the number of rings is dependent on the number of buds or conidia released [8]. The conidia are pro- duced from the generative apex of annellidophores which are unbranched intercalary hyphal cells with tapered tips. Conidia are mainly unicellular; however two-celled conidia separated by conspicuous dark cross wall were found [3]. H. werneckii pro- duces hydrophobic dematiaceous septated mycelia [3] which are formed of coherent thalli and extended from the mother cell wall [8] and lateral branches sometimes are expanded from them [9].

H. werneckii from the Egyptian environment was not reported before. In this survey, the isolated strains of H. werneckii from Egypt were molecularly, biochemically and morphologically characterized to focus on differences between them and between other previously published characterized H. werneckii strains.

Catalase test. In room temperature, a drop of diluted 30% Hydrogen Peroxide was placed onto a slide containing a drop of liquid modified YPD containing tested organisms with 6 days old. Effervescence reaction could be observed in- stantly as a positive result [14].

Proteases test. A modified protocol of 30% skim milk- agar medium [17] was done by adding 30 ml packed liquid skim milk (the used skim milk nutrition label on the pack: Fats .44 g, Carbohydrates: 10.6 g, Protein: 6.9 g, Vitamin: B1 .1 mg and Vitamin: B2 .14 mg). The formation of transparent zone around the growing isolates was considered as a positive result.

Amylases test. Vedder starch media composed of soluble starch 10 g, agar 12 g and sodium nitrate 6.5 g were dis- solved in one liter sea water and adjusted to pH 6. Amylases activity was detected by flooding the surface of inoculated media with Grams Iodine [18].

Cellulase test. The Carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) media [19,20], which were composed of: CMC 10 g, Sodium Nitrate 6.5 g, Potassium Hydrogen Phosphate 6.5 g, Potassium chloride 6.5 g, Magnesium sulphate heptahydrate 3.0 g and Agar 17.5 g in one liter with final pH of 6, were used for cellulose activity. The ac- tivity was visualized by staining the media with Congo red dye followed by de-staining with Sodium Chloride solution.

It could be concluded that new black yeast strains have been isolated and characterized in this study. They all have been iden- tified as H. werneckii, two of them EGYNDA08 and EGYNDA16 were ecotypes of each other and EGYNDA90 lay in a separate branch. Up to our knowledge, this is the first report describ- ing the occurrence of this organism in Egypt. The isolates show differences in morphological characteristics as described in the results and the enzymatic assays showed qualitative differ- ences. Further studies are ongoing to verify the pleomorphic characterization and the adaptation mechanism of these iso- lates to the saline habitat they could survive.

Many thanks to Prof. Samia Ali Haroun, the former head of botany department, Faculty of Science, Mansoura University, Egypt and many thanks to Prof. Heshmat Soliman Aldesuquy the current head of the department for their valuable help and encouragement. We thank Dr. Eladl Gala from the same de- partment for his continuous support and valuable discussions.

