The most significant drawback of Variable Structure Control (VSC) is the chattering phenomenon which has been studied for the control of mechanical systems. The reason is that the chattering generated by the switching control input is potentially harmful. As the VSC provides robust control, soft switching has been generally proposed to overcome the chattering. Although VSC has been widely proposed for real uncer- tain electromechanical systems [1,2], it is currently new for electrical energy generation systems [3,4].

A safe and reliable energy supply is very crucial for the electrical energy network. Because of this reason, many studies were dedicated to finding optimum controllers for the Automatic Voltage Regulator (AVR). The AVR system keeps the voltage level at the pre-defined level sub- jected to load disturbance and parameter uncertainties due to its aging. Since it is difficult to study on a real AVR system, nearly all controllers were developed using a commonly preferred linear AVR model which has no constraints. However, there are many structural constraints, not only in mechanical systems but also in electrical systems in the real world. There are several publications in which the importance of the performance to deteriorate and reduce the actuator life of the system or even lead to instability [79]. In the literature, the constraints were generally neglected so that the calculated control input was directly applied to the actuator of the AVR. Moreover, the saturation factor of the exciter was also not addressed in many studies. These constraints were well discussed for the previous AVR controllers in [3].

Considering the abovementioned discussions, the constraints of the AVR were considered in a few publications in the literature. Well- described mathematical models with necessary constraints were pub- lished by IEEE [16] for academic purposes. In [3], specifications of an exciter model were adapted in the linear AVR model to represent the features of the protective device. These features were also verified with a real AVR in [17,18]. Mainly, the boundaries of the control input and the exciter saturation level are two main constraints that should be included in the linear AVR model. These constraints make the linear model nonlinear [19,20].

There are recently published studies in which both a linear AVR model and the AVR with a 200MVA 13.8 kV synchronous generator connected to a 230 kV network via a transformer were used with the above constraints [21,22]. A multi-term fractional-order PID controller tuned with Rao algorithm was proposed [21]. A reinforcement approach was considered for the AVR system and the improvement of the

Since the parameters of the controllers are independent, the meta- heuristic algorithms are the best choice for optimal values. There are a number of studies listed in [3,23] in which the best optimization algo- rithm was explored. Swarm-based optimization algorithms have been proposed for the AVR and compared with other algorithms. Therefore, it is difficult to claim one is the best for the AVR.

In the present study, the problem is described from the VSC perspective in the next section. The conventional AVR model is revised according to the specifications of the IEEE recommended excitation model, named DC1C. The new model is described in the third section. The proposed controller is designed, and the control inputs with commonly used smooth switching functions are introduced in the fourth section. The selected optimization algorithm is given in the fifth section. The simulation results are discussed in the sixth section for various robustness tests identical to the previous studies. The whole results are concluded in the last section.

In [16] and [63], the protection accessories are included in the excita- tion control system models for academic studies. These limiters were rarely included in the AVR studies [3,17,18]. Every real controller is able to generate a control input within the pre-defined bounds. In this sense, the generated control input was limited to obtain a realistic result ated to control an electromechanical system [37]. Beside, non-model- based algorithms were also proposed to overcome chattering. These algorithms are twisting, super-twisting, drift, and sub-optimal sliding mode controllers, which were reported to lack smoothness [60]. The hyperbolic tangent function was also used in the super-twisting controller for smoother control of nonlinear systems with unmatched uncertainty [61,62].

In order to achieve the goal, first of all, a novel controller is considered from the perspective of VSC. Two independent controller parameters are optimized using SCA for each switching control function. The results of various operating conditions identical to the previous AVR studies are compared to each other. What sets the present study apart is that we focused on analyzing the soft switching function as it pertains to chattering in the AVR system, which has not been done before. To the best of our knowledge, analysis of the soft switching functions for the chattering attenuation has not been studied yet for the AVR system.

In addition, the input saturation constraints of the AVR are included in the controller design procedure and stability proof. The constraints exhibit nonlinear characteristics at the output and reduce the perfor- mance of the controller designed for the AVR. The whole findings are unique to the proposed controller.

Remark 3. The closed-loop output characteristics of the AVR without a controller is oscillatory and stabilize over a long period of time. The primary objective is to find an appropriate controller which generates a control input for a fast step response. Traditionally, a 1pu reference has been chosen. The measurement criteria for the step response are overshoot, rise time, and settling time which are generally used for comparing the results with the previous studies. In the measurement, the overshoot rate is the most signifi- cant in the transient-state. The direction of the reactive power flow may be

The generator output in the uncontrolled AVR shows an under- damped response having a large overshoot and a long settling time with a steady-state error [3,24,67]. Using a controller in the AVR aims to improve the output. The ideal case is obviously to get a critically- damped step response with minimal overshoot. Therefore, in the opti- mization stage of the present study, these features are taken into account when defining an objective function rule.

A different formulation was proposed to focus on one property [3,78]. The objective functions were formulated so that if any parameter resulted in an overshoot of more than a specified value, the value of the function increased to make it worst. This strategy prevented the opti- mization results from having an overshoot at the output. Since the overshoot is critical for the AVR system, a similar strategy is followed for the present study. as follows:

The optimization of the proposed controller parameters is performed in the nominal operating conditions. Conventionally, 1pu reference has been selected as a reference in the AVR studies. The SCA algorithm runs with the above specifications for 5 s with a 0.1 ms sampling time by optimizing each control input with different switching controls separately.

An iterative optimization algorithm is realizable if the simulation number of the optimization is minimum [3]. As the number of simula- tions increases, its real application becomes difficult. On the other hand, in the most cases, there is a trade-off between the number of simulations and the best scores. In order to get a realizable optimization, it is necessary to find a way to keep the simulation number at a minimum. In this sense, SCA was selected for the present problem because of its success with this type of optimization problem.

The switching control laws are dominant when the system states are not at the desired value. Therefore, in the transient-state, the switching control drives the system output to the desired point. When the smooth functions are used instead of the signum function, the switching control converges to zero until any disturbance affects the system. While the and settling time measurements. Average OS% measurements were lis- ted in [3] and compared to the results of the previous studies. It was reported that, even if the controller and exciter were limited, the per- formance of the controllers was better than the previous controllers for the parameter insensitivity. Since the same model was used in the pre- sent study, the results were compared to the results in [3].

The effectiveness of the soft switching functions used in the above operating conditions was evaluated separately in this section. As shown in no-load condition, the signum function generates highly undesirable oscillated control input which is unnecessary in the steady-state. On the other hand, the soft switching functions converged to zero as the tracking error of the AVR approaches to zero. This is an ideal switching behavior for a real AVR when there is no load change at the generator output. The other operating conditions showed different results from the no-load condition.

In the present study, we analyzed how well soft switching functions attenuated the chattering when VSC was used in the AVR system. For this purpose, we first proposed a novel controller based on a VSC via sliding mode, and it was designed for the AVR system. All the mathe- matical basis of the design procedure was given in detail. Then, a comparative study was conducted on the chattering attenuation per- formance of the soft switching control functions. Unlike the previous studies, the real AVR system constraints were included in the linear model.

Based on the load tests conducted, it has been found that the signum function generates extremely high switching activity, and soft switching functions can provide similar output performance without causing excessive heating of power electronic components. This is an important consideration when implementing switching control laws to ensure optimal performance without risking damage to the AVR systems. Therefore, it is recommended to use soft functions in the switching control law to avoid the undesirable heating of power electronic components.

