Noble metals such as palladium (Pd), silver (Ag) and gold (Au) have many applications in our life [1,2]. These metals occur in the environment at trace and ultratrace levels. Therefore, a very sensitive method is necessary for the accurate and pre- cise determinations. For this purpose, several analytical methods have been developed to measure these ions in real samples including: spectrophotometry, flame atomic absorp- tion spectrometry (FAAS), inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES), and electrochemical methods.

In the present study, we applied CPE for the separation and preconcentration of Pd(II), Ag(I) and Au(III) ions from aqueous solutions by using Triton X-114 as a nonionic surfactant. A thioamide derivative, 4-(p-chlorophenyl)-1-(pyridin-2-yl)thio- semicarbazide (HCPTS), was used as the chelating agent. The factors influencing the efficiency of CPE such as effects of pH, Triton X-114, HCPTS concentrations were systematically studied. Also, we introduced a salting-out procedure that en- ables the room temperature phase separation. The developed CPE procedure was successfully applied to determine the concentration of Pd(II), Ag(I) and Au(III) ions in some envi- ronmental samples after the method was validated.

All aqueous solutions were prepared with ultrapure water that had been obtained by Milli-Q water purification system (Mil- lipore, Bedford, MA, USA). Reagents used were of analytical grade from SigmaeAldrich (St. Loius, MO, USA) or Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). The laboratory glassware was kept overnight in 10% v/v HNO3 solution. Before the use, the glassware was washed with deionized water and dried in a dust free environment. The standard solutions of Au3+ were phase separation is accelerated by centrifuging at 4000 rpm for 10 min. The phases were cooled down in an ice bath in order to increase the viscosity of the surfactant rich phase. The bulk aqueous phase was decanted by inverting the tube and dried in water bath. The surfactant rich phase in the tube was made up to 1.0 ml by adding mixture of methanol/conc. HNO3 (5:1). The samples were introduced into ETAAS for the determination of the selected metal ions.

The water samples were filtered firstly through filter paper to separate the coarse particles and suspended matter and sec- ondly through a Millipore cellulose nitrate membrane (pore size 0.45 mm), acidified to pH 1 with HNO3 and stored in a refrigerator in a dark polyethylene bottle. 10 ml water sample was subjected to the CPE methodology as described above.

the signals decreased considerably. High concentration of salt can increase the density of water drops accompanied by the surfactant rich phase, and hence disturb the phase separa- tion. On the other hand, the absence of salt decreased the signal by about 55% (data not shown). This may be due to an

