We formulate the minimization construction sketched in Section 2.2 in terms of (co)algebras. The instantiation to deterministic automata is presented in Exam- ple 6.2, which can be read without necessarily understanding the abstract construc- tion. For the abstract construction, we assume: bras, that may involve branching. As explained in Section 8, the factorization of mb yielding a minimal automaton can not be formulated in that setting. The con- struction is also connected to the one in [4], which however assumes a duality rather than a contravariant adjunction (making the factorization of mb unneccesary, since it is automatically an epi because of the duality). That construction rules out our example of deterministic automata below.

One may wonder whether there is a converse, i.e., if we can obtain the i-reachable part of F (X, c) from the i-minimization of (X, c). Example 2.1 shows that this is not the case: partition refinement for deterministic automata may stop earlier than the computation of reachable sets in the reversed determinized automaton.

We can also use Corollary 7.3 to combine the minimization procedure based on i-minimizations and the one based on i-reachable parts. The possibility of com- puting the i-minimization from the i-reachable part suggests a procedure where we inductively compute i-reachable parts as in Theorem 5.1, compute i-minimizations along the way and terminate when the i-minimization is a minimization.

In this procedure, when computing the (i + 1)-minimization from the (i + 1)- reachable part, one would like to use the i-minimization as well. Concretely, for deterministic automata, given the partition Ei computed from the splitters Ri (Sec- tion 2.2), and the new set of splitters Ri+1, we want to compute Ei+1 by splitting the partition in Ei according to the new splitters, i.e., those appearing in Ri+1 but not in Ri. Abstractly, one can compute Ei+1 from Ei, Ri and Ri+1 as follows.

For deterministic automata, the inductive computation of i-reachable parts, and i-minimizations from them using Corollary 7.3 and Lemma 7.5 closely resembles the construction presented in [8, Algorithm 1] and the end of Section 2.2. However, the algorithm in [8] terminates only when the reachable part R has been found, whereas using Corollary 7.3 we can terminate once the i-minimization is a minimization. This may occur before the i-reachable part is the reachable part (Example 2.1).

Proof. This follows directly by duality and Theorem 4.4: the factorization system (E, M) on D yields the factorization system (M, E ) on Dop, L-algebras in D are Lop-algebras in Dop and (i-)reachable parts in D are (i-)minimizations in Dop.

