In this paper, we introduce update lenses as a refinement of ordinary (asymmetric) lenses in which we distinguish between views and updates. In addition to the set of views, there is a monoid of updates and an action of the monoid on the set of views. Decoupling updates from views allows for other ways of changing the source than just merging a view into the source. We also consider a yet finer dependently typed version of update lenses.

We give a number of characterizations of update lenses in terms of bialge- bras, algebras and coalgebras, which we derive from standard facts about dis- tributive laws between comonads/functors, compatible composition of comonads, liftings of comonads/functors to categories of coalgebras, distributive laws of mon- ads/functors over comonads/functors, cofree comonads, adjoint monads and comon- ads etc. [7,5,4,20,21]. We study conversion of views and updates, a tensor of update lenses, composition of update lenses. In the appendix, we also discuss a specializa- tion, initializable update lenses.

We first recall that it was somewhat inconvenient to use the ordinary bookshop lens to edit the price of a particular book. In particular, we could not simply list the books whose prices we wanted to edit, but had to also list all the other books. The main cause for this inconvenience was the single set of views S that got used in both lkp and upd. Here we illustrate how decoupling the updates from the views helps us reuse the same set of views for different update strategies.

The category of acts also carries a product monoidal structure. However, due to its involved definition and lack of space, we refrain from discussing it here. For the dependently typed version of acts discussed in Section 7, we refer the reeader to [2] for details.

Update lenses are a refinement of ordinary lenses that we find both practically meaningful and theoretically elegant. Most interestingly perhaps, update lenses admit decompositions that ordinary lenses do not enjoy: they can be seen as pairs of matching coalgebras, bialgebras etc. These characterizations arise naturally from various kinds of distributive laws.

We wish to continue this work by turning to symmetric variations of update lenses. We expect to be able to build on both the original work on symmetric lenses [12,11] and the newest categorical ideas of Johnson and Rosebrugh [16]. We also plan to find out the precise connections to delta and c-lenses [15].

