The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section 2 introduces the key ideas behind the definition of the language, Sections 3.1 and 3.2 introduce the syntax and the operational semantics, Section 4 presents the model of osmosis in detail, and Section 5 draws final conclusions and suggests future work.

Concentration To model either passive or active transport correctly, we need to calculate the rate at which molecules enter or exit the cell/membrane. This de- pends on the concentration and pressure; these quantities are, in turn, determined by the concentration of different substances inside and outside the membrane. To faithfully model this, we need to introduce context-dependent rates. This means that our rates are calculated via functions that consider the whole context.

Volume In consideration of defining a calculus for membranes/cells, volume is an important parameter as it can influence rates of reactions. It is known that cells modify their volumes, for instance in cell cycle or in during the intake or loss of water provided by the environment. In cells there is a physical limit to volume variation.

In general, inputs are binding operators on the arguments. This means that in the process local n(y).P the name y is bound in P , and not accessible from outside P . A similar argument applies to the other inputs in the communication primitives. The definition of free names of channels of P , written fn(P ), (and bound names of P written bn(P )) is standard, taking into account that the only binding operators are inputs and restriction. We write P{y/m} to mean the substitution of every occurrence of the name y by m in P . Similarly we write P{A/Q} to mean the substitution of every occurrence of the process A by Q in P .

In the previous discussion, we did not provide a specific functional form for the rates. Rate functions can range from constant functions to very complex functions of the environment. They will be specified by the programmer and suggested by the model under study. This gives a great deal of flexibility to the language. In the next section we will exemplify this by dealing with osmosis.

The general functional form of rates endows CoBic with the possibility of inte- grating analytic information in a process-based calculus. This has been exploited in osmosis to provide a more realistic model of water flow. Other straightforward applications are in the modeling of ion transportation in and out a cell. Indeed, this feature can be used also to abstract some aspects of the model, describing them in the functional rates. For instance, the kinetics of a simple enzymatic reaction can be abstracted (neglecting the formation of the substrate-enzyme complex) using a Michaelis-Menten form for the rate.

