Molecular biological models usually suffer from a large combinatorial explosion. Indeed, proteins form complexes and modify each others, which leads to the formation of a huge number of distinct chemical species (i.e. non-isomorphic connected components of proteins). Thus we cannot generate explicitly the quantitative semantics of these models, and even less compute their properties. Model reduction aims at reducing this complexity by providing another grain of observation. In this paper, we propose two unifying frameworks for combining model reductions: we propose a symmetric product operator for combining model reductions for stochastic semantics and we show how to abstract further existing reduced differential systems by the means of linear projections. We apply both frameworks so as to abstract further existing reduced quantitative semantics of the models that are written in Kappa, by taking into account symmetries among binding sites in proteins.

Signaling pathways describe the interactions between some proteins which are in- volved in communication between and within cells. These pathways usually suffer from a combinatorial blow-up in the number of chemical species (pairwise non- isomorphic connected components of proteins). Rules-based modeling [9,1] offers a convenient and compact solution for describing these pathways (and other molec- ular biological systems as well). The combinatorial complexity is avoided thanks to context-free rules, in which the set of all potential contexts of application for an interaction does not need to be written explicitly.

Then we apply our framework on the models written in Kappa: in Sect. 5, we give the operational semantics of Kappa. In Sect. 6 we give the definition of symmetric sites in Kappa, we review the stochastic and differential semantics, and we use symmetric sites, so as to reduce further the dimension of the state space of these semantics.

In this section, we review the generic framework that has been proposed in [11] for reducing the stochastic semantics of weighted labeled transition systems. This reduction technique is based on the use of backward bisimulations [4] so as to prove statistical invariants. We use these invariants to lump [3] some states of the transition system together, this is a weak lumping which is sound only if the statistical invariants are satisfied by the initial distribution of states. We extend this framework with a commutative operator to combine abstractions. We show that this operator is a pushout, and that abstraction composition distributes over it.

Now we introduce a new operator to combine two abstractions. We call a span two abstractions A1 and A2 from the same WLTS S. Such a span is denoted by A1SA2, or also A1A2. Dually, we call a cospan two abstractions A1 and A2 going into the

Intuitively, the product of two abstractions from the same WLTS, is the ab- straction that is more abstract than these two abstractions, and which is the least abstract among all the abstractions which satisfy this property. Now let us sketch the proof of proposition 3.12.

We present a core of the Kappa language [9] in a process-like notation and we give its operational semantics. Particularly, we do not consider internal states, agent creation nor deletion, nor wild-card bond removals. These features are convenient when writing models. Yet they would raise no particular difficulties to our theoret- ical framework.

whether the condition in Def. 6.6 is satisfied, or not we preselect the potential triples thanks to a weaker property. Thus, we use the contact map which is the summary of all bonds which may appear in the rhs of a rule in R. The contact map is a graph, the set of nodes are the pairs

