rators in informing the way the intended meaning, value, and context behind museum artefacts to be delivered through visual narratives and aesthetics. In this study, three VR scenarios have been developed using the Unreal engine to investigate the aspects of learning, interaction, and immersion during the virtual experience. One-way ANOVA approach was used to determine the significant differences between the proposed factors in the study. The study found that the absence of interaction in the immersive scenario reduced the mean score leading to a lack of constructive guidance during navigation. Whereas using Gamified and narrated approaches significantly increased the mean value of the participants compared to the control group. While many researchers argue that

interaction, immersion, and learning of visitors while engaged with the subject matter. Although some scholars argue that VR can improve the visitor experience, specific factors must be considered to enhance their engagement with virtual content. Therefore, gamification and story- telling strategies were employed to elevate the level of engagement of visitors inside virtual environments. The inclusion of such elements motivated individuals during their interaction, leading to a more seamless flow towards the intended destination in the game.

Museum institutions are increasingly interested to use immersive technologies to facilitate engaging meaningful experiences for their visitors while exploring the exhibits (Vrettakis et al., 2019). There is existing evidence that supports this observation, demonstrating how interactive virtual environments encourage active participation whilst engaging with the story that museum professionals are looking to tell (Bozzelli et al., 2019). A study by Lee, Jung, tom Dieck, and Chung that users develop towards the virtual task, resulting in reduced awareness of their physical surroundings. Finally, the third criterion is total immersion, which is considered the highest level of immersion, where users attain a complete sense of presence due to the detachment from physical reality. In VR, users typically achieve a total level of im- mersion, as the entire experience is reliant on digital representation and narratives, unlike Augmented Reality (AR) approaches. VR enables users to observe the story angle from a first-person perspective, where the users become the main character as experienced from the VR headset point of view.

The mission of a museum is two-fold: to acquire cultural artefacts of historical value while preserving them, and to educate the public about the significance of its collection, including its potential impact on society (Bachiller et al., 2023). The relationship between museum collections and their visitors demands a high level of interpretation for communi- cating their cultural value. The capability of VR technology has created opportunities for museums to showcase their collections in new and innovative ways, thereby expanding the range of interpretations and experimentation available to the public (Shehade & Stylianou-Lambert, 2020).

The emergence of VR technology in museums has raised questions about how to effectively present heritage collections to visitors to facilitate effective communication of the values and contexts of the collections that will encourage meaningful interpretations by the visi- tors. Weng et al. (2020) classified digital interpretations into two types: interpersonal and non-personal interpretations. Inter-personal inter- pretation involves two ways of communication as face-to-face interac- tion, such as the intercourse between the visitors and tour guides. Non-personal interpretation is considered as one-way communication precarious due to their delicate nature (Kyriakou & Hermon, 2019). In light of this, VR can serve as a means of preserving heritage stories by constructing a detailed virtual image of the physical object. This process of digitising real physical spaces is a crucial step in the preservation and survival of engineering heritage. Novel approaches such as those described by Baker (2005) can enable museum visitors to visualise heritage objects in their original states and understand their intended meaning. The use of mixed reality can also provide further access to artefacts that are no longer physically present in museum environments, offering additional explanations about their significance, as noted by Bachiller et al. (2023).

The study in this paper focuses on the Lanchester Petrol-Electric car as an example of an engineering heritage object. With the growing de- mand for knowledge about automotive history, visitors are increasingly interested in exploring the stories behind such collections. Cudny and Jolliffe (2019) have shown that past transportation marvels are considered to be engineering heritage objects and represent a symbol of social status. To fully encompass the legacy of this chosen heritage ob- ject, specific strategies of communication and interpretation through the use of VR technology have been adapted in the study to provide an informative and interactive experience during visits. These strategies aim to engage visitors in a deeper understanding of the technological advancements and societal significance of the Lanchester Petrol-Electric car. By providing a comprehensive context for this heritage object, vis- itors can appreciate the value and importance of preserving such pieces of engineering history for future generations.

textures to each object, simulating real-world materials such as dust and corroded industrial materials to create realistic surface details. Finally, the models were exported to Unreal Engine (UE) to build the experi- ments in real-time. In order to achieve a coherent interaction, the level design was constructed in parallel layouts to provide a sense of explo- ration during navigation. Level design is a crucial stage in the design process as it orients users and guides them towards the objectives of the

accessible in the narrated scenario, except for puzzle-solving and score collection. The Mechanics, Dynamics, and Aesthetics (MDA) framework (Kusuma et al., 2018) informed the design of the gamified scenario, building on the narrative structure. Scores and achievements were used as the main feedback mechanics in the gamified scenario to motivate the

A total of ninety six (96) participants were recruited, which included experts and public users in two phases. The first phase was conducted in closed lab environments, while the second phase was conducted in public spaces as museum environments. This paper demonstrates phase two analysis taken from the public users.

tween the group samples in more depth. The results show there is a significant difference between the dependent variables in each scenario. Statistically significant differences were found under the immersion factor across the three scenarios. There was a significant difference be- tween the narrated and immersive scenarios (p = 0.001). This indicates that participants in both scenarios have experienced different amounts of immersion according to their engagement in each experiment. There was no statistically significant difference between the gamified and

narrated scenarios under the immersion factor. In terms of the interac- tion factor, the analysis shows that there was no significant difference between the gamified and the other two scenarios (P > 0.05). However, there was a significant difference between the narrated and immersive

In the default immersive scenario, users were able to navigate freely without any instructions or guidelines, mimicking a default museum experience but virtually. The immersion, interaction, and learning fac- tors are lower in this scenario compared to the other two. Further analysis suggests that the level of interactivity significantly influenced immersion with a regression value of (R2 Linear = 0.895), indicated by the high correlation between the interaction factor and the immersion with objects in the environment highly impacted their focus and engagement in the tasks at hand, acknowledging their active roles in shaping their experience and vice versa. This has impacted learning as the learning factor is higher in this scenario compared to the other two. Analysis indicates positive correlations between the learning factor items 1, 2, and 3 and the immersion factor item 1 with an average value of (R2 = 0.500). That suggests that memorisation of knowledge, overall learning experience, and application of knowledge gains were highly

The pilot experiment data was first taken to optimise the experiments further for the end users. Then the public users managed to expire the enhanced version at the Transport Museum. Two loops were taken to improve the final experience for the end users based on the mean and significance value from each experiment as described in section 4. VR instruments are the central core of communication in this model, where the loop starts by transmitting the contents from the HMD to the end users as a signal entity of information. Then the signal is decoded ac- particularly under gamified and narrated scenarios. These elements facilitated motivation during the interaction process and allowed in- dividuals to process information coherently. Additionally, the gamifi- cation element helped users perceive a sense of accomplishment upon achieving certain objectives in the game.

The data collected from users of the experiments indicate that they were able to experience a sense of escapism while fully engaged with the subject matter. This suggests that this approach can bring visitors to experience events that are difficult to replicate and envisage in museum environments. Additionally, users became fully attached to the visual elements related to the engineering heritage object, which were evoked through the VR experience, and were less aware of their physical sur- roundings. The sense of escapism experienced by users while fully engaged with the subject matter can bring visitors back to experiencing events that are challenging to replicate and envisage in museum environments.

comprehend the observed contents due to the lack of constructive guidance while navigating in VR environments. One of the technical constraints in this study is related to the visual aesthetics quality, which was limited by the hardware capabilities. The chosen HMD Quest 2 processor has a capacity to handle a specific number of 3D elements, and surpassing these limits can overload the processor, leading to glitches and program failure.

Zhou, Y., Chen, J., & Wang, M. (2022). A meta-analytic review on incorporating virtual and augmented reality in museum learning. Educational Research Review, 36, Article 100454 [CrossRef] A meta-analytic review on incorporating virtual and augmented reality in museum learning - ScienceDirect.

