Sweet orange (Citrus sinensis) which belongs to the family Ruta- ceae are globose to ovoid shaped, berry-like edible fruits that vary in their sizes, colours, shapes and fruit quality [7]. Early acceptance of sweet orange in international trade despite their being highly perishable might be due to their high nutritional and therapeutic values [8]. They contain high vitamin C content, appreciable amount of vitamin A, folate, and fibre which have implication in stimulation of white blood cell function in the immune system, bone formation, eye health, DNA production, reduction in cardio- vascular disease risk, etc. They, however, do not contain fat, sodium, cholesterol and has low energy level value [9].

Red Acalypha are known to possess antimicrobial activities with extensive usage in the treatment of bacterial and fungal infections [29]. However, its use in prevention of deterioration in sweet orange fruits has not been investigated. Also, there is no report on the comparative evaluation of its effectiveness with chemical biocides in prevention of the activities of fungal deteriogens in sweet orange fruits.

A drop of lactophenol cotton blue stain was placed on a clean grease-free glass slide after which a sterile inoculating wire loop was used to pick the mycelium from the edge and the centre of each growing fungal colony onto the glass slide [33,34]. The myce- lium was then spread evenly on the slide. Teasing was done to sep- arate the mycelium to get a homogenous mixture, and the mixture was then gently covered with coverslips and then allowed to stay for few seconds before observing with the microscope under X40 magnification.

The fresh leaves of Red Acalypha (A. wilkesiana), the extract of which was used in this comparative study, were obtained within the premises of Osun State University, Nigeria. The taxonomy was authenticated by a Plant Biologist in the Department. Extract of this Red Acalypha was prepared in hot water as previously described [39,40].

of 1.25 mg, 0.6 mg and 0.6 mg of RFC, UPL and FCE respectively as well as 1% w/v, 0.5% w/v, 0.25% w/v and 0.125% w/v of Red Acalypha leaf extract respectively were prepared. A 100 ml of each solution was impregnated on sterile perforated Whatman filter

Out of the 22 fungal deteriogens of the sweet orange fruits tested, 19 which represent about 86.4% were susceptible to the FCE, making it the most effect powdered fungal biocide with field application potential. The FCE was active against 100% of the Arthroderma sp. (n = 1), Aspergillus sp. (n = 6), Fusarium sp. (n = 5), Gliocladium sp. (n = 1), Paecilomyces sp. (n = 1) and Penicillium sp. (n = 5). However, Alternaria sp. and the two yeast isolates, Candida

Antifungal effect of FCE biocide revealed wide differences in susceptibility of each deteriogen. The susceptibility of the fungal deteriogens ranged from 100% for Arthroderma lenticulare, Aspergil- lus fumigatus, Candida glabrata, Fusarium sporotrichioides, Gliocla- dium corda and Penicillium griseofulvum to 37.3% for Aspergillus niger.

Aspergillus sp, Penicillium sp. and Fusarium sp. which were preva- lent in this study are known to be the most important deteriogens affecting fruits worldwide [46]. The high prevalence of Aspergillus niger in the fungal isolates obtained in this study is similar to the works of Akintobi et al. [25] and Onuorah et al. [28]. Khan et al.

for the observed deterioration by 15 of the 22 study fungal deteri- ogens [26]. The result also showed that not all the fungal isolates were capable of initiating deterioration in healthy fresh orange fruits. The possible reasons for their non-pathogenicity is subject to further studies.

Aspergillus niger was the most pathogenic among the 22 fungal isolates. Similar observation was made by Akintobi et al., [25]. FCE biocide was capable of controlling the development of deteriora- tion caused by fungal isolates in almost all the citrus fruit studied. Abano and Sam-Amoah [56] stated that dips of biocides were effec- tive in controlling post-harvest rot caused by fungal species.

Sweet orange (Citrus sinensis) fruits is a perishable agricultural produce which is available in large quantity especially during its season. Preservation for a longer period is a major challenge espe- cially in developing countries where farmers do not have access to high-tech harvesting and storage facilities. This study compared the effectiveness of selected chemical biocides and Acalypha wilke- siana leaf extract against postharvest fungal deteriogens of sweet orange (Citrus sinensis) fruits for sustainable application.

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. How- ever, the authors wish to thank the Department of Biological Sciences, Osun State University, Osogbo, Nigeria for material sup- port. We are particularly grateful to Dr W.F. Sule for proof reading the article.

