Monte Carlo with Intermediate Estimations (CMIE) is a simulation method proposal aimed at making accurate estimations of dependability measures on highly reliable Markovian systems. The basis of CMIE is introduced, the unbiasedness of the corresponding estimator is proven, and its variance is shown to be lower than the variance of the standard estimator. A variant of the basic scheme, that applies to large and highly reliable multicomponent systems, is introduced. Some experimental results are shown.

Some applications of Splitting in the context of highly reliable systems can be found in [24] and [25], where the reliability and availability estimations of repairable systems are analysed using a variant called RESTART. Recently, some results in the context of static systems have been published in [3] and [12]. Some methods derived from Importance Sampling, like Zero-Variance [15,16,17] and Cross-Entropy [20,23] have been successfully applied in the simulation of systems affected by rare events.

to make it usable and efficient. Sections 4, 5 and 6 discuss some properties and features of the proposed method. Section 7 shows how to apply it to the particular case of Markovian multicomponent systems. Some experimental results are included in Sections 6 and 7. A comparison with Splitting is shown in Section 8. Conclusions and future directions can be found in Section 9.

In the case of two or more sets of intermediate states, the choice of the second, and the consecutive ones, must be somehow similar to the choice of the first one with respect to the initial state u. Whenever possible, the second set (between the existing one and state d) must be formed by the adjacent states to the existing set. However, this is not straightforward and must be analyzed for every particular model.

This leads to the conclusion that, if the set C = {1, 2,..., n} is a cut in the graph of the Markov chain, CMIE and Splitting (based on a single level set) produce the same estimation. In other words, Splitting with a single level set C is the particular case of CMIE in which the set C is a cut in the graph of the Markov chain.

Another feature that may cause complications in a basic Splitting model is failure propagation. Sometimes a particular failure may cause the simultaneous occurrence of a set of other failures, with a given probability. In a basic Splitting model this translates into crossing more than one threshold simultaneously, what makes necessary to modify the basic approach according to system under analysis. CMIE is not affected by failure propagation.

CMIE was empirically tested against some other methods taken from the liter- ature. In all cases, the results show that CMIE is in the same range of efficiency as the methods to which it was compared, not only in the variance, but also in the precision gain comparison. Some properties of CMIE were demonstrated and, besides, its variance was given a closed form. CMIE can be easily extended to other types of rare event problems like, for instance, network reliability estimation, either under a static (classic) or a dynamic approach [19].

