Given that restriction categories are built on a foundation of idempotents, one would expect it to be occasionally useful when all such restriction idempotents split, and indeed this is the case. Say that restriction structure is split when all restriction idempotents split, and let Split(C ) denote the category arising from the usual idempotent splitting (i.e., the Karoubi envelope) of all restriction idempotents in C . That Split(C ) is a restriction category when C is follows by [7, Prop. 2.26]

Since total morphisms are closed under composition and include all identities, they form an important subcategory Total(C ) of any restriction category C . Like- wise, partial isomorphisms are closed under composition and include all identities, so all objects and partial isomorphisms of C form the subcategory Inv(C ). As the notation suggests, this category Inv(C ) is not just a restriction category but an inverse category (indeed, it is the cofree such [18]) in the usual sense (see [7, 20]).

As such, we have that each collection of decisions on an object form a local model of Kw, giving us the first part of the fibration. For the second, we need to show that decision transformers preserve entailment and the propositional connectives (though not necessarily the constants). This is shown in the following lemma.

4.17 of [8], Par(C , M) is a classified restriction category under the +1 monad. Since C has coproducts and Par(C , M) is classified, it follows by Proposition 2.3 of [9] that Par(C , M) has restriction coproducts. That 0 is a restriction zero in

ion, using partial inverses to decisions rather than the codiagonal. Indeed, the inspiration for using decisions as predicates came from the study of the categorical semantics of reversible flowchart languages (see [13,19]). Since a decision in C is still a decision in Inv(C ) (see [19]), Dec(X) is still a De Morgan quasilattice in Inv(C ), though the homomorphisms between fibres differ (i.e., only decision transformers that are partial isomorphisms occur in the decision fibration on Inv(C )).

