This paper presents an approach to provide stochastic bounds for a large class of optimisation problems on graphs when the parameters (i.e. costs, weights or delays) for links are random variables. We consider the class of problems which are based on convex operators and whose complexity is polynomial, when the parameters are deterministic. Here, the parameters (for instance the delay of a link) are discrete random variables. Such an assumption drastically changes the complexity of the problem (typically, the problems turn out unfortunately to be NP-complete). We propose to give stochastic bounds (both upper and lower bounds) based on convex order. First, we prove how we can simplify a discrete distribution to obtain bounding distributions which are easier to deal with, leading to a tradeoff between the computation complexity and the accuracy of the bounds. Second, we design a polynomial time algorithm to compute an upper bound. The approach is illustrated by the computation of the execution time of a task graph.

In most optimisation problems on graphs, it is assumed that the edge or node costs or weights are deterministic, but this is not realistic in many cases. In a commu- nication network, links or networking elements may malfunction due to congestion, accidents, weather conditions, DDOS attacks, ... Thus, one may associate with each edge and node a probability that this element will be fully or only partially avail- able. Typically, we assume that each element (node or edge) has several capacity levels (that we can denote as states) with associated probabilities. Our aim is to analyze the distribution of the results of the optimisation problem knowing the dis- tributions of probabilities on the edges and the nodes. We consider a large class of optimisation problems : Max-Flow, Shortest Path, Reliability, Minimum Spanning Tree, Completion Time. These problems are built upon convex or concave opera- tors. These problems have received a lot of attention due to their practical interest and their rich theoretical context (see for instance [5] for the complexity issue).

A completely different approach was used in [18] to bound the execution time of a task graph where the delays are independent and exponentially distributed. The authors obtain stochastic upper and lower bounds of the distributions of the completion time. The stochastic order they used is the strong stochastic bound and the comparison takes advantage of the association (i.e. positive correlation) of the random variables describing the delays experienced on a path between the source and the destination.

The distribution of probability for the edges is a discrete distribution, for in- stance obtained from some measurements. We do not assume that we obtain a density from these measurements through a fitting algorithm such as [7]. We di- rectly deal with the measurements and we obtain bounds with a tradeoff between computation complexity and accuracy. The main transformation (or actions) is the fusion of atoms (like in [8]) in the input distribution of the problems.

The technical part of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we give a brief introduction to strong stochastic order and convex order and we define the family of optimisation problems we want to study. We show that these problems are based on the same set of operators which are increasing and convex (or concave). Section 3 is devoted to the elementary actions to design upper and lower bounds. In Section 4, we present an optimal algorithm for the upper bound and in Section 5

Let us consider the following simple optimisation problem for a directed graph to illustrate our approach. As our approach is not based on the graph properties but on the operators used in the optimisation process, and on stochastic ordering, the approach can deal with many optimisation problems which looks distinct at first glance. However, these problems are all built with the same operators. Thus, our approach can be used to provide stochastic bounds for all of them.

Here, we propose to reduce the number of atoms while keeping some qualitative information on the results. This is obtained through the use of various stochastic orders. We do not establish new complexity results. We just prove that we can reduce the size of the problems when it is too large and keep some bounds according to some stochastic orders [17].

Corollary 2.14 Consider the CompletionTime problem. Assuming that the dura- tions of the task are random. Replacing the random durations by their expectations introduces a systematic biais. The deterministic result is a lower bound for the in- creasing convex ordering for the distribution and a lower bound for the expectation.

These last two properties are very important to simplify the proofs of the fol- lowing results on the comparison of distributions. They allow to decompose the distributions into two parts: the one which is not impacted by the action, and the one which contains the atoms which are modified. Therefore in the following lemmas, we only consider the atoms which are modified. We begin with a new formulation of the basic actions needed to design a strong stochastic bound.

Each upper bounding distribution is obtained with our algorithm which needs to build the associated graph and compute the bounds after K N 2 operations for the bounds and N 2 operations for the construction of the associated graph (see the following remark). We must compute the bound for M distributions which are, in general, all distinct. Therefore this first step has a complexity of N 2 M K operations and we obtain a bounding graph with M distributions with size K.

{1,..., 10} as support. The random variables for the tasks are independent. We consider relatively small instances to be able to solve exactly the problem and compare the solutions with the upper bounds. Note that due to the size of the graphs and the number of atoms, the number of graph analysis is 108.

r. For the lower bound, we do not have proof of optimality and it is not clear that we can transform the minimization problem into a graph related algorithm such as the shortest path approach we use here like in [4]. But the theoretical results and the applications on the examples are promising and the approach proposes a bounding method for many practical optimization problems. Furthermore, replacing some measurements by their expectation in such an optimisation problem leads to systematic biais which must be understood. We have also proved such a relation for MaxFlow problem (in that case, we obtain an upper bound). We are also investigate how we can combine our approach and the various structure based approaches developed in the literature. The numerical methods will been implemented in a new version of XBorne [10], the software tool we develop to study stochastic bounds.

