The COVID-19 virus, the first case of which is thought to have emerged in December 2019, has caused 6.9M deaths as of July 02, 2023 [1]. When infected people are coughing or sneezing, viral droplets can stay in the air for three hours. Respiratory infection harms healthy

As COVID-19 continues to sweep the globe, researchers and data scientists have begun employing deep learning methods for the auto- mated identification of the virus in humans [5]. Artificial Intelligence (AI)-based computer-aided diagnostics has advanced rapidly in several domains of medicine because of contemporary advances in the field of AI [6]. Diseases like cancer can be diagnosed with greater accuracy thanks to automatic image analysis performed via deep learning and in more detail Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [2]. Therefore, these models show promise for enhancing the use of CXR images in the diagnosis of COVID-19 [7].

CXR of COVID-19-affected lungs show less porosity or visibility because the lungs are stuffed with smooth and dense mucus [20]. While multiple algorithms and diagnostic tools based on machine and deep learning have shown promise, they still fall short of high performance in terms of precision and error rate [21]. Therefore, healthcare profes- sionals and the community as a whole would benefit from choosing a group of effective deep learning-based analysts.

In this paper, CoviDetector is a machine learning system that utilises transfer learning and a deep learning model (InceptionV3) for the early identification and diagnosis of COVID-19 by chest X-rays. Moreover, this system is deployed as an Android Backend. The android application user interface (UI) is designed using the React Native framework, which takes as input of an image and predicts and displays the results on the screen.

CoviDetector is an Android app in development with the intention of providing medical professionals and consumers with an easy way to check for Covid-19. The proposed App helps patients receive proper classification results for the Chest X-rays uploaded by them. This would primarily help the doctors take immediate action without waiting for reports and start instant treatment. CoviDetector can accurately deter- mine if a person is COVID-19 positive or negative by analysing only an image of CXR. This information, as we have previously mentioned, can be used by doctors to make instant decisions. This would also help society, as the resources utilised are just an Internet connection with no manpower or industrial interference.

The ResNet101 CNN model was also employed by Azemin et al. [25]. The result of their work was a thousand images that were fed into the pre-trained model. They were just 71.9% accurate at best. Ozturk et al. [26] combined DarkCovidNet with a collection of 1125 photos, 125 of which were taken from COVID-19 examples, to develop a framework. An overall accuracy of 98.08 percent was found in a 5- fold cross-validation of binary tags. Utilising algorithms like ResNet50, VGG16, VGG19, and DensNet121, Khan et al. [27] constructed a novel framework for diagnosis of CXR images; VGG16 and VGG19 demon- strated higher accuracies of approximately 99.3 percent in contrast to others.

A further investigation aimed to identify COVID-19 using a transfer learning strategy and three pertained models was conducted by Loey et al. [35]. Correctness for all three categories on AlexNet was 85.20 percent using a dataset of over 300 X-ray pictures that included around

To boost the overall performance of COVID-19 methods of classi- fication, Tabik et al. [39] used a Smart Data Based network called COVID-SDNet. Their method had a 97.72 percent success rate. Taresh et al. [40] utilised transfer learning to identify COVID-19 from CXR images, so it is possible to do the same. With a 98.72 percent accuracy rate, their VGG16-based model was superior to the competition.

architecture of the network consists of 13 convolution layers and 5 max pool layers, as stated before. The largest allowable pooling window size is 2 by 2 steps. VGG19 borrows its model architecture on like its predecessor, VGG16. When pitted against VGG16, VGG19 performs somewhat better. It represents an idea in terms of form, colour, and architecture. If the picture is in the ImageNet database, a pre-trained version of the network can be loaded and used. After being taught, the network can sort photos into one of a thousand distinct categories, each of which can include commonplace items like a computer keyboard, mouse, or pencil.

Clustering is a popular interactive data analysis method for quickly understanding how the data is organised. Data clustering is the process of identifying groupings within a dataset where individual data points have many similarities but those corresponding to different clusters have few. Using iterative steps, the K-means approach seeks to divide the dataset into K distinct, non-overlapping subgroups (clusters), with each cluster containing a single value. It makes an effort to keep clusters as dissimilar (far) as practicable while maintaining intra-cluster data points as closely related as reasonable. The algorithm groups data points into clusters with the goal of minimising the sum of squared distances among them and the centroid of the cluster (the mathematical average of all data points in that group). The homogeneity (similar- ity) of data points within a cluster increases as inter-cluster variation decreases.

We used various datasets for experimental purposes. The authors of the datasets have accomplished the hectic task of gathering and categorising the CXR Images. There are four datasets on which exper- iments were performed. Two of them contain data from three classes. The other two datasets consist of data from 4 and 5 different classes. The first dataset, COVID-19 CXR Image Dataset (Research) [45] named as Dataset1 contains classes named COVID, Normal, and Viral. This dataset was used for initial model testing and validation. However, various other datasets were utilised to check the competency of the model. Another other 3 class dataset, DLAI3 Hackathon Phase3 COVID- 19 CXR Challenge [46] named Dataset2 contains COVID, No-FINDING, ThoraxDisease. This dataset was also used for the validation and testing of the DNN models. The other dataset, COVID-19 Radiography

Internet of Things (IoT): Deep learning algorithms proposed in this paper can be implemented in embedded devices such as the Raspberry Pi or Arduino and can be further used for building the smart X-ray-based COVID-19 detection [52]. CoviDetector also allows for the integration of ChatGPT and IoT, both of which may speed up and enhance patient care. Together, they form a formidable force that is altering the way we engage with technological advances and, perhaps, will make our lives better in generations and decades thereafter [53].

