A data store is a place where persistent data is managed for an application. A data store lies at the heart of an application, defining its critical concepts, stor- ing its data, constraining its data, and facilitating its behavior. A data store must be carefully managed to ensure correctness and provide an application memory.

In contrast, a data interchange provides the means to convey data among applications. A data interchange is transient and exists solely to move data from a source to targets. The source application must translate the data it is sending into the data interchange format. Similarly, a target application must use the data interchange format to populate its own internal data store. Thus a data interchange mediates applications and stands apart from them.

We will clarify our ideas by discussing a past project. The Process Data eX- change Institute (PDXI) was formed in the early 1990s by twenty companies, mostly petrochemical companies, under the auspices of the AIChE (American Institute of Chemical Engineers) [2]. The purpose of PDXI was to develop a means for exchanging data among chemical engineering design applications.

Initially there was a concern about awarding the contract to a university- led team. The industrial sponsors were concerned that a university-led team would not be business like and complete the project. However, those fears became unwarranted as the contract team gelled and worked well together.

In retrospect, one problem with our deliverables is now clear. The 150 pages of models that we delivered was much too large for an interchange stan- dard. At thetime no one realized, but we had made the mistake of confusing an application model with an interchange model.

to the application. In contrast, the data interchange model is abstract, com- bining data and metadata. The data store model can be quite large, but is easier to understand. The data interchange model is small, but can involve numerous records with its population.

Distinction between application and interchange models. Although we did not recognize the distinction at the time, something was amiss with our approach. 150 pages of models is too large for an interchange model. It is only in retrospect that we clearly recognize our mistake as this paper explains.

Another portion of the PDXI models covered physical properties (melting point, vapor pressure, specific gravity, smoke point, and many others). We happened to build a metamodel for this portion and the corporate spon- sors did not like it. They kept pressing for something more tangible. In retrospect, the industrial sponsors were uninformed. They wanted a data interchange model for their business purposes but had no idea what this should look like.

