We present a logic which we call Hybrid Duration Calculus (HDC). HDC is obtained by adding the following hybrid logical machinery to the Restricted Duration Calculus (RDC): nominals, satisfaction operators, down-arrow binder, and the global modality. RDC is known to be decidable, and in this paper we show that decidability is retained when adding the hybrid logical machinery. Decidability of HDC is shown by reducing the satisfiability problem to satisfiability of Monadic Second-Order Theory of Order. We illustrate the increased expressive power obtained in hybridizing RDC by showing that HDC, in contrast to RDC, can express all of the 13 possible relations between intervals.

A starting point of our work is Duration Calculus (abbreviated DC), which is an interval logic introduced by Zhou, Hoare and Ravn [28] as an extension of Interval Temporal Logic (ITL) by Halpern, Moszkowski and Manna [15]. The introduction of DC is motivated by case studies of real-time systems, e.g. [24], and DC can be used to reason about models of such systems at a high level of abstraction, see e.g. [26]. A distinctive feature of DC is that one can express and reason about the duration of a state in a system, where the duration of a state in an interval is the accumulated presence time of the state in that interval. Unfortunately, even simple propositional subsets of DC formulas are undecidable [27]. Decidable subsets of DC are considered for example in [27,11,12,13,17,20].

The main idea of the present work is to consider a hybrid logical version of RDC achieving more expressiveness while preserving decidability. In particular, we add nominals to RDC, where a nominal in our case names a specific interval and we add a down-arrow binder, which provides a reference to the current interval in a formula. Furthermore, we add the global modality which makes any interval reachable from any other interval. In this paper, we establish decidability results for RDC extended by these hybrid elements.

In this paper we establish a decidability result for both discrete and continuous time hybrid RDC, by establishing translations to monadic second order theory of order. For discrete time, we exploit that it is decidable whether a sentence in this second-order theory is satisfiable in a natural number structure [5], and for continu- ous time we exploit that it is decidable whether a second-order sentence is satisfiable in a signal-structure [23]. Furthermore, we illustrate the extra expressiveness of the hybrid version of RDC.

In this section we define the syntax and semantics of Restricted Duration Calcu- lus (RDC). RDC is a well-known decidable fragment of duration calculus, see e.g. [27,17,20]. In this paper we consider RDC both with a continuous-time semantics and with a discrete-time semantics.

Apart from this everything is as in the continuous-time case. In the following, we will refer to RDC with the continuous-time semantics as continuous-time RDC and RDC with the discrete-time semantics as discrete-time RDC. An interpretation in continuous-time RDC will be referred to as a continuous time interpretation and an interpretation in discrete-time RDC will be referred to as a discrete-time interpretation.

HDC to be more expressive than standard RDC, since RDC can not express the neighborhood modalities [26]. There is a simple intuitive reason why standard RDC can not express the neighborhood modalities: The chop operator is a contracting modality, that is, it provides only access to inside parts (subintervals) of a given interval. The neighborhood modalities are however expanding modalities, that is, modalities that give access to outside parts of a given interval. Of course expanding modalities such as in PNL can not be encoded in a logic such as RDC that only contains contracting modalities.

The discrete-time semantics of HDC is easily defined along the line of Sect. 2.3. It suffices to note that a discrete-time assignment of HDC must map all nominals into intervals with natural number end points. HDC with discrete-time semantics will be referred to as discrete-time HDC.

a names the interval [xa, ya]. The translation is defined recursively with respect to two first-order variables x and y. These must be distinct from all the variables of the form xa and ya, where a is a nominal. The intuition is that [x, y] names the current interval.

Rabinovich [22] has shown that the satisfiability problem for RDC has a non- elementary complexity. He just gives the proof for the continuous-time interpre- tation of RDC, but mentions that Peter Sestoft has given a corresponding proof for the discrete-time interpretation. These results of course imply that satisfiability of HDC must be of non-elementary complexity as well. Thus we can probably not hope for a more efficient decision procedure for HDC than the one given in this paper. This is in contrast to the common situation where proving decidability of

We have developed a hybrid logical version of RDC, called Hybrid Duration Calculus (HDC). HDC includes nominals, the down-arrow binder and the global modality, by which arbitrary intervals can be reached. We have shown the decid- ability of HDC wrt. to discrete-time and continuous-time domains. These results were achieved by translations (preserving satisfiability) to decidable fragments of monadic second order theory of order.

