To address these problems, researchers have proposed using virtual reality (VR) to enhance the supervision expe-rience. The application of VR in higher education seems promising (Altbach, 2009). For example, Li et al. (2022) investigated the effectiveness of distance learning callig-raphy through VR applications, while Chen et al. (2021) devel- oped a VR-based remote education platform focusing on rendering im- provements. Ying et al. (2017) proposed VREX, a VR-based educational platform, to support edu-cation in different disciplines. VR enables teachers to com-municate various types of information without the ucation have mostly focused on the use of VR for single-student learning or remote collaborative learning, overlooking the collaborative experi- ence between teachers and students in specific contexts like supervision. To address this gap, our study focuses on the user expe-rience of supervisors and students and customizes a VR ap-plication for thesis supervision meetings to investigate how to improve the design of VR applications for this specific use case. Our research question naturally arises: "How can VR applications be used to support collaborative su- pervision in thesis work?" We find that designing VR applications for supervision needs to consider the work practices of teachers and stu- dents, with particular attention to cultural and power issues, as these components play a significant role in supervision and indirectly influ- ence the user experience of the VR application. Our study contributes to a paradigm shift in the design of VR applications for specific domains. Inline with that, the rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a review of the relevant literature, Section 3 presents the case study conducted for this work, Section 4 describes the empirical setting, and Section 5 introduces the methodology that guided our research throughout the paper. The findings are presented in Section 6, followed by a detailed discussion of the results in Section 7. Section 8 provides an implementation for design and opens a room for sharing lessons learned.

Before the outbreak of COVID-19, remote thesis su-pervision was primarily utilized for part-time international students, where the high levels of student diversity and cultural differences significantly impacted their results (Gray & Crosta, 2019; Buckley, 2013). However, with the global spread of COVID-19 at the end of 2020, remote thesis super-vision has become a common necessity in higher education. Over the years, most research on remote thesis supervision has focused on exploring the challenges and problems faced by teachers and students in the remote supervision process. However, these studies often provided abroad assessment of all available tools on the market, with extensive

Asynchronous interaction typically involves a delay between sending and receiving information (Serdyukov, 2020). This type of interaction allows participants more time to reflect on complex ideas and refine their contribu-tions (Hrastinski et al., 2010; Kung-Ming & Khoon-Seng, 2005). In the context of thesis supervision, asynchronous interaction is often used for exchanging and transferring complex information or one-way notifications, such as file sharing and meeting reminders (Hansen & Hansson, 2015). Many typical asynchronous interactive communication ap-plications, like email, forums, shared network disks, and shared online calendars, are already available on the market. While much research has been done on asynchronous work tools for thesis supervision, the needs of students and teach-ers working together in a VR environment go beyond asyn-chronous interaction. The study highlights specific needs in VR, such as exploring 3D models, high- lighting contexts, and expressing emotions, which demand synchronous interac-tion. Therefore, focusing on synchronous interaction in VR can offer valuable benefits for educational purposes.

In synchronous interaction, face-to-face communication is widely accepted as the most effective channel for infor-mation exchange (Koester, 2022). However, with the impact of COVID-19 eliminating the possibility of synchronous human interaction, the demand for syn- chronous collabora-tion technology has risen (Augustsson & Jaldemark, 2014). Teachers and students now often resort to using existing tele- conferencing and videoconferencing applications (Chan-drasena Chan- drasena Premawardhena, 2021). Much of the research has also concentrated on similar systems or directly explored the experiences of typical applications available on the market. While several thesis sup- port system studies include online videoconferencing functions within asynchronous collabo-ration (Almeatani et al., 2019; De Rezende et al., 2006; Hansen & Hansson, 2015), there is minimal research that specif- ically focuses on synchronous collaboration.

In synchronous interaction, real-time exchange of infor-mation takes place (Kung-Ming & Khoon-Seng, 2005). This type of interaction enables participants to experience a greater sense of social presence and be more active and en-gaged (Hrastinski et al., 2010; Kung-Ming & Khoon-Seng, 2005). In the context of thesis supervision, synchronous in-teraction is 1994; Sherman and Craig, 2019). Depending on the level of immersion, VR systems used in current research can be categorized as follows: Low Immersive Desktop Virtual Environments (DVE): These VR systems offer a basic level of immersion and interaction and are typically experienced through a computer screen or a small display (Martirosov et al., 2022; Miller & Bugnariu, 2016). Semi-Immersive Virtual Environments: These VR systems provide a moderate level of immersion and interaction, often using larger displays or projection screens to create a more immersive experience (Martirosov et al., 2022; Miller & Bugnariu, 2016). Fully Immersive Virtual Environments (IVE): These VR systems enable a high level of multi-sensory immersion, offering a more realistic and compelling experience for the user (Pedersen & Koumaditis, 2020). Over the last decade, research has predominantly focused on fully immersive virtual environments (IVE), as they provide the highest level of im- mersion and offer users a more realistic and engaging experience. Fully immersive VR systems aim to create a sense of presence and transport users into a virtual world where they can interact with virtual objects and environments in a natural and intuitive way.

With the advancement of communication technologies, the inter- activity of VR has expanded to support multiple users collaborating in the same virtual space, known as the collaborative virtual environment (CVE) (Benford et al., 2001). CVEs find applications in various fields of remote real-time interaction, including gaming, entertainment, ed-ucation, therapy, healthcare, design reviews, and job inter-views (Beti et al., 2019; Jerald, 2016; Perez-Marcos et al., 2012). However, in the context of higher education, much of the research on using VR has focused on single-student learning experiences in fully immersive virtual environ-ments (IVEs). Only a few studies have begun to explore multi-player remote learning in IVEs.

immersive virtual environment (CIVE) for geography education and conducted qualitative research to investigate the cognitive and social dispositions of pairs of learners as they engaged in collaborative tasks. However, this study was conducted in a laboratory setting with randomly recruited groups of participants. Jackson and Fagan (2000) integrated a study into offline classroom activities for participating stu-dents, where they worked individually or in pairs to perform tasks in the immersive virtual learning environment.

Despite simulating communication scenarios through specific labo- ratory tasks, the real-life applicability and use-fulness of these applica- tions are still under exploration (Ahn et al., 2021; Le et al., 2020). Further research is needed to de-termine the effectiveness and potential of such collaborative virtual environments in educational settings.

In this section, we present the procedure of the study, in-cluding the instruments, artefacts, the participants and study procedures. The su- pervision work commenced in August 2022 and concluded in April 2023, with a total of 22 rounds of supervision meetings during this period. Each round of meetings involved one-to-one thesis supervision between the teachers and each of the five students in the virtual space, lasting about 1 h. The supervision covered various aspects of VR appli- cation development for student projects, literature review, writing, and presentation. The teachers and students had the flexibility to arrange the meetings according to their preferred supervision style and needs.

An essential aspect to mention is that both teachers collaboratively worked on the thesis supervision, given the interdisciplinary nature of the thesis work crossing domains. One teacher provided domain-specific knowledge and guid-ance to support the students in completing their thesis work, while the other teacher primarily focused on evaluating the quality of the thesis and offering academic support. This collaborative approach ensured comprehensive supervision and support for the stu- dents, combining expertise from dif-ferent domains to enrich the learning experience and thesis outcomes.

documentation and interpretation (Randall et al., 2007). The decision to use fieldwork is driven by two main reasons. Firstly, it enables a focus on the experiences of thesis supervision from the perspectives of both teachers and students (Bentley & Randall, 1994). Secondly, it facilitates an iterative design process, allowing for continuous improvement of the VR application.

During the fieldwork, semi-structured interviews were conducted with the participants. The purpose of these inter-views was to gather information about their thesis project schedules and their previous ex- periences with thesis super-vision, including the environment and pro- cess they used before using the VR-based application. In addition to the general interviews, detailed interviews were conducted with seven selected participants who had experience supervision meetings in a VR- based environment. These seven partici-pants consisted of two teachers

During the data analysis phase, we employed thematic analysis to gain insights and understand the set of experi-ences, ideas, and behav- iors across the datasets (Braun, & Clarke, 2006; Braun & Clarke, 2012). All col-lected materials, including interviews, observations, draw-ings, and audio recordings, were translated into documents for analysis, resulting in a total of 195 pages of notes. To ensure confidentiality, any identifiable participant informa-tion was anonymized. As there was no relevant theory or theoretical framework in place, we conducted an inductive approach to distill the coding framework from the dataset (Braun, & Clarke, 2006). The project team used Visio to illustrate the relationships and classifications be-tween all the codes, emerging themes, and sub-themes. This process involved iterative discussions among all authors throughout the project. As new data was collected, the codes, coding framework, and themes were continuously reviewed and adjusted.

Reaching an intra-subjective agreement among the re-search team through the identified themes is crucial for ensuring a comprehensive understanding of the data and its implications. By collectively analyzing and interpreting the themes, the research team can align their per- spectives and insights, enabling a unified understanding of the experi- ences and needs of the teachers and students in the VR-based thesis supervision. This agreement is especially valuable for guiding the improvement of the VR application. By basing the improvements on the

Based on thematic analysis, we have identified a series of issues associated with the VR application in thesis su-pervision. These issues can be summarized into the follow-ing four themes: translating super- vision Work into virtual, hidden Interests of supervision, emotional interaction and collaboration, and the emphasis on supervision effi- ciency. These themes will be introduced in the following sections.

existing workflow and mental models. The existing workflow and mental model allow teachers and students to make decisions and take action efficiently in similar situations. However, when individuals attempt to use new tools and technologies that are inconsistent with their established patterns and workflows in VR, these automated pro- cesses and patterns are disrupted. Individuals need to bear the additional learning and cognitive costs and adjust their mental models, which may lead to discomfort, confu-sion, and even resistance. Additionally, the issue of resource transfer between computers and VR applications created a disconnect between individual work and collaborative work. This is not aproblem in the physical world because there is no need to transfer resources. The students can show them to the teachers locally, via email, or similar means. However, VR applications bring a situation that causes inconsistent interaction between VR applications and the real world and builds up cognitive burdens and learning costs for teachers and students. To some degree, the quality of the meetings de- clines due to this technical issue and, of course, leaves the participants feeling fatigued and dissatisfied.

The traditional Chinese culture emphasizes hierarchy and respect in interpersonal relationships. Even though the university is an interna- tional venture, the cultural issue still plays a strong role in everyday teaching and research activi-ties. Indeed, English culture influences everyday work prac-tices; however, due to most students being Chinese, respect and obedience to elders and superiors remain fundamental moral concepts in the workplace. Therefore, students often regard which was also linked to their teaching performance. Secondly, they believed that many students lacked the ability to complete a high- quality thesis and did not have a sufficient sense of responsibility for their own thesis work. Without effective control over students, they were likely to become distracted and not listen carefully during the thesis supervision meet-ings, resulting in difficulties ineffectively revising the thesis.

Teachers expressed their belief that interactions with VR students were less active compared to offline classes. The main reason for this observation was the absence of emotional interaction methods, such as physical contact, that could liven up the atmosphere in traditional classroom settings. To improve the interaction and warmth in virtual classrooms, it is essential to explore alternative means of fostering engagement and emotional connections. Utiliz-ing various interactive tools within the VR platform and encouraging students to actively participate can enhance the overall teaching and learning experience. Additionally, implementing virtual team-building activities and creating opportunities for small group discussions may help establish a more dynamic and engaging virtual learning environment. While VR may lack physical contact, innovative approaches can be employed to compensate for it and create a supportive and vibrant learning atmosphere. As one teacher said: teractions. To address these challenges, it maybe beneficial to explore technological advancements in VR that can capture and con-vey emotional cues more effectively. Implementing features like emotion recognition algorithms or virtual avatars with expressive facial anima- tions could enhance the communi-cation experience and help bridge the gap between virtual and physical interactions. Additionally, providing training and guidance to both teachers and students on effective communication strategies in a VR environment can further improve their ability to navigate and engage in meaningful interactions. As the teacher said:

the emotions of my students. It was crucial for me to gauge their reactions to my teaching and adjust my ap- proach accordingly. But in VR, it was difficult to do so as I had limited information about their emotional state. I was left guessing whether my words were too harsh

to express opinions and thoughts effectively. Unfortunately, VR signifi- cantly restricts many of these avenues of expression, leading to diffi- culties in communicating emotions and perspectives. This limitation makes interactions more cautious and reserved, as they are unsure of how their messages are being received.

chose to use tools that were difficult to meet their needs but more effi- cient or even gave up meeting their needs. For example, the teacher and students needed to annotate key points on the thesis document and even take notes during supervision. Our original design idea was to provide users with a brush tool for annotating documents in VR. However, the teachers found the process of using the brush tool to be too complicated and inefficient. Instead, they preferred to use a direct approach by grabbing and moving a 3D object in the scene to highlight important points in documents. At the same time, both teachers and students had to give up taking notes. As the teacher said:

In addition, some necessary functions with no alternative were also very inefficient to use, which made teachers and students deeply impatient when using them. For example, teachers and students usually needed to share multiple re-sources to facilitate their communication, such as thesis doc-uments and presentation slides. The original design idea was to create these resources on their computers and then upload them to the VR application through a net disk. However, due to the hassle of device switching and slow internet speed, the file transfer individuals are expected to accomplish numerous tasks within limited time frames. This culture of high efficiency has also in-fluenced the thinking patterns and work styles of teachers and students in higher education, particularly in the context of thesis supervision. Chinese cultural values that priori-tize efficiency also underscore the importance of efficient thesis supervision in higher education. Teachers face two specific reasons for this emphasis. Firstly, they are respon-sible for su- pervising a considerable number of students simultaneously, and time

The pursuit of efficiency in thesis supervision can be both beneficial and challenging. On the one hand, it moti-vates teachers to make the most of their time to provide com-prehensive guidance to students. On the other hand, it may also create pressure for both teachers and stu- dents to cover vast amounts of information in limited interactions. To strike a balance, it is crucial for educators to focus on effective time management and utilize technology and innovative teaching methods to enhance the efficiency of thesis supervision without compromising the quality of guidance. Encouraging open communication, setting realistic goals, and providing support to students can foster a positive learning environ-ment that optimizes the thesis supervision process while maintaining educational excellence.

A variety of social positions are embedded within the social system, each serving as a predefined social role (Isaac, 1987; Symonds, 2021). This system assigns different pow-ers to these roles, establishing diverse power relationships among them. During the process of socialization, individuals come to occupy various social positions and are endowed with different powers corresponding to their respective so-cial roles (Fairclough, 2013; Isaac, 1987). This power pro-vides the possibility of action for individuals. In the context where learning occurs, The role of teachers and students is recognized as two typical social roles (Isaac, 1987). In our case, the supervisor and student roles correspond to these two roles, respectively. However, given the long-term existence of teachers and students, a powerful and histori-callyingrained power relationship gradually develops (Isaac, 1987). The characteristics and behavioral expectations of this relationship have been thoroughly established and natu-ralized within the educational context (Symonds, 2021).

Communication methods, work rhythm, and processes also influence user behaviors, attitudes, and interactions with the VR application. First, the communication methods among users are highly correlated with power relationships. Within specific institutions, power relationships shape or-ders of discourse (Fairclough, 2013). These orders will limit and constrain the ways of communication and knowledge construction about the topic (Hall, 1997). Individuals will learn the orders of discourse in the process of occupying these subject positions and grad-

Therefore, the capability of VR devices in input and output greatly impacts the communication process. In this case, VR applications and devices carry the function of language communication through micro- phone and earphone components, providing users with auditory feed- back. Users can capture limited emotional clues from the content and tone of voice. However, when it comes to the communication of changing moods and emotional states, nonverbal infor-mation is far more important than verbal information (Fabri et al., 1999). Non-verbal information mainly includes facial behavior, gaze, spatial behavior, gestures, and body language (Fabri et al., 1999; Knapp et al., 2013).

In the evaluation of VR applications, efficiency is an-other key factor that contributes to the experience of teachers and students in supervi- sion. "Efficiency" is abstractly de-fined as the resource consumption related to the accuracy and completeness of user goal achievement (for Standard-ization, 1998). Therefore, in lots of VR research, the usage efficiency of VR applications is often translated into mea-surable vari- ables, such as click counts and task completion time (Arora et al., 2017; Liang et al., 2019). Researchers evaluate efficiency in laboratory settings by controlled mea-surements of these variables. However, the use of VR ap-plications in remote education is affected by the real world and user characteristics, such as the usage environment, cultural background, and workflow. These complex condi-tions are difficult to reproduce in a

However, we should catch is-sues from these aborted tasks. Further- more, we can adapt the list of usability questions proposed by Sutcliffe and Kaur (2000) as a reference for several interviews in fieldwork. These questions aid in uncovering detailed insights into user psychology and behavior, thereby providing empirical evidence for user instruction of our interaction models.

integration between VR applications and personal tools involves switching between different devices. Ishii and Miyake (1991) have initiated anearly discussion on tool in-tegration that involves device switching. In our case, the tool integration involving the switch between devices should ide-ally overlap and integrate the images of both ends. However, these features currently only offer basic sharing capabilities, and there is still space for improvement and expansion in terms of integrating finer details. For example, desktop sharing does not

Last, the design of VR applications should also consider the process integration of users (Thomahs, 1992). In our case, for example, the PDF file transfer process from the computer end to VR, and the file transfer functions of VR and the computer, can not be successfully imported and storage of PDF during the supervision process. The file sizes are different for computer and VR applications. VR cannot effectively present the file size supported by the computer. Indeed, if we carefully consider the solution for VR technology should be based on in-situ work practices. Such an idea was also suggested by Jerald (Jerald, 2016); Jerlad indi- cated that the emphasis in facilitating rapid learning and acceptance of VR interactions by users should be on assisting users in swiftly creating mental models that align with the application. In that case, our pre- sentation integration will be supported by natural affordances and clear signifiers that guide actions and elu-cidate processes, timely and useful feedback, and apparent and comprehensible mappings (Jerald, 2016).

design research should prioritize in-situ work practices, where var-ious stakeholders involved in a project contribute to shaping technology design to ensure not only usability but also high-quality usefulness. One potential critique that may arise is the question of the practical impli- cations of our work. As mentioned, one of the key takeaways from our research is the need to educate VR developers about the absence of a one-size-fits-all design solution. Customization of design for each unique context of use is of paramount importance. This research serves as a reminder that tailoring VR applications to specific use cases is vital for their success and effective-ness.

This study aims to answer the challenges students and faculty face when conducting remote dissertation super-vision sessions via VR. The current VR application still has many system design and technology deficiencies. The study suggests improvement of the VR technologies for supervision purposes in many ways, including enhancing the continuity of VR applications, customizing the information architecture and interaction details of VR applications, and giving consideration of cul- tural differences of user groups. In addition, the paper reflects on the design of VR applica-tions for supervision purposes. A set of design implemen-tations is offered with the purpose of opening rooms for others who might share similar research interests in VR-based computer and education purposes.

