At the same time, the technology of augmented reality (AR), which combines physical objects with virtual information, is being applied to educational settings, and showing potential to enhance learning and collaboration in open-ended environments (Arici, Yildirim, Caliklar, & Yilmaz, 2019; Beheshti, Kim, Ecanow, & Horn, 2017; Chang et al., 2022; Kim, Guida, & Kim, 2021; Radu, Hv, & Schneider, 2021; Radu & Schneider, 2019a). Due to the suitability of AR technology to support and enhance activities in makerspaces, we expect the number of AR appli- cations to grow in these contexts (Radu, Joy, & Schneider, 2021).

Huang, Kestin, Shah, & Schneider, 2022; Radu & Schneider, 2022), electronics (Beheshti et al., 2017; Reyes-Aviles & Aviles-Cruz, 2018), robots (Kyjanek, Al Bahar, Vasey, Wannemacher, & Menges, 2019, May; Radu, Hv, & Schneider, 2021), energy transfer (Fidan & Tuncel, 2019), design process (Kim et al., 2021; Wacker, Wagner, Voelker, & Borchers, 2018), and assembly (Song, 2020). These projects illustrate the potential of AR technology for learning with physical objects, and typically show that AR can lead to improved efficiency in performing tasks, reduced cognitive load, improved comprehension and collaboration. However, although such research investigations show the potential of AR tech- nology in open-ended, collaborative environments, they typically do not provide guidelines for designing effective AR applications. The lack of design guidelines makes it expensive and time consuming to develop AR applications that are designed for this kind of complex, messy environ- ment. One study estimates the cost of developing an AR application is between $50,000-$250,000 (Berman & Pollack, 2021), and the high cost of developing, testing, and supporting AR applications can be a barrier to the benefits of AR (Alam, Susmit, Lin, Masukujjaman & Ho., 2021; Ber- man & Pollack, 2021; da Silva et al., 2016).

Mantri, 2021). Some considerations exist for ensuring that AR is an appropriate technology for the task at hand, such as using AR to access phenomena difficult to see (Dunleavy, 2014; Rose, 2021), using AR not simply for its novelty (Laine, 2018; Radu, 2014; Rose, 2021), ensuring that tangible objects are augmented (Endsley et al., 2017; Rose, 2021), using AR to direct user attention (Rose, 2021), and ensuring that the visual design is not overwhelming (Endsley et al., 2017; Rose, 2021). Specifically in educational contexts, guidelines suggest that designers can use AR to visualize the unseen or spatially complex topics (Dunleavy, 2014; Radu, 2014; Rose, 2021), concretize abstract topics (Laine, 2018; Radu, 2014), use narrative and scaffolded problems (Dunleavy, 2014), leverage physicality (Laine, 2018; Radu, 2014; Rose, 2021), use AR to empower existing curricula (da Silva et al., 2016), use multiple types of representations to communicate learning content (Laine, 2018), support teacher awareness (Cuendet et al., 2013), or design for flexibility of classroom activities (Cuendet et al., 2013). Our contribution is to expand on these guidelines by investigating AR applications for makerspaces.

This section describes projects and research studies that we have conducted in the last 5+ years. Our research team has been exploring various possibilities of AR applications for makerspace environments through the development of working projects involving headset-based augmented reality (i.e., Microsoft Hololens) and studied their effects through experimental studies in controlled laboratories and ecological settings. Through this process, we have documented the effects of AR technology on student learning, collaboration and affect, and we have accumulated a set of best practices for designing effective AR experi- ences. In this section, we describe the five projects developed over 5+ years (see appendix A for more information on each study). We then synthesize these findings into guidelines and tensions that designers should consider when developing AR systems in open-ended learning environments. To extract design principles, we followed the approach used by Cuendet et al. (2013): each guideline was formulated by reflecting on our personal experience as designers, feedback from users, qualitative observations and quantitative results from each study. To give readers a sense of the evidence was used for each guideline, we indicate our data sources in parentheses (QT: quantitative findings; QL: qualita- tive observations; PT: lessons learned during pilot studies; FD: user feedback).

about the physical world (e.g., their knowledge about manipulating physical objects like the robot) and have the AR visuals respond to that, rather than forcing people to interact with virtual elements. In makerspaces, this means designing AR that fits well with the physical objects and using sensors to create interactive visuals. (PT)

be viewed by people unfamiliar with AR or unfamiliar with the project, because viewers may be highly sensitive to aspects that de- velopers don't mind (e.g., being sensitive to the jitter of the AR tracking, or being able to distinguish real vs virtual objects). (QL, FD)

Open-ended learning environments can involve collaborations be- tween people who have varied interests, backgrounds and levels of expertise. Interactions between these variables influence what features and information should be built into AR experiences. Social interactions, for example, may be hierarchical where an experienced participant teaches a novice; or they may be collaborative, where team members work together to achieve a common goal. Furthermore, participants may work together in roles that are similar (e.g., both participants building a robot together), or highly specialized to their interests or expertise (e.g., one participant programming electronics and another participant con- structing physical materials). When designing AR applications to support collaboration, we suggest considering the following guidelines:

Understand for whom AR is not necessary: For some activities, the cost of using augmented reality technology may outweigh its benefits, and some collaborators may not actually need AR (e.g., HoloBoard and HoloBot projects). This applies, for example, when the team member has all the information available for their task without AR, or when the team member is doing activities that cannot be enhanced by AR.

Provide various types of visualizations for different points of entry: One type of concept can be represented in multiple ways (for example, magnetic fields can be shown as 3D arrows, volumetric torus shapes, or vector fields), thus showing one concept in multiple ways gives students different points of entry to understanding that concept. Furthermore, our results suggest that students who see more visualiza- tions representing different concepts (such as in the HoloSpeaker study) are stimulated to think about and discuss those multiple concepts. Thus, using multiple representations can encourage richer engagement with the learning content.

surfaces, it is valuable to anchor AR content onto physical objects. For example, displaying magnetic fields on physical objects (HoloLenz project), or displaying voltage on real circuits (HoloBoard project). This enables learners to use their existing knowledge to understand relation- ships to AR visualizations and to interact with the learning content by manipulating familiar objects.

Strive to be minimalistic and avoid visual overload. Visual over- lays can be overwhelming and distracting, especially if displayed on physical or digital workspaces that are already busy. It is important to provide the right amount of AR visualizations to illustrate the core learning content that the users should focus on, and not more. When in doubt, designers can let students or teachers control what information is displayed, and filter unnecessary information (such as in the HoloLenz project where the instructor could add/remove AR visualizations depending on discussion topics).

Provide explanations of what the representations mean. Some- times users may not be familiar with a visual representation or how to interact with it, and this may be difficult to learn especially if there is no instructor present. Designers can instruct users on how to read and use each representation, either by providing introductory tutorials or UI el- ements that allow users to gain further information.

Reduce barriers to entry by leveraging what users already know. Users will take knowledge from their interaction with other real or digital environments and transfer it to AR. Designers should strive to create AR representations that look familiar to users (e.g., in the HoloBot project showing sensors as 2D bar charts) and permit interactions that are ex- pected (e.g., in the HoloLenz project, allowing the user to grab and move visualizations around the space).

Gather feedback from people unfamiliar with AR: Sometimes, lack of familiarity with technology can be beneficial because it stimulates ideas that are not constrained by current technological limitations. For example, we found that insights and ideas can come from talking to students and educators unfamiliar with AR, or from talking to children who provide unfiltered brainstorming ideas. Although such ideas may be often too undeveloped or impossible to achieve with current technology, sometimes they yield valuable stimulation for the brainstorming process.

In this paper we have described various AR experiences designed for makerspace environments and the studies assessing their affordances. This allowed us to extract 14 design guidelines for creating augmented reality systems. Our guidelines provide recommendations on how to support social collaboration, facilitate integration of virtual content with physical objects, promote conceptual understanding, and increase us- ability. We expect these guidelines to support designers and help them make more informed decisions when considering the use of AR in various open-ended learning environments (e.g., not just in makerspaces, but also in factory settings, hands-on lab sessions, professional workshops, engineering contexts, and more).

The guidelines presented above share overlaps with guidelines created in other contexts; for example, with usability guidelines such as striving for familiarity, reducing barriers to entry, or providing infor- mation about what representations mean (Ejaz et al., 2019; Radu, 2014; Tuli & Mantri, 2021), as well as guidelines about educational and collaborative design, such as providing appropriate scaffolding, striving to visualize invisible phenomena, designing multiple representations, and designing for various user roles (Cuendet et al., 2013; Dunleavy, 2014; Laine, 2018; Radu, 2014; Rose, 2021). However, makerspaces differ from traditional environments due to their high diversity of social

The first and main tension we had to navigate was the amount of AR visuals displayed. Designers need to think critically about what is worth visualizing through AR as opposed to other mediums such as computer screens; anything that can be done on a computer screen, for example, under-exploits AR technology. Thus, when AR seems under-utilized, designers should consider making invisible information visible, espe- cially information that can be difficult to visualize using other platforms, or difficult to connect with real-world phenomena. On the other hand, designers also need to be wary of showing too much information through AR. This may lead to visual overload or cause learners to be distracted and ignore some content. In this case, designers should strive to provide a minimalist experience while leveraging the medium of AR, or let users turn AR layers on/off to decrease visual clutter and cognitive load.

A fourth trade-off was how much agency is given to users. We found that when the experience was too controlled and linear, users lost motivation to explore the content taught. In our studies, users were naturally curious about the AR representations, and wanted some freedom to interact with them. On the other hand, giving too much freedom caused users to be disoriented and confused. A useful strategy for calibrating agency is to provide scaffolding that fades over time; for example, users can see hints on how to interact with the AR content or arrows to guide their attention, which fade over time. Another strategy is no content is shared, users have to explicitly and verbally describe the information they have access to. While this could cause disengagement and frustration, there are situations where this design decision could be beneficial (e.g., students participating in a jigsaw learning scenario, where they have to combine individual information to find a shared

solution). When the content is duplicated, there is no risk for misun- derstanding - but it may lead to a missed opportunity to engage each user in the activity. In sum, we encourage designers to consider sharing some, but not all, AR information among users. There should be enough shared

Additionally, our guidelines are somewhat specific to the technology currently used in makerspace and for creating AR content. We do not know what AR technologies or makerspaces/learning environments will look like 10 years from now. Additionally, we based our guidelines solely on the work we conducted; these studies sometimes had small sample sizes, the majority were done in controlled settings, with similar users, and were led by the same research team. To generalize these results, researchers could use other published research to augment our guide- lines, extend the results with larger sample sizes, replicate the results in other contexts, and/or conduct additional ecological implementations of these systems. Finally, we acknowledge that there are other guidelines that we did not explore and which could be covered by future work - for example, guidelines for facilitating social interactions in larger groups (e.g., community building), increasing accessibility and inclusion

The data for this study is confidential and not available for open ac- cess. The study has approval from the university's Institutional Review Board and adheres to the institution's ethical guidelines. The participants participated voluntarily, and all data has been anonymized prior to publication.

Hill, J. R., & Land, S. M. (1998). Open-ended learning environments: A theoretical framework and model for design. In Selected research and development Presentations at the national Convention of the Association for educational Communications and technology (AECT) Sponsored by the Research and theory division.

