The significant limitations of research work are mainly in three aspects: (1) This paper tries to find out human factors affecting communication networks of mobile games, but human factors are too complex and dynamic to find overall and atypical human factors. (2) Due to influence of Metaverse, communication net- works of mobile games will become more complicated in the future. The applicability of security management model also needs to be adjusted accordingly. (3) This paper invites experts to con- duct security evaluation. The evaluation process may have subjec- tive factors of experts. Therefore, this paper reduces subjective

Scholars have done a lot of research on network protocol, net- work architecture, geographical factors, vulnerability factors of communication network. These research have very strong refer- ence significance for security management of communication net- works in mobile games and digital cultural consumption. However, existing research focuses more on technical optimization, hard- ware transformation. Few research discusses security management of communication network in mobile games from perspective of players. Under Metaverse, players have gradually become domi- nant force in mobile games and digital cultural consumption. It is urgent to study security management of communication networks with players as the core.

behavior. In order to further analyze factors behind reasons, this paper summarizes factors from six dimensions based on player interviews (mainly interviewed core groups of mobile games, namely teenagers; also interviewed some middle-aged and elderly groups) and literature analysis [27,29]. That is, physiological, phys- ical, pathological, pharmacological, psychological and psychosocial factors.

dimensions. Why design evaluation indicators in the first place? There are two reasons as follows: (1) To find out the human factors (human errors) affecting the security management of communica- tion networks from different dimensions. (2) Security evaluation usually relies on indicators. Reasonable indicators are strong sup- port of scientific, accurate and rigorous security evaluation.

Third, taking first security evaluation to judge whether risks arising from human factors are below the security threshold or not. If the security threshold is far from being achieved, corre- sponding measures need to be taken. According to behavioral science theory, human behavior is dominated by motivation, and human errors can be effectively prevented through management of human motivation [30]. Main method of managing human moti- vation is the well-known 3E rule [27].

The indicator weight is related to status and role of indicators. This paper takes the entropy weight method (EWM) to design indi- cator weight. The entropy weight method measures the amount of data information through information entropy, and designs the weight of each indicator accordingly [31]. Compared with Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) and other methods, it has stronger objec- tivity. The main calculation steps are as follows.

According to security management model, the design of secu- rity threshold is critical step. As we know, security threshold is rea- sonable standard for achieving security state [33]. The system security theory argues that security state is not absolutely safe, but the risk is controlled within security range [27]. When the security threshold is reached or exceeded, it means that security state is achieved; If the security threshold is not reached, it means that the security state is not implemented.

The core idea of 3E rules is to take corresponding countermea- sures according to results of the first evaluation. It is mainly divided into three steps. The first step is to find indicators below security threshold based on results of the first security evaluation. The second step is to take corresponding measures against these indicators according to 3E rules. The third step is to check whether implementation of measures is complete. Meanwhile, according to practice situation, it is necessary to summarize experience and enrich content of 3E rules.

There are many specific countermeasures to deal with results of the first evaluation. For example, in terms of engineering tech- niques, cloud technology should be used to strengthen the super- vision of player errors in mobile games; The linkage mechanism should be optimized to achieve harmless accidents. That is, when player errors lead to accidents, measures should be immediately taken to stop or slow down digital cultural consumption; Error- resistant designs should be added for hardware buttons or soft- ware programs in mobile games. In terms of education, education and training should be standardized for players. It is necessary to emphasize that errors should not be ignored; The digital cultural consumption content should prevent fatigue or decrease psycho- logical tension; If players are taking medicine or are sick, it is rec- ommended to play mobile games reasonably. In terms of enforcement, it is best to design certification system for game com- petitions; For players who often cause accidents related to commu- nication networks, it is best to interview the reasons or form blacklist management system. In short, there are many counter- measures under the 3E rules, But these countermeasures should not violate public order, good customs and legal systems. These better not hinder players from enjoying digital cultural consumption.

The criteria to fix the threshold value from 3E rules is very crit- ical and important. 3E rules are mainly three operational steps and the focus is on the execution of the steps. However, how can the security threshold be reached during execution? Based on the security management model, this paper proposes the second secu- rity evaluation. The purpose of second security evaluation is to check whether 3E rules meet the security threshold. The second security evaluation is usually conducted after the third step of the 3E rules. Therefor, it can be concluded that the criteria to fix the threshold value from 3E rules depends on the result of second security evaluation.

The influence of players on security management of commu- nication networks is becoming more and more obvious under Metaverse. Driven by the Metaverse, players become the focus of digital cultural consumption [5]. This means that players both design and consume digital cultural con- tent through communication networks. In addition, commu- nication networks with better compatibility and interoperability may have very few technical errors. For example, security errors of communication networks caused by hardware technology is getting smaller and smaller. The final result is that the influence of players on security man- agement of communication networks is becoming more and more obvious.

This paper takes mobile games as an example, and designs the security management model from perspective of players. The rele- vant conclusions are as follows: (1) Under Metaverse, security management of communication networks in digital cultural con- sumption is increasingly influenced by players. In other words, the importance of physiological, physical, pathological, pharmaco- logical, psychological and psychosocial factors is becoming more and more prominent. (2) Security threshold is the key of security management model. This paper has designed the security thresh- management model determines whether security management reaches or exceeds security threshold. The results show that G2 = 6.70 > G1 = 5.01. It means that security threshold has been exceeded after the second security evaluation. This also confirms the validity of security management model. (4) The management of risks in communication networks is crucial. This paper designs 3E rules, involving technology optimization, administrative regula- tions, personal management. This manifests certain practical sig- nificance for the management of risks.

Wei Gao: Investigation, Project administration, Validation, For- mal analysis, Conceptualization, Data curation, Methodology, Resources, Visualization, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Lin Li: Conceptualization, Supervision. Yingchun Xue: Investigation, Funding acquisition. Yan Li: Investigation, Valida- tion, Writing - original draft. Jinlong Zhang: Investigation, Software.

