Abstract The medical practitioners analyze the electrical activity of the human heart so as to pre- dict various ailments by studying the data collected from the Electrocardiogram (ECG). A Bundle Branch Block (BBB) is a type of heart disease which occurs when there is an obstruction along the pathway of an electrical impulse. This abnormality makes the heart beat irregular as there is an obstruction in the branches of heart, this results in pulses to travel slower than the usual. Our cur- rent study involved is to diagnose this heart problem using Adaptive Bacterial Foraging Optimiza- tion (ABFO) Algorithm. The Data collected from MIT/BIH arrhythmia BBB database applied to an ABFO Algorithm for obtaining best(important) feature from each ECG beat. These features later fed to Levenberg Marquardt Neural Network (LMNN) based classifier. The results show the proposed classification using ABFO is better than some recent algorithms reported in the liter- ature.

BBB developed when there was a block along the conduc- tion path of electrical pulses in the heart. BBB makes it diffi- cult for the heart to pump blood effectively through the heart circulatory system because the impulse deviates from the preferred path. This delay may be observed through the changes in the ECG. There are two types of BBB : Left Bundle Branch Block (LBBB) and Right Bundle Branch Block lyzing the cardiac abnormalities. The diagnosis of the heart diseases by the physicians done by following a standard rule set (changes). In this project, our aim was to automate the above procedure so that it leads to correct diagnosis of the ail- ment of BBB. Good performance depends on the efficient and accurate detection of ECG features. Here in this paper ABFO technique used as the feature extraction (optimization) technique.

Chemotaxis: The movement of E. coli bacterium can be explained via two steps, Swimming and Tumbling, through the flagella. Basically, the E. coli bacteria will move in 2 alternative ways. It will swim for an amount of time within the same direction, or it will tumble (change direction). It will alternate between these 2

Here we have taken the deviation in the last chemotaxis step and is multiplied with the previous step-size. The multi- plier increases or reduces the step-size accordingly. X for the next step, is obtained by adding the step size to the previous value.

In the year 2002 Passino designed BFO algorithm to reduce the size of population by mimicking the behavioral model (forag- ing strategy) of E. coli bacteria present in our inter-stain. The matrix below shows that there are N bacteria each having six features. By using ABFO algorithm [31,32,35] the size of fea- tures can be reduced by taking the features with good fitness strategy only.

