respectively, listed in the order of accuracy, loss, validation accuracy, validation loss, recall, precision, and F1- score. Comparisons with other state-of-the-art models using the same datasets demonstrated the effective per- formance of the predictive model. The results suggest that RNN models, particularly GRU and LSTM, can be effective for detecting PF OA, and the specific RNN architecture used can have a significant impact on performance.

The internal structure of GRU shows that It only has two gates, without the output gate and internal memory as in LSTMs with three gates. In an LSTM, an update gate connects the input and target gates, but GRU reset gates are directly connected to the previous hidden state [13]. Through the input and target gates, the reset gate in LSTM can be obtained.

tence spectrum, to the 1D sEMG signal of knee muscles. The objective was to detect knee abnormality by straightening the knee and obtaining 2D projected images that were input into a convolutional neural network (CNN) model. The experiments were conducted using 10-fold cross-validation, with the number of kernels increasing as the model layers grew. The fully connected layers were adjusted based on the loss value, and the hyper-parameters of the dropout parameters and ReLU activation function were tuned for optimal performance. The re- searchers used the same public EMG dataset in Lower Limb as in their manuscript. Their findings indicate that the scalogram image repre- sentation outperformed the spectrogram and persistence spectrum in detecting knee abnormality, with a maximum accuracy of 84%.

Bansal et al. [16] aimed to investigate significant differences in the movements associated with knee muscles, gait, leg extension from a seated position, and leg flexion upwards in regular and abnormal sEMG data. To achieve this, they employed a range of machine learning techniques such as iforest, KNN, and boosting algorithms to enhance classifier accuracy and predict the three distinct movements for normal and abnormal sets of data. The researchers started by denoising and filtering the sEMG data. They used the same public EMG dataset in Lower Limb that was utilized in their manuscript, achieving an accuracy rate of 85% without implementing anomaly detection techniques, as was also done in our model.

Zhu et al. [17] investigated the effect of sEMG preprocessing and prediction on walking data collected from 10 adults (five males and five females). They performed preprocessing analysis using bandpass/prin- cipal components and independent components. Then they imported the processed data into support vector regression for training and predic- tion. A machine learning support vector regression is based on statistical (walk). They implemented recognition using an LSTM deep learning model best suited to motion detection based on studying the sEMG and intrinsic joint properties from a temporal perspective, utilising LSTM memory cells that can access and keep data for long periods of time. Their model achieved an accuracy of nearly 99%, with the drawback that the model was only experimented on and trained on healthy people. Additionally, patient sEMG data may not be comprehensive and should be thought of as adapting to various walking environments.

Li et al. [19] researched the relationship between joint movement and surface electromyography (sEMG), creating a valid reference for exoskeleton control. During normal adult walking, the sEMG and the associated movement of the knee were measured. A random forest with principal component analysis (RFPCA) was used to establish the model for knee movement in sEMG.

The estimated model RFPCA was compared to a back propagation neural network with principal component analysis to validate their findings (BPPCA). RFPCA was found appropriate for all experiment participants and takes less time to execute. RFPCA had a mean square error of about 5, which was lower than BPPCA, which had errors ranging from 7 to 25. The researchers concluded that the RFPCA approach for estimating knee movement from sEMG is practical and might be employed for exoskeleton control and motion analysis.

Khowailed and Abotabl [22] introduced the neural muscular acti- vation detection (NMAD) framework, which uses deep learning to identify muscle activation. Not only does the proposed method greatly enhance the time detection accuracy, but it can also adapt to varying levels of interference and signal-to-noise ratio due to its training nature. The key notion is that, rather than relying exclusively on heuristic as- pects of the sEMG signal to predict activation timing, an artificial neural network can be trained to do so. Because the sEMG signal is time series, a recurrent neural network (RNN) is a good candidate for determining the timing of muscle activity. The findings suggest that a properly trained RNN can outperform state-of-the-art algorithms in terms of accuracy. Furthermore, the trained neural network can work reliably in a wide range of SNR and cross-talk conditions.

For studying the continuous estimation of sEMG of knee joint angle, Liu et al. [24] suggested predicting knee angle using a convolutional neural network (CNN) model. Normal walking studies were conducted with a six-channel sEMG acquisition device and an optical motion cap- ture system to determine the actual and intended knee angle. The sug- gested model includes two other neural network models: the convolutional neural network (CNN) and the backpropagation neural network (BPNN). Their results reached the BPNN and the CNN models, which can predict knee angles with greater accuracy.

This is what the interpretation of these procedures is supposed to accomplish. Multiplying ct and ft, for example, is a method of erasing irrelevant data from the carried data flow. In the meantime, it, and ot, give current information, updating the carry track with new data [14].

while TN demonstrates the falsity of the expected cases and their real output. The predicted cases are confirmed by FP, but the actual output is demonstrated to be erroneous. Finally, FN demonstrates that while the actual output is correct, the predicted cases are false. Arguments are calculated for knee abnormalities against normal ones [37].

variables onto a real case associated with the study. It includes various terms around the difference between determined and real- world values for data samples. The objective is either to minimize a loss function or its opposite, which is to be maximized [38]. The loss function can be calculated based on a quadratic function, commonly called the Mean Squared Error (MSE) technique. The

into normal numbers for computation. When using cross-entropy loss instead of mean squared error loss, models with sigmoid and softmax outputs perform better than those that suffer from saturation and poor learning. The forecast of a short-term vs. long-term prediction model is contrasted in time series classification problems using cross-entropy loss. When one class has a significantly higher probability, cross- entropy loss results in a significant penalty [40].

Simple RNN model performs moderately well, with a validation accu- racy ranging from 0.687 to 0.943 depending on the variant. The models by Ibraheem et al. and Bansal et al. perform less well, with validation accuracies ranging from 0.837 to 0.858. These results suggest that the use of RNN models, particularly GRU and LSTM, can be effective for this task, and that careful selection of the specific RNN architecture can have a significant impact on performance.

Zhu M, Guan X, Li Z, Gao Y, Zou K, Gao X, Wang Z, Li H, Cai K, Prediction of knee trajectory based on surface electromyogram with independent component analysis combined with support vector regression, Int J Adv Robotic Systems, vol. 19, p. 172988062211196, July 2022.

versity in Egypt. She currently works as the Executive Manager of the E-Learning Center at Kafrelsheikh University. She participated in refereeing at the International Space Apps Challenge 2020 and 2021, in addition to training for digital transformation as a certified trainer.

Saleh Naif Almuayqil : received the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the Faculty of Computing and Digital Technologies, Staffordshire University, U.K. Since 2018, he has been the Chair of the Information Systems Department. He is currently an Assistant Pro- fessor with the College of Computer and Information Sciences, Jouf University, Saudi Arabia. He has published scientific articles in various national and international journals and conferences. His current interests include health informatics, knowledge discovery, knowledge management, digital transformation, and data science.

A. A. Abd El-Aziz have completed Ph.D. degree in June 2014 in Information Science & Technology department from Anna University, Chennai-25, India. He has received B.Sc., and Master of Computer Science in 1999 and 2006 respectively from Faculty of Science, Cairo University. Now, he is an Associate Professor in the FGSSR, Cairo University, Egypt.

Medhat A. Tawfeek received the B.Sc., M.Sc. and PhD in Computer Science from Menoufia University, Faculty of Computers and Information in 2005, 2010 and 2015 respectively. He is presently an assistant professor in the department of Computer Science, Faculty of Computers and Information, Menoufia University, Egypt. He also holds the same position in in the department of Computer Science, College of Computer and Information Sciences, Jouf University, KSA. His research interest includes cloud computing, internet of things, smart card security, machine learning, distributed system, and fault tolerance.

Fatma M. Talaat: Machine Learning Department, Faculty of Artificial Intelligence, Kafrelsheikh University, Kafrelsheikh, Egypt. She received a B. Sc. in Computers and Systems Engineering. She got the PhD degree in fog computing. She got the master degree in the area of the security in network based applications. She is currently an Assistant Professor in the Faculty of Artificial Intelligence, Kafrelsheikh University.

