The Radon transform [7] is based on the properties of integrals taken along straight lines through an object. The continuous space Radon projective trans- formation has an inversion formula that permits close approximation of the shape of an arbitrary object given a sufficiently representative set of discrete, sampled projections (for example, x-ray transmission profiles) of that object. The Discrete Radon Transform (DRT) operates on arbitrary objects em- bedded in a discrete rather than continuous space. An image I(x, y) maps to its DRT, R(t, m), where I is a discrete object sampled at regular locations x and y, and R is a set of digital projections with translates t and angles m, with x, y, t and m integers. A general definition of the DRT was developed by Beylkin [1] for discrete rectangular arrays of arbitrary integer size. Beylkin de- veloped an exact algebraic formalism for the discrete projection and inversion process, established a connection between the DRT and the discrete Fourier transform (both processes are 1:1 mappings of the original discrete set) and provided an efficient algorithm for its computation. Beylkin also included the possibility of the projections being taken along curved as well as straight paths. The addition of curved path projections is an essential extension when inverting projections from seismic imaging, where rays experience significant refraction, such as also occurs in ultrasound CT. Beylkin also foreshadowed the implementation of filtering and other spatial operations in 2D or higher spaces by computation of these properties in the DRT space. The Radon transform shares much in common with the Hough transform used to segment lines or shapes in digital images and the DRT is strongly related to discrete representations of straight lines used for a discretised version of the Hough

The DRT properties are illustrated here by a 2D example (for higher di- mensions, the 2D plane can be mapped to a torus [8]). The conventional DRT works on prime p sized arrays and was developed to project the discrete elements (pixels) of digital images. When considering real, discrete atomic systems rather than digital images, the value at each array site may be inter- preted in several (multispectral) ways; as some numeric property of the array at that point (for example, the local electron density), or as a (constant) label to denote the type of atomic species at each site, or as a binary value (for filled/vacant lattice sites).

tion P , the digital image I, and the digital projection R, of the same object. The link between I and R is exactly 1:1 and invertible, so that information about the image I (such as the total variance) is distributed (usually non- uniformly) across R, the set of digital projections. O is not unique for any given set of discrete projections P , but P can be made sufficiently representa- tive to make I a close approximation of O. It is possible to map exactly from R to P but mapping from P to R is, like mapping from P to I or from O to I, a lossy process that depends on the details of the continuous to discrete mapping.

The ym values, as denominators in (2) and (4), produce cycles of length mod(ym) in the terms that contribute to each d2 value. For example, the hexagonal solutions for d2 = 19 have ym = 2, 3 and 5, so that the net period- icity of f (19) as a function of p is 2  3  5 = 30. For p = 408, the 32 values of m contributing to d2 = 289= 172 include 16 degenerate pairs of m values, corresponding to xm : ym = 17 : 17. These are generated because 17 is a prime factor of 408.

