Bioactive compounds are extracted from aromatic, toxic, and medicinal plants in pure or crude forms were considered recently as effective agents in controlling bacterial and fungal pathogens. Review of literature and the examination of botanicals against Can- dida species were significantly increased in the last decade [11,12]. The population of the Indian subcontinent has been traditionally using many plants as medicine for treatment of several microbial infections.

was subjected to crude extract preparation using Soxhlet appara- tus (Sigma Soxhlet Mantle, Tamil Nadu, India). Distilled water and ethyl acetate (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) were used as sol- vents. Crude extracts were concentrated under reduced vacuum and stored for further analysis.

C. albicans (NCIM 3471), C. tropicalis (NCIM 3118), and C. glab- rata (NCIM 3236) were obtained from National Collection of Indus- trial Microorganisms (NCIM), National Chemical Laboratory, Maharashtra, India, and used for anticandidal analysis. A primarily anticandidal test was carried out for aqueous, ethyl acetate extracts, and fractioned compound by well-diffusion method as described by Magaldi et al. [17]. Yeast was inocula prepared from 18-h-old mother cultures. Yeast inocula were spread on petri dishes containing Sabouraud dextrose agar and wells were made using a sterile cork borer. Extracts and fractioned compound were dissolved in sterile 4% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Thereafter, 100, 200, 400, and 800 mg extracts and fractions were loaded on the

About 179 mg dry weight of the residue was obtained from identified fractions. Fractionated compound was crystal in nature and green in color, soluble in all organic solvents. The Rf value of this compound was 0.37 in toluene/ethyl acetate (4:1) in mobile phase.

In recent years, the number of researches focused on drug development from plant sources to treat infectious has notably increased. This plant material has been used in various biological studies [19,20]. Among all the properties, antifungal activity has received the most attention. Candida species are normal flora, harmless yeast-like fungi in healthy humans, but they can cause infections in skin and mucosal membranes under immune- compromised situations [21]. In this study, we evaluated the anti- candidal activity of C. collinus leaf extracts and its fractions.

