e.g. [2,3] and shape, e.g. [4]. A comparative study of some CBIR works is reported in [5]. Unfortunately, users are still usually unsatisfied with results answered by actual CBIR sys- tems, owing to the semantic gap problem. Indeed, there is a gap between the relevance notion from the user viewpoint and the automatic relevance of the system. For improving results given by a CBIR system, one must, therefore then, reduce the gap between the two previous cited kinds of rele- vance. The relevance from the user perspective is related to what he/she has in his/her mind about his/her needs, whereas relevance from the system viewpoint is related to the query.

The rest of this paper is arranged as follows: Section 2 pre- sents the proposed approach. In Section 3, we discuss the con- sidered materials and settings. Section 4 shows experiments conducted and the obtained results. We conclude the paper with conclusion and some perspectives.

The execution scenario of our approach is as follows: after receiving the submitted query, the system answers by a set of images as initial results applying one matching measure. After that, the user has to designate some relevant images from those answered by the system. The first images not judged by the user are considered as non-relevant. The system will then tances: Euclidean distance, Intersection distance, Sorensen dis- tance, Kulczunsky distance, Soergel distance, Chebyshev distance, Manhattan distance, Squared distance, Mahalanobis distance, and Canberra. 3 quasi-distances are used here: X2 dis- tance, Neyman-X2 distance and Separation distance [34]. For the divergence, we use the Jeffrey divergence. All these settings

This study was focused on the paradigm of matching measure selection within the CBIR systems. The study has considered as many as 18 matching measures, including similarities, dis- tances, quasi-distances and divergences. The selection process was based on the SFS algorithm with one round and relevance feedback in order to determine the best matching measure for a specific query. As such, we introduced a novel approach to the distance-selection paradigm in the context of CBIR, rather than the classical and well-known features selection paradigm. The obtained results show that our approach yields promising results in terms of precision, recall and utility value.

