Concurrent strategies [15] are being investigated as a possible foundation for a gen- eralized domain theory, in which concurrent games and strategies take over the roles of domains and continuous functions. One motivation is to broaden the range of applicability of denotational semantics. Hence it is important to see how concurrent strategies can be adapted to quantitative semantics, to probabilistic and quantum strategies.

Just as event structures can be thought of as models of distributed computation so are probabilistic event structures models of probabilistic distributed processes. Existing definitions of probabilistic event structures [1,10,17] are not general enough to ascribe probabilities to the results of the sometimes partial interaction between strategies. This paper first presents a new workable definition of probabilistic event structures, extending existing definitions. Probabilistic event structures are char- acterized as event structures with a continuous valuation on their domain of con-

In a quantum game Player and Opponent interact to jointly create a probabilistic distributed experiment on a quantum system. Accordingly a quantum strategy is taken to be a distributed probabilistic strategy on a quantum event structure, according with work on quantum games [6]. There are similarities with the work of Delbecque [4], itself based on probabilistic HO games [3].

Without information about the stochastic rates of Player and Opponent we cannot hope to ascribe probabilities to outcomes of play in the presence of races, i.e. im- mediate conficts between moves of opposite polarities. Our results on probabilistic strategies depend on restricting to games which are race-free.

In the case of Blackwell games total strategies amount to those used traditionally. There are several reasons to consider symmetry in games, situations where dis- tinct plays are essentially similar to one another. Symmetry can help in the analysis of games, by for instance reducing the number of cases to consider. Symmetry can also help compensate for the overly-concrete nature of event structures in represent- ing games; many useful operations on games which are not monads or comonads

Discussion with Samy Abbes, Samson Abramsky, Nathan Bowler, Peter Hines, Ohad Kammar, Klaus Keimel, Mike Mislove and Prakash Panangaden has been helpful. Daniele Varacca deserves special thanks for our earlier work on probabilis- tic event structures. I gratefully acknowledge the ERC Advanced Grant ECSYM.

