This work proposes a Dynamic Epistemic Logic with Communication Actions that can be performed con- currently. Unlike Concurrent Epistemic Action Logic introduced by Ditmarsch, Hoek and Kooi [15], where the concurrency mechanism is the so called true concurrency, here we use an approach based on process calculus, like CCS and CSP, and Action Models Logic. Our approach makes possible the proof of soundness, completeness and decidability, different from the others approaches. We present an axiomatisation and show that the proof of soundness, completeness and decidability can be done using a reduction method.

Example: Consider that there are two students waiting for a message from a teacher to send back the homework and that one student does not know if the other received or responded the message. To represent this we need to model the following actions: teacher sending the message (send action), each student receiving (receive action) and responding (response action) the message independently. We also need to guarantee that: the receive action can not be performed before the send action, the response action can not be performed before the receive action and the students actions can be performed concurrently. Can we model this using Action Models Logic? Since this is a very small example one can argue that this can done by using pre conditions and non deterministic choice to model all the possible paths. Now imagine the same situation with 100 students. It would be not so easy to model.

This work proposes a way to deal with concurrency and communication with Dynamic Epistemic Logic. We use an approach based on action models and process calculus, like CCS and CSP, which allow us to prove soundness, completeness and decidability. Different from [15], that implements concurrency on top of Epistemic Action Logic, we extends Action Models to deal with concurrency and communica- tion. The proofs of soundness, completeness and decidability can be done using a reduction method.

In sections 2, 3 and 4 we give a brief introduction to Multi-agent Epistemic Logic, Action Model Logic and Concurrent Dynamic Epistemic Logic. Next we present the Dynamic Epistemic Logic that we propose in this paper. The last section is the conclusion.

Let A = {1, ..., n}, denoted by i, j..., be a finite set of agents, AMS={a1, a2, a3 .. .}  be  a  finite  set  of  action  models  and  N   =

Now, we introduce the Expansion Law, which is very important in the definition of the semantic and in the axiomatisation of our logic. We present a particular case of the Expansion Law, which is suited to our needs. The most general case of the Expansion Law is presented in [9].

