Conclusions: E. coli is the most predominant bacteria isolated from bladder cancer patients. Both CK-20 and UPII have different expression levels for both benign and malignant cases. Combined use of UPII and CK-20 may be a promising noninvasive tool for the detection of bladder cancer in urine for patients who have both symptoms of UTI and cancer.

cystoscopic examination of the bladder coupled with voided urine cytology. High attention is focused on bladder cancer early detection and follow up using urine markers. The marker must be sensitive and specific to detect free cancer cell in urine and quantitatively describing cancer progression [10e14].

Uroplakins are the integral protein subunits of the urothelial plaques. One of these uroplakins is uroplakin II (UP-II). It is readily detected by immunohistochemistry in urothelial car- cinomas, but not in non-urothelial tumors [16,17]. UPII expression is not strictly correlative with low pathological grade, despite its being the terminal differentiation products of normal urothelium [18]. So, UP-II can be an excellent marker particularly when combined with other urothelium-restricted markers in the differential diagnosis of bladder cancer [19].

Two early morning voided urine samples of about 50e100 ml were collected from 20 bladder cancer and 15 UTI patients admitted to the Urology and Nephrology Center, Mansoura University and from ten normal volunteers. These samples were collected in sterile tightly locked containers after aseptic precautions during obtaining the samples. One sample was collected for bacterial culture, the other was obtained for quantification of gene expression using Real Time PCR.

The collected samples were cultured on C.L.E.D agar and blood agar media (OXOID, ENGLAND). Smears of the isolated bac- teria were stained with gram stain and were examined for morphology and arrangement. Bacterial identification and characterization of the most dominant isolates from the samples using automated VITEK 2 according to manufactory instructions were carried out (bioMerieux, Marcy I'Etoile, France) [20].

rescence measurement every 15 min. The results were inter- preted by the ID-GNB database after the incubation period about 3 h. According to Shaaban, Ghozlan [21] the antimicro- bial susceptibility tests of the identified bacterial isolates were carried out using VITEK 2 antibiotic susceptibility panel cards.

was quantified using Nano Drop (Thermo scientific, USA) and its integrity was determined by 1.5% agarose gel electropho- resis and ethidium bromide staining. Only samples that were observed two RNA characteristic bands and were not degradable were used for real-time PCR (RT-PCR).

free water. The plate was inserted in real time thermal cycler (ABI PRISM 7000, Applied Biosystem, California, USA). For each sample, the procedure was carried out in triplicate. A mathematical model introduced by Pfaffl was used for the relative quantification of target genes [23].

Studying the difference of gene expression for urine samples between the three groups, and the relation between bacterial barcodes for samples and percentage of gene expression was performed. All analyses were performed using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). ROC and KaplaneMeier analysis were used to determine the cut off level of CK-19 CK-20 and UPII mRNA expression. The nonparametric Mann Whitney rank, Pearson, Spearman, Anova, Kruskal and sum U test were used for the statistical comparison of the variables between the various groups. The level of significance was determined to be less than 0.05.

It's a well-established fact that gram-negative bacteria of E. coli and K. pneumoniae are the most common pathogenic bacteria causing UTI, a finding that entirely agree with our results. The current results also pointed out that E. coli is the most com- mon uropathogenic bacteria, which infects bladder cancer patients. This finding copes with the suggestion of El- Mosalamy, Salman [7] that urinary bladder infection by E. coli may play a major additive and synergistic role during bladder carcinogenesis. It is known that inflammation facili- tates initiation and progression of malignancy through pro- duction of inflammatory oxidants [24]. In our study we found a

Results of antimicrobial susceptibility pattern of E. coli isolates revealed that E. coli isolates were highly sensitive to Imipenem and Amikacin (100%). However, high resistance rate was reported for amoxicillin/clavulanate, followed by trimethoprim/sulphamethoxazole and then other drugs. Debnath, Das [25] reported that the E. coli resistance rates for nitrofurantoin, amikacin, amoxycillin/clavulanic, ciprofloxa- cin and piperacillin/tazobactum were 4%, 13%, 17%, 50% and 50%, respectively. Therefore, these results are somewhat different from these of the present study. The possible reason for this disagreement may be due to the difference in geographical location, population response or misuse of antibiotic in our locality.

Early diagnosis of bladder cancer is mandatory because any delay in treatment has been shown to affect progression. At present, cystoscopic examination and urine cytology remain the primary methods for the initial evaluation of the lower urinary tract lesions to rule out bladder cancer. How- ever, cystoscopy is invasive and may be ineffective in patients with an indwelling catheter or active inflammation due to the presence of abnormal appearance of the bladder mucosa, whereas cytology has low sensitivity in low-grade papillary disease. Additional lab-based markers are needed to aid in the evaluation of these lesions [8]. Genetic marker development represents a promising direction for the diagnosis of bladder cancer [27]. Highly sensitive real-time RT-PCR has already shown its ability to differentiate between malignant and benign tissue and also to determine the stage and grade of tumor tissue [28].

cells. In our study, CK20 is only expressed in BC group, with no false positive results. This absolutely agrees with immuno- logical and northern blot studies found that CK20 expression was restricted primarily to gastrointestinal tissue, urothelial cell carcinoma and merkel cells [32]. In the current study, there was a statistically significant difference in CK-20 mRNA level among BC, UTI and control groups. This finding is

consistent with the results of Guo, Luo [32]. Other studies have shown sensitivities ranging from 65% to 90% and specificities ranging from 67% to 90% for CK-20 mRNA [27]. On the other hand, some authors reported that CK-20 has a very low specificity [33]. Our results demonstrated that there was a statistically significant decrease in CK-20 mRNA level in BC patients with respect to bacterial infection and there was a significant correlation of CK-20 expression with tumor stage. Similarly, El-Salahy [15] reported a significant correlation be- tween CK-20 mRNA expression and tumor stage. However, there was no correlation with the tumor grade in the present study, a finding which is not coping with the results of El- Salahy [15] but is coping with Pu, Wang [8].

We found the overall sensitivity of UPII was 63.1% and specificity was 100%. Its sensitivity in transitional cell carci- noma was 90% in our study. This copes with the suggestion that UPII is a highly specific marker for human TCC [17]. These results agree with those of (Kurahashi, Hara [34]) who reported that UPII mRNA was reliable in early detection of bladder cancer metastasis by testing its level in tissue and blood. We found no significant correlation between UPII mRNA expres- sion level and tumor grade or stage.

E. coli are the most predominant bacterial isolates among bladder cancer patients. CK-19 urine marker has low speci- ficity for bladder cancer detection. But CK-20 and UPII urine markers show high specificity as they have different expres- sion level in benign and malignant states. Combined use of UPII and CK-20 could represent a promising noninvasive tool for the detection of bladder cancer in urine for patients who have both symptoms of UTI and cancer. So further studies e with large individuals number e on the reliability of the combination of these two markers are recommended.

Kurahashi T, Hara I, Oka N, Kamidono S, Eto H, Miyake H. Detection of micrometastases in pelvic lymph nodes in patients undergoing radical cystectomy for focally invasive bladder cancer by real-time reverse transcriptase-PCR for cytokeratin 19 and uroplakin II. Clin Cancer Res 2005;11(10):3773e7.

