shear strength distribution. The results of the parametric runs conducted are presented in the form of graphical charts where high and low embedment and lateral friction factors can be read-off for any selected pair of mean shear strength and COV. Similar trends are observed in the charts for all pipelines evaluated. It is found that the range of normalized embedment, z/D, increases with increasing COV and decreases with increasing mean shear strength for all pipelines tested. A similar trend is observed for the residual horizontal resistance. The expected range of peak horizontal resistance Hpeak/V shows the same trend but only for soils with mean strengths less than 4 kPa. For soils with higher mean strengths, the range of Hpeak/V is found to be mostly insensitive to variations in COV and further increases in the mean strength.

design methodologies. Focus has been on identifying key factors and mechanisms which lead to the as-observed embedment in the field and to the formation of lateral buckles (i.e. their spacing and geometry) along given pipeline routes. These have culminated in the development of best practice methods and models for design applications.

Lateral buckling is very sensitive to both the pipe-soil interaction and to features of the as-laid route geometry such as the out-of-straightness and presence of trigger sites (i.e. pipeline segments where soil conditions and/or pipe geometry are particularly favorable to the formation of buckles either naturally or by design). A number of models have been proposed to predict the embedment of pipelines resting on clay seabed.

The PIPESTAB project conducted by SINTEF [27] and projects lead by the American Gas Association/Pipeline Research Committee developed models for use in clays. Models based on empirical evidence were pro- posed [12,26] and used widely. The HOTPIPE project initiated in 1996 and the SAFEBUCK Joint Industry Project initiated in 2002 have culminated in the development and updates of design and best practice guidelines in the oil and gas industry.

Finite element analysis and plasticity theory have been used to develop models to predict pipeline embedment under combined hori- zontal and vertical (V-H) loads [13,17,23]. Methods to account for the influence of the soil self-weight and local heave effects were also developed [7,16]. The changes to embedment resulting from large lateral movement of the pipeline were investigated [28].

The methodologies developed are deterministic in nature. None- theless, it is necessary in the design process to account for variability in the numerous input parameters. The inherent variability in the shear strength of soil along a pipeline route can significantly contribute to the overall variability in the design parameters. The inherent variability in the undrained shear strength of a seabed soil can be estimated by sample collection and testing of soils along the planned route and is routinely determined as part of the geotechnical survey. In practice, the high and low estimates of shear strength are selected based on experience but are often arbitrary. In this study the undrained remolded shear strength of a residual lateral soil resistances. This is followed by a parametric study investigating the influence of soil strength heterogeneity, expressed as a coefficient of variation, COV, on the calculated embedment and ulti- mately the lateral friction factors (peak and residual) of a pipeline resting on a clay seabed. A PSI calculation tool developed for this pur- pose and written in the R code language has been used in the analysis. Verification of this code is established by comparing calculated embedment and horizontal resistances with those reported from centrifuge model tests and from theoretical methods. The results of the parametric study are evaluated for selected pipeline size and shear strength ranges. The script for the PSI-lateral code is provided in the Appendix. It may be used by those in the industry and researchers who wish to conduct their own sensitivity studies on project specific soil and pipeline properties.

Extensive structural analyses must be performed during the design stage (with the aid of probabilistic, analytic and finite element tools) to assess whether global buckling will lead to excess stress loading at critical points (i.e. at buckle locations, connection spools and sub-sea structures) or to cumulative fatigue damage over the design life. Miti- gation measures may then be incorporated into the design at locations where it is deemed necessary.

The potential range of end expansions and strains developed in the buckles need to be determined by considering friction factors based on the full realistic range of pipeline and soil input properties. Low estimate (LE), best estimate (BE), and high estimate (HE) values of each PSI parameter are used in buckling and walking analysis to capture the ef- fect of geotechnical variability and uncertainty along the given route [31]. It has been shown, however, that use of LE, BE and HE values of soil strength in deterministic calculations to identify the range of rele- vant breakout friction factors can lead to an over- or under-estimation of the actual range. Furthermore, because of the non-linearity of the rela- tionship between soil properties, pipe embedment and lateral resistance, analyses based on arbitrary combinations of LE, BE and HE soil pa- rameters, may not capture the extreme values of the PSI parameters that are actually possible [32,35].

Inspection of as-laid pipeline embedment are conducted routinely to verify that the embedment values predicted in the design phase are in fact valid. Improved prediction of pipeline embedment is critical to narrowing the range of pipe-soil responses obtained [4]. A number re- finements to embedment calculations have been developed. These include (i) methods to account for the dynamic effects of the installation process and (ii) methods to account for strength changes arising from the

Large deformation finite element methods have been used with shear strengths modified for strain rate and softening to study pipe-soil interaction during vertical embedment [7]. It has been found that if both strain rate and softening effects are taken into account, the computed response is a good match with centrifuge data as reported by [9]. It has also been found that water entrainment can increase the soil sensitivity significantly compared to the fully remolded strength measured without water entrainment [24].

Field observation studies show that there is considerable variation in the embedment along a pipeline route. Detailed back analysis of as-laid pipeline embedment in soft clayey soil (strength gradients ranging from 0.425 to 0.947 kPa/m) have been conducted along a 45 km long pipeline route in the Bengal Bay [37]. The four sections of the route evaluated showed that 80% of the measurements of non-dimensional embedment (z/D) were between upper and lower limit ranges of 0.475 and 0.830 depending on route section properties. The values reported were noted to correspond to good weather lay conditions. It was also found that the remolded soil resistance to the pipeline during the dynamic laying

Comparison of calculated and as-observed field embedment values have shown that the latter approach provides reasonable estimates of field embedment values for pipelay occurring during average weather conditions. This approach has been found to over-predict values of embedment in the case of pipelay occurring in very calm weather con- ditions and under-predict values of embedment during pipelay in extreme weather conditions and in pipelay conditions associated with down time events [29,30]. In summary, use of the remolded shear strength in place of the undisturbed strength allows for an improved estimation of pipeline penetration as-observed in the field.

After installation the soil supporting the pipeline will begin to consolidate under the submerged (usually empty) weight of the pipeline. The shear strength of these near seabed clays is in the order of a few kilopascals and they typically have liquidity indices larger than one. Hence, any change in the consistency due to consolidation can signifi- cantly impact the pipe-soil interaction. There is a time lapse between installation of the pipeline and hydrotest phase. This period typically lasts for several months or more, and hence there is sufficient time for the soil to reconsolidate under the as-installed submerged weight of the pipeline. Further embedment of the pipeline may occur during the hydrotest phase if the increase in the submerged weight of pipeline due to flooding is significant. It was proposed [4] that calculation of addi- tional pipeline embedment (associated with the increased load during related to the soil berm pushed in front of the pipeline. The second term is a frictional component and the third term captures the passive self- weight resistance from the soil ahead of the pipe. Alternative models for calculating the lateral residual resistance are provided by [3] and [6].

In order to achieve this, an R code was developed to perform the PSI calculations based on the mathematical model and best practice guide- lines as described in section 3. The results obtained from the developed code, PSI-Lateral, have been verified using published data from the literature. This verification is for calculated embedment values as well as for calculated peak and residual resistances. The verified code, PSI- Lateral, was then used to conduct a parametric study to evaluate the impact of strength variability on the lateral response of pipelines of different diameters and weights. Details for all of these steps are described in the following sections.

The R coding language has been selected as the source code for PSI- Lateral. It is one of the most popular open source programming lan- guages for statistical computing. It is an interpreted language, so the R code can easily be run in different platforms without any need for compilation.

The single most important variable impacting the degree of hori- zontal resistance (peak or residual) that may be developed, is the pipeline embedment. Since horizontal resistance is sensitive to embed- ment it is important to ensure that estimates of embedment are as ac- curate as possible and conform to accepted best practice. For this reason, the PSI-Lateral script for embedment is validated against two types of data published in the literature. These include lab data obtained from centrifuge tests and as-laid pipeline embedment obtained from field surveys. Since the calculation methods are nonlinear and involve solu- tions based on iterative procedures, it is good practice to ensure that the code runs correctly and produces expected results. Verification has been used by the authors as a reality check for the developed code and is provided here for the benefit of interested users.

The embedment results from PSI-Lateral fall within the range bounded by the minimum and maximum observed embedment in the field for all four pipe sections. For pipe sections 2 and 4 the calculated values lie very close to the reported average value. This good match is an indication that the calculated embedment is a good predictor of the as- laid field embedment.

an initial pipe embedment of about 0.43 pipe diameters. Note that the horizontal resistance to movement, H (measured as a force per unit length of pipe), is normalized using the undrained shear strength of the soil at the pipe invert times the pipe diameter. As the pipe is pushed laterally, a peak resistance is observed (associated with the development of suction pressures behind the pipe) followed by a sharp decrease in resistance and a gradual rising of the pipe to a normalized embedment of about 0.25 pipe diameters. The horizontal bearing capacity solutions derived by Merrifield et al. (2008) for smooth and rough pipes are also shown and appear to be in good agreement with the peak normalized resistance observed at low horizontal displacement of the pipe.

initial normalized embedment of 0.43, is in good agreement with the peak measured resistance reported by [9]. The calculated normalized residual resistance is less than that observed by experiment in the centrifuge device but is, as expected, significantly lower than the peak value.

values of k and COV. Hence, in this study where the maximum COV is 37.5%, the minimum k is 2 kPa/m and the maximum k is 8 kPa/m, the extreme values of suLE and suHE that have been evaluated are 0.5 kPa/m and 14 kPa/m respectively.

Calculated parameters in PSI-Lateral include the submerged weight of the pipeline at installation (i.e. empty weight), Wi, and the section modulus, I, based on the chosen pipe outer diameter and wall thickness. The lay tension is calculated for typical values of the hang-off angle and

There is a significant time lag between the installation of a pipeline and its operation. During this period there is time for (i) any excess pore pressures developed during installation to dissipate, (ii) the soil to consolidate under the additional load of the submerged weight of the pipe and (iii) soil setup to occur. As a result, the shear strength of the soil at the time the pipeline is operational is expected to be higher than that mobilized during the installation stage. This operational strength may be higher or lower than the original in-situ undisturbed shear strength of the soil and is dependent on the submerged weight of the pipeline and consolidation characteristics of the soil.

In the PSI-Lateral code, the undisturbed shear strength at the depth of the pipe invert is used in calculating the lateral resistances. For the purposes of this study, the shear strength relevant at the time of oper- ation is taken to be a multiple of its remolded shear strength at instal- lation. This multiplier, su_sur_ratio, is used to express the general strength gain that occurs in this time period. It can be likened to the soil sensitivity (ratio of undisturbed strength to remolded strength), but is not necessarily limited to the original undisturbed shear strength (since the final shear strength may be higher due to consolidation effects).

In this section, the methodology used in this study has been pre- sented. First, the PSI-Lateral code that has been developed for this study has been discussed (section 4.1). Then the calculated embedment values from PSI-Lateral have been verified against published case studies in the literature (section 4.2). The calculated monotonic lateral resistances (both peak and residual) have been verified against centrifuge model test results (section 4.3). Finally, the details of the parametric study that has been conducted using PSI-Lateral has been presented (section 4.4).

In order to be able to compare different cases, the results of the calculations are presented in non-dimensional units. Hence the embed- ment of the pipeline is presented as the normalized embedment (z/D), and the horizontal resistances are presented as pipeline friction factors. The friction factor is a design parameter used in the evaluation of the stability of on-bottom pipelines. It is the expected resistance of the soil to the movement of the pipeline expressed as a ratio of the submerged weight of the pipeline itself. The friction factors for lateral displacement which include the peak (or breakout) resistance (Hpeak/V) and the re- sidual resistance (Hres/V), are evaluated in this study.

PIL value decreases with increasing value of mean k. This means that the range of embedment values becomes narrower as the mean shear strength of the soil increases. These two trends are consistent for all pipe weight-diameter combinations and mean soil strength gradients analyzed.

The Hres/V value is a function of only the normalized embedment. Hence, the changes in PIL for the residual horizontal resistance follows the same trend observed for PIL values for normalized embedment. The only difference is that the change in PIL for Hres/V value is of a smaller magnitude (i.e. the change is less steep) than the changes observed in PIL for z/D. Hence it may be stated that the range of Hres/V values corre-

The embedment of on-bottom subsea pipelines installed in deep water clay seabed is a complex geotechnical problem influenced by many parameters including the installation water depth, lay conditions (i.e. sea state), pipeline stiffness and weight, soil stiffness and stress concentrations at the touchdown point. This makes it difficult to readily identify how shear strength variability impacts design variables such as the horizontal peak and residual resistances and the respective friction factors.

The buckling of deep water HPHT pipelines is greatly impacted by the mobilized shearing resistance of seabed clays in the top half meter of the seabed. Typically, these clays have low shear strength. Sampling and testing at intervals along a pipeline route can provide data for estimating the inherent variability that exists along that route. In PSI studies the embedment and friction factors (axial and lateral) for a given pipe-soil combination are evaluated. Typically, variability in shear strength is taken into account by conducting additional analyses using LE and HE strength profiles with the corresponding PSI parameters also labeled as LE and HE values. However, this approach can lead to an over- or un- derestimation of the range of PSI parameters. It has been demonstrated that calculations combining simultaneous onerous extreme values of input parameters tend to produce PSI parameter limits that are widely varied (yet extremely unlikely) which can lead to overly conservative design solutions [32].

inherent variability in terms of COV of undrained shear strength, as measured in field vane shear tests, was shown to range from 4% to 44% with a mean value of 24% [20]. The typical range of variability for undrained shear strength obtained from good-quality direct laboratory or field measurements was reported to range from 10 to 30% COV (considered low variability) [19]. The COV values used in this study range from 5% to 37.5%. This range encompasses, to a large extent, the above reported inherent variability of undrained shear strength of clays as measured in laboratory and field tests.

Alternatives to this deterministic approach are the use of probabi- listic methods such as the Monte Carlo-based simulation approach [14,15,25,32] which provide a more rigorous way to handle the un- certainty. In the probabilistic methods the input variables are treated as random variables with statistical distributions. Any identified correla- tion between input variables may also be incorporated in the calculation.

3.05 kN/m2. The PSI-Lateral code may be used to develop project spe- cific charts for making quantitative assessments. The PSI-Lateral code may also be incorporated in Monte Carlo analyses for probabilistic as- sessments of global buckling or used as a research tool for other pipeline related studies.

parameters and follows the state-of-the-art recommended procedure in industry guidelines. This code has been used to conduct a parametric analysis for determining the influence of the variability of undrained shear strength (expressed by the COV) on the embedment and the peak and residual friction factors (Hpeak/V and Hres/V) of on-bottom subsea pipelines. Three selected pipeline diameters and 9 pipeline nominal weights were evaluated to determine the prediction interval lengths of the three design parameters (z/D, Hpeak/V and Hres/V) for mean shear strength gradients varying from 2 to 8 kPa/m and COV ranging from 5% to 37.5%. The parametric study conducted and the charts developed allow a systematic (and visual) evaluation of how changes in mean shear strength and COV impact the design variables.

