The work aimed on the improving the refractory properties of Kankara clay (alumino-sil- icate) found in Kankara Village, Katsina State, Nigeria by blending with coal ash for the production of refractory bricks was investigated. Coal ash additions were varied from 5 to 25 wt% in the blend. Refractory properties such as: linear shrinkage, apparent porosity, bulk density, cold crushing strength and thermal shock resistance were tested. The results were compared with standard refractory properties for fireclay bricks. All the values ob- tained from the blends are within the recommended values for medium fireclay bricks. Hence, addition of coal ash to Kankara clay enhanced the refractory properties; the bricks were used in the production of heat treatment furnace with good thermal resistance.

Clay is a complex mixture, which varies in composition depending upon the geological location. It is a natural sub- stance which occurs in great abundance [4]. The origin of clay may be traced to either of the two geological processes namely sedimentation and weathering [4]. According to Chester [5] clay is a natural source of many industrial finished products. One of such products that have proved indispensable in the metallurgical industries is the refractory material [6].

The raw materials for the production of various refractory products include kaolinite (Al2O3$2SiO2$2H2O), chromite (FeOCr2O3), magnesite (MgCO3) and various types of clays. alumino-silicate and magnesite refractory products are the major types of refractories used in the metallurgical industries [7]. There are vast deposits of clay spread across every region in world, each differing from site to site on account of geological differences.

High ash in coke lowers the carbon content and also demands the use of more fluxes and hence consumes more energy for slagging. This increases coke rate and leads to lower efficiency of the metallurgical process. It has been reported that 1% in- crease in ash content in coke leads to an increase of 1.5e2% in coke rate, 1.5% in the flux rate and lowers blast furnace effi- ciency by 3e5% [12].

Earlier works on Kankara clay (alumino-silicate) as a re- fractory materials showed that it has a low refractoriness, thermal resistance and high apparent porosity [13], which are not satisfactory. Hence, there is need to improve the re- fractory properties of this clay. It is in the light of the fore- going research, that the investigation of the effects of coal ash on some refractory properties of Kankara clay was motivated.

The raw clay was soaked in water for three days and dried in open air for a week, this treatment was necessary to remove dead organic matters. The dried clay was then crushed and ground into powder using jaw crushers and pulverizing ma- chine. The ground clay was sieved to pass through sieve 300 mm aperture. The coal ash was also sieved to 100 mm sieve size.

Test samples were prepared by mixing freshly sieved clay with various percentage of coal ash between 5 and 25 wt%. The clay mixture was found to be plastic at 10% water content. The blend was packed into a metal moulding box and pressed using hydraulic press. A pressure of 10 kg/cm2 was applied to enhance homogeneity and surface smoothness of the samples.

failure using a standard rig, if failure did not occur the brick was then put back inside the furnace and heated for a period of 10 min. This cycle of heating, cooling and testing was repeated until failure occurred [16]. The number of complete cycles to produce failure in each sample was noted.

