To do so, we define a class of Petri nets, called Petri nets with counters (PNZ ). They are place/transition (P/T) Petri nets enriched with data in a global vector of integer variables, manipulated through linear transformations. The places, arcs and tokens in PNZ are like in P/T nets, while each transition carry an annotation encoding the linear transformation to perform at each firing. A PNZ can be understood as coding the control state in its places and the data state in its variables. It may also be seen as a special case of coloured Petri nets, that implement the integer variables as integer marked places. Its semantics usually leads to produce infinite reachability graphs.

A more compact state graph construction is defined next. This is made possible by detecting executions that change the data state but not the control one, and executing them as a meta-transition. The result is a compact graph in which each state possibly encodes a huge or infinite number of reachable markings.

represented as a (possibly infinite) reachability graph which is the directed graph whose nodes are all reachable markings and where each arc represents a transition and a binding producing one marking from another. In this context, the reachability graph can be considered as a compact representation of trace(N, M0). In particular, it may remain finite (i.e., have a finite number of reachable markings) even if it admits infinite traces.

We have produced a prototype implementation that computes a compacted state graph for a PNZ. The sets of integer vectors are stored using the NDD structure defined in [1] and implemented in the library Lash [2]. In some cases, our implemen- tation ends up with an error, when a transformation cannot be iterated by Lash (as explained in the introduction, this approach is not complete). Moreover, we cannot guarantee that it will terminate as this is a problem that is undecidable in general. However, sufficient conditions for the termination have been given in [1] and it is left as a future work to study how they could be applied in our setting.

