This paper suggests a combined system that use the two protocols, Kerberos and ECMQV, to enhance the security of the network and improve the energy consumption in the net- work. Beside that it increases the network speed due to mini- mizing the number of communications and calculations. The remaining part of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2, the related work, describes Lightweight Kerberos protocol with short messages and ECMQV. Section 3, explains the Combined Security System and how it is effective for wireless sensor network. Section 4, the discussion of the results com- pared with the two mentioned protocols. Finally, the paper closes with a conclusion in Section 5.

In sensor networks key establishment, the nodes set up a shared secret key after deployment, either through key trans- port or key agreement (or key exchange) [11]. In key transport protocol, an entity creates or obtains a secret key and transfers it securely to the other entity(s). On other hand in key agree- ment, all participating entities contribute a random input to derive a shared secret key. The advantage of key agreement over key transport is that entities cannot predetermine the resulting key because it depends on the input of all participants.

knows its own secret keys a, c, and the public keys S, T, U, and V. Also, B knows b, d, S, T, U, and V. The shared secret K is determined by entity A as in Algorithm 1. B also compute the same value of K by swapping (a, c, T, U, V) in Algorithm 1 with (b, d, S, V, U) [15].

A wireless sensor network can be divided into several clus- ters. Each cluster has a number of sensors nodes and one of the nodes is elected as the coordinator (head). The head is responsible for the general mission and collecting the sensed data of other nodes and routing to the sink. For that, the head energy-consumption is higher than other nodes [16]. The energy analysis of the Kerberos protocol shown in [6] is based on the assumption that entity A can directly send/re- ceive messages to/from the third party T. This is reasonable for small sensor networks, but not for large networks where the sensor nodes may be located apart from the base station. The communication energy cost of Kerberos depends on the transmit power level and on the number of intermediary nodes between A and T. Multi-hop communication between A and T increases overall energy consumption since any intermediary node has to forward the message to its neighbor

All these benefits will be gained by using the combined sys- tem and the results in experimental results section support that. Unfortunately, switching between the two protocols in layer 2, using Kerberos for communication with layer 1 and ECMQV for communication among nodes in layer 2 and for communication between layer 2 and layer 3, cause some load in this layer. But comparing to the saving in the power and enhancing the security it can be used.

This paper presented combined security system combines Lightweight Kerberos and ECMQV Protocols. The combining system takes the benefits of the two protocols. One of system benefits is enhancing the energy consumption. Saving energy means decreasing number of communications and computa- tions, and this improve the speed of the network. Another ben- efit is, using two strong protocols as Lightweight Kerberos and ECMQV improves the network security. The experimental re- sults of the system compared with energy cost of Lightweight Kerberos and ECMQV Protocols showed that, the overall en- ergy cost of using the combined system is less that using of Lightweight Kerberos or ECMQV alone. These results are based on the energy characteristics of the WINS sensor node.

