This paper introduces elementary concepts needed to define a formal, computationally oriented, model for intentional systems. First, the paper briefly reviews the central concept of intentionality, to contextualize the work. Then, it characterizes the main types of intentional acts, defines the concepts of intentional process and intentional system, and gives the basis of the formal model of such systems. Next in a brief case study, a formal model for a sample constative intentional system is presented and discussed. Following, the features that are still lacking to achieve a full-fledged formal model of intentional systems are indicated. Finally, the relationship between the formal model of intentional systems introduced here and the usual semantical models for formal languages is discussed.

The paper is structured as follows. In Sect. 2, we review the concepts of inten- tional act and intentional process, the main background concepts of the work. In Sect. 3 we introduce the formal concept of intentional system, on the basis of which we realize the formal modeling of intentional processes. Sect. 4 presents a simple case study, giving a concrete example of the applicability of the ideas presented here. Sect. 5 is the Conclusion, where some related works and some general issues are discussed.

For simplicity, we consider here intentional processes constituted only by non- empty sets with just one single act, which happens to be intentional, that is, an element of IActs. And, we take time to be discrete and linearly ordered, denoted by T = 0, 1, 2, ... .

9 We keep undetermined here the detailed specification of when one may say that a predication is true of an object and when one may say that an object (or a predication) fulfills the condition of being of a given type. See discussion in Sect. 5, regarding the latter point.

To see that, one can directly compare the scope of semantical issues tackled by the perspecive introduced here, with the scope of semantical issues tackled by the usual semantical perspectives adopted in formal language systems (for both logical language systems, see e.g. [2], and computational language systems, see e.g. [3]).

Logical semantics, even though reducing the semantical range, compared with the Husserlian semantics, still contemplates the eidetic elements that pertain to language, as one can see in the classical understanding of logical expressions in terms of connotations and denotations. The same can also be seen in the work on intensional semantics, dealing with intensions and extensions (see, e.g. [7]). Empiricist semantics, on the other hand, strives to drastically restrict language to its sole relation to objects, an option strongly criticized by Husserl [5].

