(FSR) algorithm has been explained in Section 2. Section 3 discusses proposed Energy-Aware Fisheye State Routing (EA-FSR) algorithm. The simulation set-up and various environmental parameters used are discussed in Section 4. Results have been presented and discussed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 sets the conclusion of the work done and its future scope.

time is the most critical. The lifetime of a network depends upon the energy consumption of the nodes which in turn depends upon the different tasks performed by the sensor nodes. The maximum amount of energy is consumed during the communi- cation task followed by computation and sensing respectively. Communication mechanisms that perform route selection on the basis of the residual energy of the network can improve the overall network energy thereby increasing network life time. This imposes rigorous constraints on the routing protocols [5].

To avoid the problem of energy imbalance and the forma- tion of energy holes, a new mechanism for path selection is suggested in EA-FSR. It uses the energy as the basis for selecting a neighbour node rather than the shortest path length. The energy of all the neighbouring nodes is com- pared to find the node having maximum residual energy. Then this node is selected to forward the packets. This pro- cess is performed for every node which has some packets to transmit.

The results obtained from simulations shows that the Energy- Aware Fisheye Routing (EA-FSR) performs better for varying mobility values of the sensor nodes. As there is significant in- crease in the throughput of the network. Also the overall en- ergy consumption of the network has decreased to almost 12%, ensuring longer network lifetime. But there is slight in- crease in the average end-to-end delay and jitter values. Thus this protocol can be used as a replacement for the Fisheye

In future, the energy-aware fisheye can be modified further to consume less energy and generate low control overhead by incorporating some optimisation techniques like swarm intelli- gence. Also, this protocol can further be analysed for other parameters like topological changes, change in duty cycles, etc. Also, real time environment can be used to study the ac- tual behaviour of this protocol.

