and destination. Further, the degree of reputation depends upon the rate of packets forwarded by a mobile node for its neighbour. Furthermore, the reputation level of each and every mobile node can be computed based on the first hand and sec- ond hand reputation mechanisms. In first hand reputation mechanism, the reputation level is derived through direct inter- action from the mobile node. In contrast, the second hand rep- utation approach manipulates the reputation factor of a mobile node by quantifying the information elucidated from their neighbours [1].

The remaining part of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the detailed discussion about the existing reputation based selfish node mitigation mechanisms with the shortcomings of the literature. Section 3 elaborates ERCRM approach to detect selfish nodes based on the compu- tation of estimated energy metric and exponential reliability coefficient with their corresponding algorithms and illustra- tions. Section 4 describes the exhaustive simulation study con- ducted for evaluating the performance of ERCRM approach along with its results analysis and Section 5 concludes the paper with possible future research recommendations.

Marti et al. [5] proposed a reputation mechanism which incorporates watch-dog and path-rater for effective detection and mitigation of malicious nodes present in the ad hoc net- work. This mechanism detects malicious nodes based on two levels of rating obtained through the link level and forwarding level monitored by each and every mobile node. This mecha- nism also utilizes two rating levels namely suspected rating and neutral rating for identifying misbehaving nodes. Michardi and Molva [6] have proposed a collaborative reputa- tion framework, which utilizes watch-dog as the detection component. Authors have utilized three reputation approaches viz., subjective reputation, indirect reputation and functional reputation for detecting selfish nodes. Authors also formulated a mechanism for detecting misbehaving nodes based on thresh- old level of packets dropped by a mobile node.

punishment strategies deployed in a distributed manner in each and every node. Kargl et al., [10] have contributed an evidence based mobile intrusion detection system that incorporates the capability of overhearing through an embedded secure archi- tecture called SAM. This detection mechanism utilizes a rout- ing protocol namely SDSM, that optimally decides the routing strategy through negotiation among the participating mobile nodes of the networks.

In addition, Farad and Askwith [11] proposed a Packet Conservation Monitoring Algorithm (PCMA) that aids in detecting the malicious nodes in the ad hoc scenario. This monitoring algorithm mainly targets on the detection of speci- fic type of malicious nodes from the routing path and thus enables reliable dissemination of data by increasing the overall performance of the network in terms of packet delivery ratio, throughput, total overhead and control overhead. Zouridaki et al. [12] contributed a reputation mechanism for detecting malicious nodes based on opinion metric. This opinion metric is calculated based on trust and confidence limit estimated through the statistical values obtained from the reliable deliv- ery of packets. Authors have considered both first hand and second hand reputation information for detecting maliciousness.

updated periodically whenever a packet enters or leaves nodes. This mechanism identifies the mobile node as selfish when the drop counter exceeds a threshold value. Eidenbenz et al. [19] proposed a COMMIT protocol to prevent the exploitation of network utilization. This COMMIT protocol integrates game theoretic approach with VCG payment scheme for identifying misbehaving nodes. Dehnie and Tomasin [20] contributed a cooperative MAC protocol which performs uniformly powerful test and probability ratio test. From these tests conducted, the effect of fading and interference that could result due to the presence of selfish nodes in the ad hoc environment is further analysed.

In this section, in-depth analysis of the characteristics and performance of the proposed ERCRM are studied through simulation using ns 2.26 simulator. The comparative analysis between ERCRM with the existing selfish node mitigation algo- rithms viz., PCMA, SHRCM and AODV-SELFISHNESS is investigated.

nodes present in the routing path [24]. The presence of selfish nodes in the routing path degrades the performance of the net- work by decreasing the packet delivery ratio. At the same time, it increases the packet drop rate and the number of retransmis- sions [25]. Hence the performance of the ERCRM is analysed using evaluation parameters viz., packet delivery ratio, throughput, control overhead and total overhead [26,27,7]. The definitions of these parameters are given below.

