work, it is defined as the point with the highest curvature in the fingerprint ridges [11,12]. Henry definition and forensics definitions [14] partially coincide with these definitions except that the CP is defined at the shoulder of the loop away from the delta point. The manual extracted points are always defined on a ridge. The fingerprint images are classified into five classes according to the presence of the SPs [8]. The left loop and the right loop contain one core and one delta point. The whorl type contains two cores and two delta points. The arch type is classified into three subclasses. The tented arch contains one core and one delta points. The up-thrust arch contains no loop, but there is a small sudden change in the ridges. The plain arch does not contain any SPs.

There are several categories of the SP detection methods [8], where the CP is one of the SPs; methods based on the Poincare Index (PI) [15], methods depends on the local characteristics of the ridge orientation [16,17], methods locate the intersection of the different ridge orientation partitions [11], and methods that detect the orientation map and the SPs simultaneously using a mathematical model such as the 2D Fourier Expansion (FOMFE) [18]. The PI method [8] is the classical approach of the SP detection. It is defined as the sum of the orientation change along a closed circle. Depending on this sum value, the presence of a SP and its type is determined. Its advantages are: the simplicity of design, robustness to the image rotation and the determination of the singularity type [19]. But, it is sensi- tive to noise. There are methods that use complex filters to de- tect the points of symmetry in the complex valued tensor orientation field [17]. But their accuracy is low in the CP detec- tion in the arch type fingerprint. A more robust, but complex, filter is recently presented called the semi-radial symmetry filter followed by removing the spurious points using an orientation variation-based feature [20].

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 pre- sents the developed aspect of the singular point detection. In Section 3, the orientation map is analyzed. Section 4 describes the proposed core detection procedure. The experimental re- sults are given and discussed in Section 5. Finally, the conclu- sion is presented in Section 6.

The local ridge orientation is defined as the angle h(x, y) made by the ridges (or the ridges and valleys [4]), crossing through a small neighborhood centered at point (x, y), with the horizon- tal axis. The orientation h(x, y) can be calculated on each pixel in the fingerprint image, thus forming an orientation map that is called a high resolution map [4]. The neighborhood will overlap in this case. For less computational time, the orientation can be calculated block-wise, such that the image

Our aim is to use a fast technique in detecting the CP. This can be achieved by designing a mask that scans the orientation map for the detected orientation pattern, mentioned, around the CP. The mask parameters are generated from the distribu- tion of the orientation values around the CP as shown in the following section.

from FVC2002 set (B) is done. The segmentation parameters are chosen to minimize the error between the manual seg- mented blocks and the blocks segmented using the segmenta- tion algorithm. The parameters values are: mth = 5, vth = 0.1 and str = 3 pixels.

