Every transportation grid accommodates the lines of a particular transportation mode such as the rail grid of a metro system: It is made up of a finite set of discrete waypoints that are connected by tracks. In particular, a track that connects the waypoint w1 to another waypoint w2 indicates the possibility of a vehicle movement from w1 to w2; no more (such as a length, a curvature, or a slope) and no less. Thus, every pair of a waypoint is connected by at maximum two tracks, namely one track in each direction. Since by convention every waypoint moreover is either empty or occupied by at maximum one vehicle at a time, then also note that conflicting vehicle movements can occur iff two or more vehicles try to access the same waypoint at the same time.

It schematically depicts the transportation grid for the orbital line of a people mover: A vehicle at w1 can go to w2 via t1,2, from w2 to w3 via t2,3, and from w3 back to w1 via t3,1, respectively. Alternatively, a vehicle at w1 can take t1,3, and thus directly move from w1 to w3 without the necessity to pass by w2. Then note that a conflict between two vehicle movements might occur iff one vehicle, say a1, wants to access w3 from w2 via t2,3, and at the same time another vehicle, say a2, wants to access w3 from w1 via t1,3. Assuming this to be true, we privilege a2 over a1 due to the fact that a vehicle movement taking t1,3 has a higher priority (lower integer number inscribed to t1,3) than another vehicle movement taking t2,3.

The station has two GPs and three corridors: Among the two GPs there is one entrance area that can accommodate up to 50 passengers (written in brackets next to it), and one platform that can accommodate up to 200 passengers. Moreover we can say that a passenger at the entrance area can transfer to the platform since a corridor connects both in the right direction. The unambiguous interpretation of the remaining two corridors depends on the context of the station, though; i.e., on the interface specification between this station and all transportation grids of TN; see below. Nevertheless, from the labels written next to all corridors we can anticipate

In this paper we have introduced a continuous-time stochastic hybrid automaton model and showed how its discrete time approximation can be used to forecast pas- senger loads in multimodal transportation networks: All passengers are grouped into a finite set of trip profiles that route the respective (continuous) passenger flows. All vehicles on the other hand are either parked, or executing missions with deterministic driving times between all pairs of two consecutive waypoints (whereas docking times at stations vary according to the passenger load). Uncertainty explic- itly enters the model in form of the passengers who start their trips in the network and the estimations for the initial passenger loads of all stations and vehicles.

