Molecular biological models usually suffer from a large combinatorial explosion. Indeed, proteins form complexes and modify each others, which leads to the formation of a huge number of distinct chemical species (i.e. non-isomorphic connected components of proteins). Thus we cannot generate explicitly the quantitative semantics of these models, and even less compute their properties.

In this paper we propose a formal framework to automatically reduce the combinatorial complexity of the differential semantics of rule-based models. Our reduction is based on two abstractions, which are combined thanks to a generic product. The first abstraction tracks the flow of information between the different regions of chemical species, so as to detect and abstract away some useless correlations between the state of sites. The second abstraction detects pairs of sites having the same capabilities of interaction, and abstracts away any distinction between them. The initial semantics and the reduce one are formally related by Abstract Interpretation.

We present a formal framework for constructing coarse-grained differential se- mantics. We instantiate this framework with two abstract domains. The first one tracks information flow between the different regions of chemical species, so as to detect and abstract away some useless correlations between the state of sites. The second one detects pairs of sites having the same capabilities of interaction and abstracts away any distinction between them.

In [3] is proposed a framework where the information flow between the sites of chemical species is used so as to build reduced models. With this approach there is no formal definition for the semantics or for the flow of information. Moreover, reduced models have to be written by hand.

In the Section 2, we describe some case study to illustrate our approach. In the Section 3, we provide a generic framework to define differential semantics, reduce these semantics, and combine these reductions. In the Section 4, we introduce the language Kappa and its differential semantics. In the Section 5, we show how to detect pairs of sites having the same capabilities of interaction and we use this information to design a model reduction. In the Section 6, we introduce an analysis of the flow of information between the different regions of chemical species, and deduce which correlations can be abstract away. Then, we use this information to cut chemical species into self-consistent fragments.

Now, we instantiate the generic framework that we have proposed in the Section 3 with a particular language. We focus our study to the models that are written in Kappa [6]. In the present section, we present Kappa and its semantics.

explained below. The left hand side (lhs) El of a rule describes the agents taking part in it and various conditions on both their internal and binding states for the rule to apply. The right hand side (rhs) describes what the rule does.

Example 5.2 We consider two examples of rule sets. The first one is the example of the Section 2.1, in which we do not assume that the rates of the first two reactions are the same. The second example is a more subtle example.

We propose to annotate the contact map with an over-approximation of the flow of information between the different regions of chemical species. The main idea is to identify the correlations between the states of the sites, which can be safely abstracted away, because they have no influence on the behavior of the states of the other sites. This way, the so-obtained annotated contact map (aCM) will be used as a symbolic description of the set of fragments of chemical species, the concentrations of which will be the variables of our reduced system.

10(b). This aCM should be read in the following way. In a receptor, the state of site a may influence all the state of other sites, the state of site b may influence the behavior of the state of sites c and d. Moreover, information may flow across bonds: in dimers, the state of sites a and b of a receptor can control the behavior of the state of sites b, c, and d of the other receptor.

In the Section 6.2, we define the set of fragments that is denoted by an aCM and in the Section 6.3, we give the constraints that should be satisfied by the aCM, so that it soundly summarizes the flow of information. In the Section 6.4, we define the reduced model associated to the set of fragments of a sound aCM.

have the same number of pattern components. We consider the antecedent F  of F before the application of the rule. F may be not connected, but any pattern component in F intersects a pattern component in the E ona site that is modified by the rule. Moreover, a pattern component in F  intersects at most one pattern

We have proposed a formal framework for reducing the differential semantics of rule-based models. This framework combines two abstractions: we use the flow of information to detect useless correlations and the pairs of site having the same capabilities of interaction to abstract away any distinction between these sites. The initial semantics and the reduced one are formally related by Abstract Interpreta- tion.

In future works, we will implement this framework within the OpenKappa plat- form (downloadable at kappalanguage.org). Then, we will address the combi- naison of the reductions based on the detection of useless correlations (as in this framework), and the ones based on the detection of invariants (as in [9,8]). On the theorical side, we are looking for a semantics definition of the flow of information (based on the set of ground reactions induced by a rule-based model), both for the stochastic semantics and for the differential one. Then we will describe the abstrac- tions of the flow of information which is used in this paper and in [7,5,10,9,8] as a hierarchy of abstractions of this semantics definition of the flow of information.

