& Sheng, 2011). With VR, a learner can engage in creating and inter- acting with learning objects within a virtual world through the sense of presence while being unaware of physical environmental conditions. Educators are currently exploring VR technologies and applications at different levels of education (Segura et al., 2020; Agbo et al., 2022). Students can gain knowledge from the visualization of abstract concepts

rules, and the task can be easily accomplished (Chaves et al., 2021). The importance of VR mini-games, which include providing an opportunity for learners to interact directly with modeled real-life problems and deliver easy and substantial learning goals, has been emphasized in the literature (Bouali et al., 2019; Devisch et al., 2017).

Given that the developed prototype is user-centered, RQ1 is relevant and motivated by Smutny et al. (2019), who reviewed studies on the use of VR in different domains, such as safety, travel, history, and engi- neering education, but not in problem-solving and CT education. Therefore, this study intends to examine how users found the developed VR application useful from the perspective of interface, aesthetics, and functionality that aide interaction between the learners and learning objects in VR.

In RQ3, the study seeks to examine whether the developed inter- vention fulfils its aim by fostering CT education and problem-solving skills. Although Smutny et al. (2019) revealed other domains in which VR has been applied, there are limited studies on the domains investi- gated in this study.

Furthermore, Segura et al. (2020) presented a VR game called VR-OCKS, aimed at teaching the basic principles of programming. The game was intentionally developed to attract young learners to computer science by building their interest in programming. The evaluation of VR-OCKS revealed that group learners performed better in terms of un- derstanding programming concepts, such as loops, and conditional structures.

Recursion is one of the essential concepts of CT for problem solving, in which complex problems are handled by formulating a solution to address a smaller chunk of the problem, and the solution can be itera- tively applied to solve the entire problem. Hulst (2010) defined recursion as an implant of a component of the same form. From Karlsson's (2010) viewpoint, recursion entails getting a simple output through an in-depth embedded iteration within a complicated structured system that uses previous information. Recently, Lee et al. (2019) explained that the major component of recursion includes recognizing iterative formats in the problems and solving them by utilizing smaller format solutions. Recursion is building an incremental system whose functionality depends on prior information. The study of recursion in the context of higher education has revealed that students' prior knowledge of the theoretical aspects of recursion and motivation affects their learning and under- standing of the concept (Lacave et al., 2017).

algorithms, which is one of the key concepts in problem solving. Furthermore, Lee et al. (2014) revealed that students complicate their problems by building an incorrect model of recursive processes, confusing and mixing the wrong processes of iteration with recursive processes.

Although some of the previous studies presented in this section pro- vide an overview of efforts made to integrate CT education in different contexts through the facilitation of the aforementioned CT concepts, the approaches demonstrated in terms of interventions are predominately course design and computer-based applications, which may provide a minimal level of engagement and interaction for learners. Therefore, the affordances provided through the use of an immersive VR game-based approach could make learning and teaching CT more engaging and interacting to facilitate learner's comprehension (Segura et al., 2020).

Educational games are aimed at teaching through entertaining ac- tivities, and the purposeful combination of entertainment and education translate into efficient learning tools with elements that are interactive, reflective, and challenging (Bertozzi, 2014; Panagiotakopoulos, 2011). Furthermore, educational games which is popular in the domain of GBL are design for the purpose of learning. indeed, Novia et al. (2021) described educational game as an object-based learning games that uses collaborative contents and devices to communicate with a server. Ac- cording to a recent study, GBL fosters learning through engagement and interaction (Agbo et al., 2021b). Nowadays, there is a persistent rise in studies that promote the development of educational games for enhanced learning experience.

The iThinkSmart VR application was developed with the Unity game engine, C#, and Firebase cloud resources. The VR application can be installed on a smartphone, which can be inserted into a lost-cost Card- board HMD with the support of a Bluetooth hand controller to facilitate virtual interaction between the player and the game elements. Recently, the use of low-cost immersive HMD to facilitate teaching and learning is gaining ground (Cheng & Tsai, 2020). Hence, the iThinkSmart VR application was developed with the intention of delivering affordable and accessible education to learners.

This study engaged participants who were bachelor's or graduate students from different fields of learning. Some of the participants did not major in computer science; hence, they were not very familiar with computing education and problem-solving concepts. Indeed, the sample participant consist of students that have no background in virtual reality mini-games, and were novices to concepts of computational thinking. Particularly, the targeted users of the iThinkSmart VR expedition are early university entry students in Africa who enroll in computer science degrees but are novices and do not have prior computer science or pro- gramming knowledge.

(2021), with slight modifications made by the authors to fit the context of this study. Aloweni et al. (2021) utilized a similar approach to qualita- tively evaluate learning experiences and collected feedback for improving a GBL system. The rationale for adapting these questions to conduct interviews for this study is because they are short, straightfor- ward, and unambiguous, such that respondents could provide answers that are relevant to address this study's research questions (Buschle et al., 2022). These questions were used to collect information on the usability and experience of the participants. According to Holloway and Wheeler (2010), semi-structured interviews produce data that are comparable from all participants while still allowing for scope flexibility.

Interaction and representational fidelity are analogous. Whereas interaction in a VR application helps foster personalization through feedback, representational fidelity describes important features that allow for interactivity within the virtual environment. Regarding this study, participants commented on the features of VR mini-games that enhance their usability. Indeed, some of the participants felt that the inherent contextual sound in the virtual world contributed to their ability to interact with the game elements, including the challenges. Examples of some responses from the participants are shown in the following quotes:

This study revealed many aspects of the VR expedition mini-games that would need improvement, which is a key finding from the pilot testing. Among other themes that participants felt could be improved include aesthetic aspects (sound and graphics), game elements, game challenge, navigation, and speed. Some participants felt that the level of challenge could be further improved to gradually progress from very simple to complex challenges.

Our findings, which align with a previous study by Cheng and Tsai (2020), revealed that the aspect of the VR expedition is an interesting part of the mini-game that motivates players. Research has shown that motivating learners within a technology-mediated learning environment can create a positive impact (Butgereit, 2016; Dias et al., 2019; Mei & Sheng, 2011), such that even when some of the challenges in the mini-games were not familiar to the players, they were motivated to think more and resolve the challenge. An example of an educational VR expedition application was developed by Google to allow learners to take a virtual field trip and learn in different contexts (Google Arts and Cul- ture, n. d.).

