Universal Coalgebra provides a categorical framework where bisimilarity can be characterized as final se- mantics, i.e., each LTS can be mapped to a minimal realization identifying bisimilar states. Moreover, it is often possible to lift coalgebras to an algebraic setting (yielding bialgebras by Turi and Plotkin or, slightly more generally, structured coalgebras by Corradini, Heckel and Montanari) with the property that bisimilarity is compositional with respect to the lifted structure. The existence of minimal realizations is defines operational semantics by means of structural axioms and reduction rules. Process calculi representing complex systems, in particular those able to generate and communicate names, are often defined in this way, since structural axioms give a clear idea of the intended structure of the states while reaction rules, which are often non conditional, give a direct account of the possible steps. Transitions caused by reaction rules, however, are not labeled, since they represent evolutions of the system without interactions with the external world. Thus reduction semantics in itself is neither abstract nor compositional.

In [6], we have provided a coalgebraic characterization of standard Reactive Systems `a la Leifer and Milner. Thus the present paper have to be understood as an extension of [6] to G-Reactive Systems. We will show that the extension is straightforward: instead of using the decomposition property of IPOs, we use the decomposition property of GIPOs.

The paper is structured as follow. In Section 2, we introduce some basic notions on 2-categories and G-categories that are fundamental in order to introduce G- Reactive Systems in Section 3. In Section 4 we introduce coalgebras and structured coalgebra. Section 5 defines a colagebra for the LTS derived from the Reactive Sys- tem and Section 6 proves that, if the base category has GRPOs, then the coalgebra previously defined is a structured coalgebra, i.e., bisimilarity is a congruence.

The last point is called middle four interchange law. It states that in 2-categories the order of composition of 2-cells is not important. Indeed it can be shown that in any possible diagram, all the possible different ways to combine together vertical and horizontal composition, yield the same composite 2-cell. This primitive operation is called pasting.

In this section we give a coalgebraic characterization of GIPO Labeled Transition System of G-Reactive Systems through the theory outlined in the previous section. First of all, we have to define the universe of observations. Since the labels of the GLTS are arrows of the base G-category C (representing the contexts), we define the functor as parametric w.r.t. C, and ||C|| (i.e. the class of all arrows of C) is

The coalgebraic model defined in the previous section does not take into account the algebraic structure of the states, i.e., of the possibility of contextualizing a term. In order to have a richer model we lift that construction to a structured setting where the base category is not anymore Set|C|, but a category of algebras with contextualization operations. In the following we assume that the category C has strict distinguished object, i.e., that the only arrow with target 0 is id0. This is needed to distinguish between elements and operations of algebras.

Note that this proof is completely analogous to that of Theorem 1 of [6] that is the analogous theorem for Reactive System `a la Leifer and Milner. Here we use composition and decomposition of GIPOs, while there we we used composition and decomposition of IPOs. This makes evidence of the fact that it is not important what kind of construction we use, but it is important that the construction satisfies these two property. This is really evident in tile systems [11] where the theory prove

Another interesting point concerning Borrowed Contexts is the derivation of an SOS semantics as pointed out in [3]. Indeed reasoning on the derived LTS is usually hard, and it will be more useful having an SOS specification of it. This paper can be seen also as a first step in this direction. Indeed, as shown in [20], GSOS specifications can be seen as the lifting of the endofunctor to the algebraic setting.

