and delivery of high-quality services is now possible. Various types of devices are getting connected to the Internet and it is estimated that 10 billion different devices used in industries are now con- nected to the Internet. CRWSN is going to play a vital role in the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), in the days to come. Moreover, research and development in the area of wireless sensor networks for various research issues such as energy efficiency, load balanc- ing, congestion control, etc are still ongoing and recent publica- tions are available [33,34].

In this paper, a node clustering protocol for CRWSN has been proposed. During the design process, evolutionary game theory has been applied. Various characteristics of CRWSN such as node mobility, dynamically available communication channels, the residual energy level of nodes, and geographic locations of the nodes are considered as input parameters to the clustering algorithm.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the related work along with a background of this work. The system model is highlighted in section 3. The proposed protocol is pre- sented in section 4 followed by a theoretical analysis of the proto- col presented in section 5. Simulation results related to the performance evaluation of the proposed protocol are presented in section 6. The paper is concluded in section 7.

including the network layer have been developed [22,23]. More- over, node clustering protocol and medium access control protocol for cognitive radio ad hoc networks is proposed in [35]. In this sec- tion, a few papers in the line of game theory-based node clustering for wireless sensor networks, and CRWSN are highlighted.

A game theory-cluster-based routing protocol for wireless sen- sor networks is proposed in [1]. Energy efficiency is the major con- cern in this paper. Evolutionary game theory has been used in clustering the nodes in the WSN setup. In this work, node mobility is not considered, and the cognitive radio (CR) aspect is out of scope. However, the performance of the proposed protocol is com- pared with LEACH [2], and LEACH-C [2]. The proposed game theory-based protocol shows improved performance.

A game theory-based clustering algorithm for wireless sensor networks is proposed in [4]. The proposed approach is based on LEACH [2] and CROSS [5], and a game-theoretic approach is consid- ered during the selection of cluster heads. The proposed work achieves an even distribution of cluster heads and uniform energy consumption across the network. However, the proposed approach does not consider the mobility of the nodes and the CR aspect of the network.

Evolutionary game-based routing protocol for wireless multi- media sensor networks is proposed in [6]. After cluster formation in the network, the cluster head node for each cluster is elected by using the evolutionary game. The proposed approach shows improved performance in terms of energy efficiency, end-to-end delay, packet delivery ratio, network lifetime, and cluster forma- tion time.

A spectrum-aware version of LEACH was proposed in [7] that is applicable for CRWSN. The proposed protocol was named CogLE- ACH. In this enhanced version, the number of free channels was considered as a weight in computing the probability of each sensor node for becoming cluster head. CogLEACH outperformed LEACH. However, the issues of network topology, mobility of nodes, and channel quality were not properly considered in the design.

A spectrum-aware clustering approach was proposed in [8] for CRWSN. In this work, network topology and spectrum availability were represented jointly through an undirected bipartite graph. Spectrum aware clusters were formed by constructing bicliques of maximum size from the bipartite graph. This protocol does not consider the residual energy of the nodes and incurs heavy compu- tational loads. Node mobility was also not considered.

A cluster formation approach was introduced in [9] considering various weighted clustering metrics such as temporal-spatial corre- lation, confidence level, and residual energy level that are applicable for CRWSN. The assumptions made in this work were very firm, for example, the Euclidean distance between any two nodes is known and it does not change. Channel state was also not considered.

Network Stability Aware Clustering protocol (NSAC) has recently been proposed in [10] for CRWSN. This protocol considers power consumption and spectrum dynamics simultaneously. Channel quality has been considered as a metric while cluster head nodes were selected. A modified version of NSAC applicable for CRWSN has very recently been proposed in [11]. However, both protocols do not consider node mobility in CRWSN.

The nodes are deployed randomly in inaccessible environments. The sensor field is unattended and also of hostile nature. The nodes are deployed by uncontrolled means, for example, from helicopter or airplane. It has been assumed that as per the above considera- tion, the deployment of nodes follows poison distribution. Thus, the probability that there are m nodes within area s is given by the following expression [28].

Energy model: In CRWSN, the CR nodes apart from data trans- mission and reception perform additional tasks of spectrum sens- ing and switching. Hence, the energy consumption is more in CRWSN as compared to traditional WSN. So, while designing the energy consumption model all four tasks have to be considered. Assume, Ess to be the energy consumed during spectrum sensing,

Stage 2: The sink node creates the topology of the cognitive radio sensor network. This topology is created based on the geo- graphic location and movement profiles of the sensor nodes. Stage 3: The sink node forms the clusters after forming virtual grids across the sensor field. Grids are merged based on the necessity to form clusters.

Step c is repeated until all the clusters are scanned. There- fore, from the initial n2 clusters, the final clusters are formed; and this final number of clusters is generally less than n2. This is due to the merging of initial clusters for the low density of the nodes inside initial clusters.

In evolutionary game theory, it is very important to formulate the ESS. An ESS is a state in the game that ensures that different species in a population co-exist together and do not threaten each other by increasing the extinction probability through a selfish choice of strategies. For this CHSG (Cluster Head Selection Game) game, the ESS is the nodes in EP subset should select the strategy sCH and the nodes in NEP subset should select the strategy, sNCH.

Proof: The sink node forms the clusters. The sensor field is geo- graphically virtually partitioned into the grids. In the process of forming the final clusters, initial clusters are merged sometimes, if the total number of nodes inside a cluster does not reach at least the threshold number. Thus, there is no chance that a sensor node can become a member of more than one cluster. As the sensor node does not choose a cluster head node, rather it is the sink node that forms the clusters and also selects the cluster head nodes, the formed clusters are always mutually exclusive.

Proof: The process of cluster head node selection is based on evolutionary game theory and inspired by the process depicted in [6]. However, the outcome of our protocol in terms of cluster formation is different and unique. This is so because the way sen- sor nodes are classified into eligible, and ineligible is unique, and different from that of [6].

nodes. However, the rate of increase is very low because as the number of nodes increases, the total energy of the network increases. It is also observed that the rate of energy depletion is lower during CH selection as compared to cluster formation.

The performance of the proposed clustering protocol in terms of the quality of the selected CH node has been compared with the protocol proposed in [9], RARE [35] and LEACH [2]. Here, the qual- ity of the selected cluster head node indicates two parameters. The first one is the percentage of high-energy sensor nodes that has got selected as cluster head. High energy indicates that the residual energy level of the selected cluster head node is above a certain threshold. Here this threshold has been considered as 75% of the initial energy level. The second parameter is the geographical distri- bution of the selected cluster head nodes. The way, the selected cluster head nodes are geographically uniformly distributed in the parameter under consideration. No two selected cluster head nodes are expected to be geographically close to each other.

