Despite the widespread of social media among all age groups in Arabic countries, the research directed towards Author Profiling (AP) is still in its early stages. This paper provides an Egyptian Dialect Gender Annotated Dataset (EDGAD) obtained from Twitter as well as a proposed text classification solution for the Gender Identification (GI) problem. The dataset consists of 70,000 tweets per gender. In text classi- fication, a Mixed Feature Vector (MFV) with different stylometric and Egyptian Arabic Dialect (EAD) language-specific features is proposed, in addition to N-Gram Feature Vector (NFV). Ensemble weighted average is applied to the Random Forest (RF) with MFV and Logistic Regression (LR) with NFV. The achieved gender identification accuracy is 87.6%.

Gender identification of authors has, thus, become more impor- tant with the increase of fake identities in social media accounts. Arabic language writers are increasing in social media. Taking into consideration the unique nature of the Arabic language and the work done on GI in general, Arabic in specific, GI methodologies and models need to be studied.

The work done in Arabic, especially dialectal Arabic, is still in its infancy. There is a lack of resources and lexicons, also the average accuracy achieved for dialectal Arabic needs improvement. This work builds a new gender annotated dataset EDGAD, to be avail- able for future research. The paper at hand also proposes a com- plete GI model in addition to an engineered feature vector with integrates different EAD language-related features with N-gram FV achieving 87.6% accuracy.

The data is composed of male and female sets where each set has 70 accounts. Each account contains a variable number of tweets in case of the unbalanced dataset and limited to 1000 tweets in case of the balanced dataset. Cross-validation is applied with 7 folds. Each fold contains 10 accounts of each gender. As a result, the training set will always contain 120 accounts while the testing set contains 20 accounts. This will ensure that tweets from a certain account will not be available in both training and testing in the same fold.

number of occurrence of words in each category. We gathered a list of words in Egyptian Arabic representing each topic. The swear words list, for example, is a list of 24 types of similar swear words. A list of almost all the swear words in MSA and Egyptian Arabic is made with their different pronunciations, suffixes and prefixes. We added more words to the emotions list published initially by Rabie and Sturm in 13.5

This is a representation for the input text. More tweets are col- lected; 180,000 tweets are taken from re-tweets and others are retrieved from other 100 accounts in January 2018 that is not going to be used in the dataset. These tweets are used as an input to Gen- sim.6 We used the skip-gram model to build our word2vec model. It is parameterized with iterations (5), minimum word counts (5), vec- tor dimension (350), workers (4) and window (8). This embedding layer is used to get the vector representing each word in the input text, then an element-wise average is calculated to get a fixed length vector representing the whole input text, i.e. given a sentence of 4 words, each word is represented as a vector of 350 elements, then the average of each element over all the words is calculated and the final averaged 350 elements are added to the FV.

The two feature vectors MFV and NFV will be inputs to RF and LR classifiers respectively. The RF classifier builds multiple decision tree models and outputs the class which is the model of all the decision trees built. The use of multiple decision trees corrects the over-fitting to the training data that can happen in a single decision tree.The decision of using the RF and LR classifiers is based on several experiments that revealed their higher performance over other classifiers, this will be illustrated in details in the exper- iments section. According to this, the choice was to combine them. The combination is made using ensemble weighted average.

