Path-based temporal logics are commonly used as specification logics, particularly in the context of automatic verification. Instances of such logics include the logic CTL* with its fragments CTL and LTL for transition systems [3], and the logic PCTL for probabilistic transition systems [7]. In spite of the similarities shared by these logics, no general, unified account of path-based temporal logics exists.

computational types needed to recover the usual notions of computation path for such systems. While the transition type describes the type of individual transitions (typically linear) and determines the notion of computation path, the computational type describes how the transitions from particular states are structured (e.g. using sets, or probability distributions). The distributivity of T over F then allows com- putation paths from individual states to be similarly structured.

It is shown in [8] that any commutative monad on Set has a canonical distribu- tive law over any shapely polynomial functor (i.e. a functor built from identity and constant functors using finite products and arbitrary coproducts). This provides examples of distributive laws of the powerset monad over shapely polynomial func- tors. Moreover, the construction of the canonical distributive law (by induction on the structure of the shapely functor) generalises straightforwardly to any category with products and coproducts, thereby also providing examples of distributive laws of the subprobability measure monad over shapely polynomial functors on Meas.

Our path-based coalgebraic temporal logics will be based on the notion of pred- icate lifting, as introduced by Pattinson [13]. However, the semantics of these logics will differ somewhat from the standard semantics of coalgebraic modal logics in- duced by predicate liftings, as defined e.g. in loc. cit. Also, the notion of predicate lifting used here is more general than the original one of [13], and applies to endo- functors on both Set and Meas.

In the case of the non-empty powerset monad, the above result only implies that the infinite trace map is an op-lax coalgebra morphism. This is weaker than the defining property of the infinite trace map in [10], which asks for a proper coalgebra morphism. The study of sufficient conditions for the infinite trace map to define a proper coalgebra morphism for an arbitrary (affine) monad T remains an open question, but we conjecture that the local continuity of the functor F 7 will be at least a necessary condition.

Future work will generalise these results to arbitrary (non-affine) monads. Apart from the powerset, lift and subprobability measure monads, a non-affine monad of interest is the multiset monad, due to its relevance to graded temporal logic. The study of the relationship between finite and possibly infinite traces constitutes another direction for future work.

