This paper introduces the generalization of Mignotte modular secret sharing over the polynomial rings. Mignotte proposed threshold secret sharing over the ring of integers. We extend his method for the ring of polynomials which is Euclidean as well and therefore allowing to use the Chinese Remainder Theorem. In particular, we prove that any access structure can be realized within this modular approach. Further, we put the bounds on the number of participants of such secret sharing scheme with the moduli of the same degree. And finally we estimate the information rate of the new scheme.

The concept of secret sharing as a mathematical method of splitting the secret value into shares so that only authorized subsets of shares could restore it was initially introduced by Shamir [8]. Later, Asmuth, Bloom [1] and Mignotte [6] independently devised the modular approach in secret sharing based on the Chinese Remainder Theorem in the ring of integers. Also, Asmuth and Bloom proposed to use Euclidean rings other than the ring of integers. All mentioned methods deal with the threshold secret sharing i.e. all subsets of not less than k participants out of t can compute the secret.

Proof. The boundary on the number of participants of the threshold secret sharing scheme follows from the previous lemma. To realize the arbitrary structure accord- ing to the theorem (2.2) we need no more than 2t different pairwise co-prime moduli for multiplications (number of all subsets of t participants).

And finally let us estimate the information rate of the constructed secret sharing scheme. Information rate is defined as the quotient of dividing the length of the secret by the maximal length of the share (in bits).We consider the most important case of q = 2.

research is a subject of our further work. In fact, we managed to conclude this research after the conference. We have proved that the polynomial modular scheme is perfect and ideal using the technique of Quisquater, Preneel and Vanderwalle [7]. These authors revisited the security of the modular scheme in the ring of integers and showed that it is only asymptotically secure.

