We could try to push the strategy even further, and say for instance that zag subcategorises for a collection of elements which could themselves form a sentence (differently ordered). But it will be much simpler if we simply say that zag subcategorises for a verb, in this case kussen, which in turn subcategorises for a subject Harold and an object Maria. Then we might describe the Dutch order (in part) by saying that a verb v which is argument to some r must succeed r, but other arguments to r precede it. Having eliminated the S and VP level entities, we may as well eliminate NP too, simply saying that zwem (for example) subcategorises for a noun, and that a proper noun (such as Harold) need take no arguments, but a (singular) common noun (like man) subcategorises for a determiner (say een) which must come immediately to its left.

but not wanting objects to precede verbs would imply the opposite. One direc- tion to try to remedy this situation might be to go for a more localised treat- ment of order, but this is difficult and arguably unintuitive, especially in the broader specifications, and especially in dealing with the cross-dependencies in Dutch. The alternative is to insist that different entries are used for each word.

Clearly it is somewhat unsatisfactory to have to independently specify that for each distinct root constructor, dependents maps the result of its application to the multiset formed by the further application of whichever grammatical functions are defined there. A more satisfactory solution would be to employ a specialised institution, in which the concept of grammatical function, and the definition of dependents, is built into the underlying logic. An institution is a formalisation of what it means to be a (first-order) logic, defined in terms of category theory ([5]). In [7], I define some example institutions specialised for use in a linguistic setting. It might also seem preferable to find a way to build the subject operation into the specialised institution, as always corresponding to the first argument of the verb, but perhaps not, since one might want to be able to deal with a verb like promise, in Harold promised to swim along these lines:

The fact that we are able to use for German, and later Dutch, the same dependency system ADependencyModel used for English, is partly a reflec- tion of the closeness of the languages (though of course it also has a lot to do with the triviality of the example). However we need a different prece- dence relation, and of course the actual words are different. The first dis- junct of the axiom of GermanOrderModel is the same as for EnglishOrderModel. The second says that a verb succeeds all its subordinates. ParametricGer- manic(GermanLexicon+GermanOrderModel) is a specific grammar covering de- pendent clauses such as Michael Harold schwimmen sah.

In this article I have attempted to demonstrate the utility of the algebraic spec- ification language ASL in so-called grammar engineering. The class-of-model semantics employed by ASL makes it useful both in tracking the broad notion of what it means to be a solution, as well as in producing specific grammars which implement the broad concept. I have illustrated how parametrised spec- ification may be used to embody the use of the same construction in different contexts, including across languages. This, and the notion of stepwise refine- ment, are seen to accord well with the principles-and-parameters approach of contemporary linguistics.

