Connected Square Network Graphs (CSNG) in the study of Selcuk (2022) and Selcuk and Tankul (2022) is reconsidered in this paper. Although (CSNG) is a 2-dimensional mesh structure, the most important fea- ture of this graph is that it is a hypercube variant. For this reason, this study focuses on development algo- rithms that find solutions to various problems for (CSNG) with the help of hypercube. Firstly, an efficient algorithm that finds the Hamiltonian path is given. Further, two different algorithms that perform the mapping of labels in graph and the unicast routing are given. Furthermore, the parallel process for map- ping and unicast routing is discussed. Finally, guidelines are given for broadcasting algorithms.

Motivated by [15,16], this paper proposes new algorithms for CSNG. Section 2 gives information about CSNG, divide and conquer method, dynamic programming, the travelling salesman problem, the routing problem and the broadcasting problem. Section 3 intro- duces a new Hamiltonian path algorithm employing dynamic pro- gramming techniques. Additionally, algorithms are provided for mapping and routing, along with a discussion on the parallel pro- cess for these algorithms in Section 4. Finally, broadcasting algo- rithms are given for CSNG with the help of broadcasting algorithms for hypercube.

Divide and conquer algorithm is implemented on various graph structures. On hypercube interconnection graph, a divide and con- quer method to solve tridiagonal systems is implemented by [20,21] gives a generic divide and conquer implementation of the algorithms on hypercube like routing. On the other hand, in [22] divide and conquer mapping is proposed for efficient execution of parallel computers with hypercube structure. In [23], a binomial tree is embedded onto 3D mesh and torus interconnection network, and divide and conquer routing algorithm is proposed. A simple and optimal approach for mapping in 2D meshes is given in [24] and a partially adaptive and deterministic routing algorithm for 2D mesh networks on chip is given in [25]. Other mapping algorithm HyPar is proposed in [26] for hybrid GPU-CPU networks.

solution, so running time is not polynomial [32]. In the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP), the goal is to find the shortest tour a seller takes starting from the city he is in and returning to the city where he started after stopping by each city only once. It is assumed that there is a road between any two cities and that the length of that road is known. It is easy to understand but difficult to solve. TSP, in the language of graph theory, is to find the shortest Hamiltonian cycle on a (plain) graph where cities are represented by the vertex and roads by the edges between the vertices.

The Hamiltonian path is named after 19th century mathemati- cian William Hamiltonian which passes through each node on a graph only once. If a Hamiltonian path ends where it started, com- pleting a full cycle (if it is possible to go from the last node on the path to the first node), these paths is called the Hamiltonian cycle. A graph containing a Hamiltonian cycle also contains a Hamilto- nian path, but the reverse is not always true. The graphs that have a Hamiltonian cycle are called Hamiltonian graphs.

TSP is studied on interconnection topologies. Ant colony opti- mization algorithm applied on ring and hypercube in parallel for TSP [33], chemical reaction optimization [34] and grey wolf algo- rithm [35] is implemented for TSP over hypercube. [36] shows NISQ circuit compilation problem is same as TSP on torus network. TSP is also studied for mesh networks for channel allocation scheme for reducing interference [37].

Routing is the process of finding the shortest and potential paths between nodes in a network topology. There are two main types of routing problems, depending on their purpose and com- plexity [38]. The shortest path is the main focus of the path finding problems. Compared to other routing problems, these problems are relatively simple. Tour construction problems are the second group. It is more complex than the first category problems of build- ing an entire tour within a given network. For instance, real distance and geographical information system (GIS) are used to solve real world problems represented as a network.

Path Finding Problems primarily encompass Shortest Path Prob- lems (SPP), which involve determining the minimum total cost (time, distance, expense) between two nodes. Single Source Short- est Path Problem is for finding a path between source and destina- tion vertices. There are various algorithms for these problems. All Pair Shortest Path Problem to find paths between all vertices pairs in the network. Tour construction problems can be divided into three classes: Travel Salesman Problem (TSP) is the first one and the most well known, Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) is the gener- alized version of TSP with many salesmans, and lastly Bus Routing Problem (BRP) is another version of TSP with route balancing, may have time window constraints and busses can have same or differ- ent capacities.

SPP is implemented on many different types of interconnection networks. In [39] shortest path routing is applied for all to all com- munication on hypercube. In [40] average shortest distance is found with new model for irregular ring and hub network. One to one shortest path problem is studied for on-chip board large scale mesh network in [41], while one to all shortest path problem is studied for torus network [42].

CSNG 2, 1 , CSNG 1, 2 , CSNG 0, 3 ). In fact, 010 for the outer recur- sive structure and 01 for the inner recursive structure are chosen as the initial node. To obtain the Hamiltonian path for the inner recursive structure, the Hamiltonian path considered above must be shifted so that the starting node is 01 (See step 1 in Algorithm 1). A Hamiltonian path for the square will be named H(0) and I(0) (reverse sorted of H(0)) are obtained as follows:

If the message sent to the network targets directly a single node which address is known, the message is sent using an algorithm designed as unicast. Thus, the network elements used in between perform the task of transmitting the message only to the specified node. Broadcast algorithms deliver the message to all nodes while multicast algorithms are used for communication within the group.

Example 4.1. Finding the map for the graph CSNG 2, 2 is a recur- sive process. There are 4 different base cases for Algorithm 2 according  to  the  values  of  i  and  j.  These  cases  are 0, 0 , 1, 0 , 0, 1 and 1, 1 for values of i, j that determines base case	return	map	M	and	takes

Algorithm 4 and Algorithm 5 are the revised version of hypercube broadcast algorithms in [44] designed using divide and conquer approach. The costs for these two algorithms can be obtained by writing k m 2 instead of logp the complexity in Algorithm 4.2 and Algorithm 4.7 in [44].

hypercube variant and to develop algorithms that offer solutions to significant problems. As a result, these algorithms obtained for this graph are similar to hypercube algorithms rather than classical mesh algorithms. . The first algorithm aims to find an alternative Hamiltonian path for CSNG by using dynamic programming, with

a runtime of O(2k+m+2). The second algorithm calculates the map- ping of node labels for CSNG k, m and runtime of it is O 2k+m+2 . Additionally, Algorithm 3 presents an unicast routing algorithm with time complexity of O max 2k+1  1, 2m+1  1 . The utilization of parallel and distributed architecture enhances performance at runtime, depending on the number of processors. The most general

