This paper connects coalgebra with a long discussion in the foundations of game theory on the modeling of type spaces. We argue that type spaces are coalgebras, that universal type spaces are final coalgebras, and that the modal logics already proposed in the economic theory literature are closely related to those in recent work in coalgebraic modal logic. In the other direction, the categories of interest in this work are usually measurable spaces or compact (Hausdorff) topological spaces. A coalgebraic version of the construction of the universal type space due to Heifetz and Samet [5] is generalized for some functors in those categories. Since the concrete categories of interest have not been explored so deeply in the coalgebra literature, we have some new results. We show that every functor on the category of measurable spaces built from constant functors, products, coproducts, and the probability measure space functor has a final coalgebra. Moreover, we construct this final coalgebra from the relevant version of coalgebraic modal logic. Specifically, we consider the set of theories of points in all coalgebras and endow this set with a measurable and coalgebra structure.

M as formulas; these formulas are then interpreted by singletons. Our treat- ment here makes for a more expressive language. We feel that when dealing with a space like [0, 1], one might want to have a set denoting a subinterval or a measurable subset of it. Also, there is a technical advantage: at various points, it will be good to know that the set of interpretations of formulas of all sorts coincide with the measurable subsets. To get this, one clearly must start with the measurable subsets of the constants. The only price we pay for this that we take. However, our work is a bit different than in the cited works since our final coalgebra is based on the satisfied theories rather than the maximal consistent ones in some logical system. This means that our result is actually weaker, since we do not obtain a completeness result. On the other hand, we believe that it is is easier to get the final coalgebra this way. And the general method works even in the absence of a logic, as we have seen in the work on measurable spaces.

The main difference between our work in this section and the earlier work in Section 3 is that this time we prove that the functions rS are surjective before we can prove the Truth Lemma. (Recall that in the measurable space setting we derived the surjectivity of rS in Corollary 3.12.) satisfied theories. This is simpler, though of course one must do more work to get completeness results. From the side of coalgebra, perhaps what is most original here is taking a language for sets as opposed to (or, in addition to) a language of points. The interplay of the two languages is well worth studying.

