interactions can provide additional information about how the AR vi- sualizations are influencing students. For example, from student dialogue it is possible to detect what students are paying attention to, what topics are at the threshold of their understanding, and what they are thinking about at different stages of the activity (Chin & Brown, 2002; Hadzi- georgiou, 1999; Meyer & Land, 2005). These learning process metrics revealed through 1-1 tutoring interactions can provide a richer under- standing of how different aspects of the AR experience are influencing student learning behaviors, adding to what is already known about the general benefits of AR for influencing outcome metrics.

continued to pose questions from multiple perspectives, they were able to channel their efforts to other directions, and to eventually arrive at meaningful insights. The authors also found that students who engaged in many distinct types of inquiry styles showed better learning, and, if the student questions reveal appropriate answers to proceed to the next step of the inquiry, then students are more likely to keep motivated and actively involved in the activity. In the present study we expand on the qualitative model from Chin and Chia (2004) and apply it to investi- gating how AR content influences student inquiry styles.

In the domain of augmented reality for education, research has shown that AR visualizations (also termed AR visual representations) serve to guide student inquiry, and can encourage active collaboration and improve problem solving approaches between peers. For instance, Una- halekhaka et al. (2019), in studying a collaborative AR physics activity, found that collaborators use AR visualizations as effective grounding representations when teaching each other, by easing the process of asking questions and providing explanations. Shared representations in AR can also enhance the balance of contributions and diminish leader- ship dominance, for example when student peers engage in AR-enhanced exploration of electromagnetism (Radu & Schneider, 2019b) or debug- ging robots (Radu et al., 2021). Fidan and Tuncel (2019) found that augmented reality visualizations enhanced the learning of student groups, as well as their attitudes towards problem-based learning activ- ities, compared to traditional learning activities without AR. Wang et al. (2014) studied student actions in a collaborative physics environment, and found AR representations were more supportive for learning and problem solving because they engaged greater active learning through experimentation; in contrast, when learning without AR, students engaged in less experimentation. These results indicate that, at least in the context of student-student collaborations, AR visualizations can be beneficial in engaging students in deeper thinking and more active learning because they encourage experimentation, rapid feedback, and easier communication. It is expected that AR instruction through remote tutoring may yield similar benefits, and that qualitative analysis of stu- dent inquiry can be used to measure the impact of AR visualizations.

To answer these questions, we have designed an interactive AR sys- tem for physics education, developed a coding scheme to measure stu- dent inquiries and their relationship to AR visualizations, and performed a between-subjects study that measures learning and inquiry through quantitative and qualitative methods. In the next section, we describe the design of the AR application as well as our research metrics. We follow with a presentation of our results from student learning outcomes and analysis of how AR visualizations impact student learning. Following, we present our results regarding student inquiry styles, and analysis of how inquiry styles vary under different AR conditions, as well as analysis of how AR visualizations impact inquiry styles. We conclude with a dis- cussion and reflection on our findings.

induced forces becomes more salient. Similar to the first two parts, the student is asked prediction questions, given instructional material, and prompt for any questions. At the end of the 3 parts, the instructor asks if the student has any other questions that may be useful for their coursework.

We performed qualitative analysis of participant videos, to under- stand how participants communicated with the instructor while engaging in inquiry-based learning. A coding scheme was constructed through iterative bottom-up coding. The coding scheme design was influenced by the four categories of the question-driven problem-based learning (Q- PBL) framework presented by Chin and Chia (2004). The Q-PBL frame- work was developed to measure student thinking during a time scale of multiple weeks across different mediums (ranging from student journals to in person conversations with peers), and it groups student questions by function: distinguishing between questions aimed at information gath- ering, bridging and integrating knowledge, extending and exploring beyond the current setting, and reflecting/hypothesizing. Based on this concepts. Full-AR participants who asked these questions, asked 40% less integration questions than Basic-AR participants. In terms of Exploration beyond the problem, Full-AR participants on average asked almost one and a half times the number of exploration questions than Basic-AR participants. In terms of forming research Hypotheses to understand why a phenomenon happens, the number of questions is low, and Basic- AR participants used hypotheses more than Full-AR participants.

This data suggests that AR visuals may be useful for students to gain basic knowledge that fills their knowledge gaps about various concepts and may stimulate students to inquire about different concepts while exploring the learning domain. The presence of AR visuals may make students think of different concepts, and the dynamic nature of AR vi- sualizations may illustrate those concepts in changing situations, thus potentially helping students to develop deeper understanding and encouraging students to think about multiple concepts under various situations. Additionally, the presence of multiple AR visualizations may help to connect multiple concepts together, possibly explaining the lower number of Integration questions asked by the Full-AR group overall.

critically about the material). In our data we observed a lot of the external signs of active learning especially in the Full-AR group, but this does not mean that other students were not actively engaged. In fact, students in the Basic-AR group seemed to be engaged with the instructor, just communicating differently. Future studies can employ more measures to measure student internal processes, such as measuring cognitive load and asking students more focused pre-post questions. Finally, we acknowl- edge that the activity itself influences the types of inquiry students engage in; with other kinds of learning content, and other tutoring ac- tivities that are less instruction driven, students may exhibit different kinds of inquiry patterns. It is our hope that other researchers can use our coding scheme to investigate similar 1-1 tutoring sessions with AR, leading to generalizable findings across studies.

In this study we investigated how increased complexity of augmented reality content influences learning and inquiry in remote 1-1 tutoring of electromagnetism concepts. We constructed an AR tool that instructors can use during remote tutoring sessions of Faraday's Law and Lenz's Law, and conducted a between-subjects study where students were taught the same content under different levels of complexity of AR visualizations. Students who experienced a higher complexity (multiple dynamically changing 3D visualizations that are anchored and moving with real ob- jects) learned more, appeared to show a wider variety of inquiry styles, and showed more willingness to explore and take actions upon the learning activity, than compared to students experiencing the lower complexity application (which only used a few 2D representations not moving with the real objects). The AR visual representations seemed to stimulate students to think about multiple types of scientific concepts, to link relationships between concepts, and to encourage more active engagement.

The data for this study is confidential and not available for open ac- cess. The study has approval from the university's Institutional Review Board and adheres to the institution's ethical guidelines. The participants participated voluntarily, and all data has been anonymized prior to publication.

We wish to thank Zohal Shah, Bryan Janson, Kelly Miller, Alex Kontoyiannis, and Olivia Miller for their valuable formative input and assistance with recruitment, as well as our study participants and pub- lication reviewers. This material is based upon work supported by US National Science Foundation under grant no. 1917716.

