encoding of HyLL into SELLe (SELL plus quantification over locations) that gives better insights about the meaning of worlds in HyLL. We conclude our expressiveness study by showing that previous attempts of encoding Computational Tree Logic (CTL) operators into HyLL cannot be extended to consider the whole set of temporal connectives. We show that a system of LL with fixed points is indeed needed to faithfully encode the behavior of such temporal operators.

Extensions of LL have been proposed in order to fill this gap. The aim is to propose stronger logical frameworks that preserve the elegant properties of linear logic as the underlying logic. Two of such extensions are HyLL (Hybrid Linear Logic) 3 [8] and SELL (Subexponential Linear Logic) [9,19]. These logics have been extensively used for specifying systems that exhibit modalities such as temporal or spatial ones. The difference between HyLL and SELL relies on the way modalities are handled.

We also propose an encoding of HyLL into SELLA (SELL with quantification over locations) that gives better insights about the meaning of worlds in HyLL. More precisely, we represent HyLL formulas as formulas in SELL and encode the logical rules as formulas in SELLA. We show that a flat subexponential structure is sufficient for representing any world structure in HyLL. This explains better why the worlds in HyLL do not add any expressive power to LL: they cannot control the logical context as the subexponentials do with the promotion rule.

are the de Morgan duals of the negative connectives. A formula is positive if it is a negated atom or its top-level logical connective is positive. Similarly, a formula is negative if it is an atom or its top-level logical connective is negative.

Focused proofs are organized into two phases. In the negative phase, all the invertible inference rules are eagerly applied. The positive phase begins by choosing a positive formula F on which to focus. Positive rules are applied to F until either 1 or a negated atom is encountered (and the proof must end by applying the initial rules) or the promotion rule (!) is applied or a negative subformula is encountered, when the proof switches to the negative phase.

Definition 2.1 We call a monopole a linear logic formula that is built up from atoms and occurrences of the negative connectives, with the restriction that ? has atomic scope. Bipoles, on the other hand, are positive formulas built from monopoles and negated atoms using only positive connectives, with the additional restriction that ! can only be applied to a monopole.

Note that (A at u) is a mobile proposition: it carries with it the world at which it is true. Weakening and contraction are admissible rules for the unbounded context. The most important structural properties are the admissibility of the general identity (i.e. over any formulas, not only atomic propositions) and cut theorems.

The next definition introduces the encoding of HyLL inference rules into SELLA. Observe that, surprisingly, the subexponential structure needed is flat and it does not reflect the order on worlds. This is explained by the fact that worlds in HyLL do not control the context on rules as the promotion rule in SELL does. This also explains why HyLL does not add any expressive power to LL.

the needed property in that state. Therefore, the use of fixed points excludes the use of theories for encoding the transition system and we must internalize the tran- sition rules in the definition of the path quantifiers (see Definition 4.1). This seems to be the accurate way of controlling the use of rules in CTL.

Formal proofs in HyLL were implemented in [10], in the Coq proof assistant. It would be interesting to extend the implementations of HyLL given there to SELL. Such an interactive proof environment would enable both formal studies of encoded systems in SELL and formal meta-theoretical study of SELL itself.

