Energy efficiency has recently turned out to be primary issue in wireless sensor networks. Sensor net- works are battery powered, therefore become dead after a certain period of time. Thus, improving the data dissipation in energy efficient way becomes more challenging problem in order to improve the life- time for sensor devices. The clustering and tree based data aggregation for sensor networks can enhance the network lifetime of wireless sensor networks. Hybrid Ant colony optimization (ACO) and particle swarm optimization (PSO) based energy efficient clustering and tree based routing protocol is proposed. Initially, clusters are formed on the basis of remaining energy, then, hybrid ACOPSO based data aggrega- tion will come in action to improve the inter-cluster data aggregation further. Extensive analysis demon- strates that proposed protocol considerably enhances network lifetime over other techniques.

[15] utilized simulated annealing technique to control the topology by maximizing the network coverage and lifetime of WSNs as objective functions. Nayak and Vathasavai [16] utilized type-2 fuzzy logic in WSNs to make a decision for CH efficiency. Ouchi- tachen et al. [17] implemented IMOWCA (Improved Multi- Objective Weighted Clustering Algorithm) for the selection of CHs. Residual energy is used to select the best performing node for further communication with BS. Base Station Genetic Algorithm is utilized to balance the energy among different clusters.

Elshrkawey et al. [18] addressed the issues of LEACH protocol like improper selection of CH, formation of unbalanced clusters, and continuous transmission of updating data. They used threshold value to elect CHs, sensor nodes send their updated data in their allotted time, and modified TDMA scheduling is utilized to break steady state phase. Rani et al. [19] used E-CBCCP protocol to cache the data at CH and relay node to evade the communication of same data packets. Control packets are used to inform all sensor nodes that data packets are same and do not transmit the data packets. Laouid et al. [20] designed an approach to select the best route based on hop count and residual energy of each sensor node to maximize the life of network.

