On the other hand, we can consider two groups of attri- butes for learning material including explicit attributes and im- plicit (latent) attributes. Explicit attributes are known such as subject and publisher for learning materials and can be ex- tracted by experts, but implicit attributes that are latent can be inferred by historical ratings of learners. Some researches tried to combine attributes (features) of users or items with his- torical rating for recommendation. Robin [7] reviewed several hybrid recommender methods developed to combine the exter- nal (we called explicit) features and historical rating data for higher prediction accuracy. According to the experiment re- sults reported, it is believed that both features and the histor- ical ratings have great values to estimate the prediction function for recommendation.

In order to generate recommendations with higher quality and accuracy and alleviating some problems in existing recom- mender algorithms such as sparsity in learning environment, this research combines explicit and implicit attributes of learn- ers and materials in the unified model. This model has two modules. In the implicit attribute-based module, genetic algo- rithm is used for extracting implicit attributes of leaners from historical rating in the shape of weight vectors. In the explicit attribute-based module, preference matrix (PM) is introduced that can model the interest of learners based on explicit attri- butes of learning materials in a multidimensional space. The main contribution of this paper is improving the quality and

Rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, the previous related works on e-learning material recommender systems are discussed. Section 3 introduces the overall system framework and describes the proposed mechanism step by step. Experiment section applies the proposed algorithm for a dataset to evaluate and analyze the performance of method. Finally, Conclusion section provides the concluding remarks.

Recommender systems have already been implemented in real e-commerce applications such as Amazon [8] and CDNow [7] where they are used to recommend to online shoppers, prod- ucts and services that they might otherwise never discover on their own. There have also been several pioneering research system prototypes, such as Syskill and Webert [9], Fab [10], and GroupLens [11]. Many recommendation systems in vari- ous fields such as movies, music, news, commerce and medicine have been developed but few in education field [12]. With the appearance of e-learning, learning material (learning content or learning resource) recommendation is a new topic in recom- mendation systems.

Most of recommendation systems are designed either based on content-based filtering or collaborative filtering. Both types of systems have inherent strengths and weaknesses, where con- tent-based approaches directly exploit the product informa- tion, and the collaboration filtering approaches utilize specific user rating information. In addition, to produce the accurate and effective recommendations, researchers proposed several different algorithms, some of which derive from the achievements of data mining. Some of recommending algo- rithms are user-based collaborative filtering [13], Item-based collaborative filtering [10], Cluster-based collaborative filtering [14], Dimension reduction based collaborative filtering [15], Horting Graph-theoretic collaborative filtering [16] and Bayes- ian network based recommendation [17]. In the following of this section, we explain some researches about recommender systems in the area of e-learning in four categories.

Hybrids: Each recommendation strategy has its own strengths and weaknesses. Hence, combining several recom- mendation strategies can be expected to provide better results than either strategy alone [28,29]. Most hybrids work by combining several input data sources or several recommendation strategies. Liang et al. [30] implemented the combination of content-based filtering and collabora- tive filtering to make personalized recommendations for a courseware selection module. Liu and Shih [31] designed a material recommendation system based on association

Truly, rating of a user for an item represents the overall rat- ing value on different attribute value of product. Therefore, two users that have similar overall rating values for a specific item may place different emphases on its attributes. As a result, to have a good personalization in e-learning recommender sys- tems, it is necessary to consider different attributes of materials [36].

Thus, we can use the prediction models built based on the ob- served attributes or explicit attributes plus latent attributes or implicit attributes to improve the recommendation process for acquiring higher prediction accuracy [36]. In this research, the explicit attributes were modeled using PM and also genetic algorithm is used to find the relationship between the overall rating and the underlying implicit attributes weight vector for each learner. More specifically, given the ratings data of a learner, GA computes his/her preference model in terms of implicit attributes weight.

where x is the decimal number of the binary code for each attribute weight. Two matrixes of attributes weight WU = (w1, w1, ... , wN)T and WI = (e1, e1, .. . , eM)T that indi- cate attributes weight vectors for N users and M items respec- tively become the optimizing targets. Its initial solution could be some random values gained by an off-line process. At the basis of initial population, new individuals produced in each iteration are evaluated by fitness function.

where fc(WU, WI) denotes the value of fitness function for chromosome c, PS is number of individuals in the population or population size and pc(WU, WI) denotes the probability of selecting chromosome c. Because the sum of fitness in a popu- lation is constant, an individual with lower fitness)higher pre- diction accuracy) has larger probability to be chosen. We find that the universal sampling method scheme yields a good indi- vidual to be selected for the reproduction of the next popula- tion. We hope it would be helpful in improving the efficiency of our algorithm.

Mutation operator is used to investigate some of the unvis- ited points in the search space, and also to avoid premature convergence of the entire feasible space caused by some super chromosomes. This operator makes random changes in one or more elements of the string. Mutation is done with a small probability, called mutation probability or rate. According to mutation rate, randomly selecting some elements of individual, and changing its value, new individual can be gained. It is a lo- cal random searching method to keep diversity of population.

Definition 2. The preference model of learner Li is defined as a matrix with m rows in which m denotes the number of attri- butes of materials. Each cell in this matrix is defined as a four-tuple (KA, NH, RR, level), where KA is the keyword of the levelth attribute accessed materials by learner Li and level denotes the row number for this tuple.

ing for learner a. AWi indicates attribute weight that was de- fined before. For reflecting the similarity between the rating vectors of two learners, the learner rating based similarity can be applied to overcome sparsity rating problem. Inspired from Pearson, this similarity can be defined as follows:

recommendation: Explicit Attribute Based Collaborative Fil- tering (EAB-CF) and Implicit Attribute Based Collaborative Filtering (IAB-CF). These two methods can be combined for final recommendation. A linear combination of EAB-CF and IAB-CF is used for recommendation (EB-IB-CF). Therefore for rating prediction the following formula is used:

In order to check the performance of the proposed algorithm, a real-world dataset is applied in our simulations. MACE1 dataset that is pan-European initiative to interconnect and dis- seminate digital information about architecture is used for experiment. This dataset is issued from MACE project that is done from September 2006 to September 2010. This dataset uate decision support accuracy. For the evaluation of recom- mender system, they have been used by various researchers [12,14]. The precision is a measure of exactness and recall is a measure of completeness. Several ways to evaluate precision and recall exists [40]. When referring to Recommender Systems the recall can be defined as follows:

every generation. We only keep the 5% of the best individuals from each generation to obtain the next one (elitist selection). The genetic algorithm stops when there is an individual in the population with a fitness value lower than a constant c. We

In addition, there are three other parameters including: number of neighborhoods, weighting coefficient in the combination of two type of similarity in EBA-CF (beta) and EAB-CF and IAB-CF (alpha) that must be adjust for better recommendation. According to previous experiments, EBA-CF for b = 0.35 gives the best prediction accuracy.

One of the most important applications of recommendation systems in e-learning environment is personalization and rec- ommendation of learning materials. However, since the repos- itory of learning materials is very massive and these materials have several attributes, there are several drawbacks such as sparsity when applying the existing recommendation algo- rithms. To address these problems and have a good recom- mendation for learner, this paper presents a novel personalized recommender system that utilizes explicit and im- plicit attributes of materials in the unified model. The experi- ment results show that the proposed approach performs better than the traditional approaches. The main contribution of this paper is improving the quality of recommendations and addressing sparsity problem using genetic algorithm and a multidimensional information model.

