Recently, the Internet of Things (IoT) has played key roles in every aspect of daily routine tasks. It uses the continuous commu- nication of the internet to link different computing devices (things) to permit users to do their jobs [1]. The IoT is based on sensing devices that monitor, capture, and share data using a wireless net- work (WSN) [2]. These sensing devices are sometimes referred to as data producers, and the IoT applications are referred to in the current work as data consumers. The IoT is characterized by a large data flow, so it is known as a data-intensive domain [1].

The current work plans to reduce the energy and latency costs for enhancing data availability and system performance for all IoT applications. The sensed data and their traffic conditions are assessed and estimated using an intelligent approach to identify the accurate data need of each fog node. This can achieve efficient network traffic that minimizes the collision between the transmit- ted packets. The authors of this work proposed a novel intelligent solution for dynamic consistent replication and placement of IoT using fog computing. This proposed approach is called iFogRep and makes the following three contributions. To save and assess the information in the fog layer using iFogRep, each sensing device must transfer its data to the predefined owner to decrease the latency, energy, and network consumption.

The first contribution of this work is a new dynamic placement mechanism that allocates each sensing device to the optimal owner node. It uses a machine learning technique with an opti- mization function to estimate the real latency between the sources and destinations. The dynamic placement algorithm also defines the optimal capacity of each owner. The optimal owner is identi- fied based on the lowest latency and energy. The proposed place- ment algorithm reduces the consumption of the whole system latency.

To reduce the quantity of transmitted data and minimize the access latency of applications, the second contribution proposes a novel intelligent replication protocol. The proposed partial detached replication algorithm uses an adaptive prediction tech- nique. The adaptive prediction technique predicts the ideal num- ber of copies of each datum and determines their locations dynamically. Additionally, it uses an efficient machine learning mechanism to estimate the lowest latency path of each location.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 addresses the previous work that was concerned with IoT prob- lems of latency, availability, and inconsistency. Section 3 presents the suggested approach and algorithms to improve the placement, replication, and consistency of the IoT. Section 4 shows an experi- mental study that evaluates the proposed approach. Finally, the conclusion is presented in Section 5.

interruptions in communication. The authors of [27] introduced a dynamic data placement and replication approach. The graph par- titioning (GP) data placement method uses an edge server for effi- cient storage to minimize the latency. The proposed replication method implements a support vector machine as a machine learn- ing technique to classify the data center and forecast the workload.

Replication is usually added to achieve high data availability, but adding replication introduces a key need to maintain data con- sistency among replicas. Data consistency is defined as the capabil- ity of the platform to synchronize the data copies to the similar last form [1]. Indeed, replica synchronization adds a latency above to the platform based on the quantity of copies and their locations.

The consumer list is applied by increasing or eliminating nodes according to any change in the pattern access. The path miner sub- component is responsible for using the information about the physical properties of the network to determine and estimate the optimized shortest path between all fog nodes. The current path miner uses an algorithm introduced by [26].

Each sensing device is assigned uniquely to its optimal fog node, and every fog node j is in charge of receiving a subset of data items. Therefore, the fog node is referred to as the owner of those items. In other words, each datum di is allocated to only one specific fog node that is referred to as the owner of that item.

