in the form of random so that the content not appears. Encryption and decryption consume large amount of time. Therefore, there is a need for effective algorithm. They pro- posed a region based selective image encryption technique which provides facilities of selective encryption and selective images of reconstruction. Gao et al. [4] proposed a nonlinear chaotic algorithm (NCA), which uses the power function and the tangent function instead of the linear function.

Yu et al. [5] suggested that the efficiency of image encryp- tion algorithm depends on the reconstruction of the image using some neighboring pixel characteristics. In accordance with the characteristics of different images of various bilateral level slightly, encryption system proposed reconstructs of the bit-level. Since the permutation of sub-images composing high 4-bits of the original image has a relatively high computational complexity, in this scheme the permutation of sub-images is performed with low 4-bits instead, which therefore has a lower computational complexity.

ICA defines a generative model for observed multivariate data, which usually is given as a large database of samples. In this model, data variable are assumed to be linear or nonlinear mixtures of some unknown latent variables, and mixing system is also unknown. And it is assumed that the underlying vari- ables of non-Gaussian are independent of each other and are called independent components (IC) of the observed data. These independent components are also called sources or fac- tors that can be found by ICA [14,15].

Decorrelation or whitening. This stage seeks to diago- nalize the covariance matrix of the input signals. This is done through computing the sample covariance matrix, giving the second order statistics of the observed output. From this, a matrix is computed by eigen decomposition which whitens the observed data.

Rotation. This stage reduces a measure of the higher order statistics which will ensure that the non- Gaussian output signals are as statistically independent as possible. It is clear that this stage can be carried out by a unitary rotation matrix, to provide the higher order independence. And it is performed by finding a rotation matrix which jointly diagonalize eigenmatrices formed from the fourth order cumulants of the whitened data. The outputs from this stage are the independent components.

is the idea that the pixels have strong inter-dependencies espe- cially when they are spatially close. These dependencies carry important information about the structure of the objects in the visual scene. The resultant SSIM index is a decimal value between  1 and 1, and value 1 is only reachable in the case of two identical sets of data.

where I(x, y) is the original image, I'(x, y) is the approxi- mated version and (M, N) are the dimensions of the images. A lower value for Mean Square Error (MSE) means less error, and as seen from the inverse relation between the MSE and PSNR, this translates into a high value of PSNR. Here, the signal is the original image, and the noise is the error in reconstruction.

In this paper, we proposed a new Encryption method consists of a combination of Independent Component Analysis and Arnold Cat Map matrix. The experimental results showed that the proposed approach yields a better encryption performance compared to random matrix using JADE algorithm. The results have shown the unintelligibility of the tested images using Arnold Cat Map matrix in comparison with random matrix. Also it can be estimated that the cryptanalytic efforts that need to analyze this proposed system will be very high in comparison with the efforts paid to the system based on ICA alone.

