WSNs are widely used in various applications types such as: medical treatment, battlefield, industrial monitoring, and threat detection. One of the major concerns in WSNs is the maintenance of sensor nodes, as most of them are battery operated. These sensor nodes are often positioned in harsh environments that are difficult to reach. Thus, short battery lifetime in WSNs is one of the major limitations of sensor node. Moreover, it is mandatory to deploy of large number of wireless sensing devices for various purposes like temperature sensing, humidity sensing and many more. Energy harvesting is a method to recharge the nodes, that is, it is

Section 2 presents a literature survey based on lifetime exten- sion techniques and techniques to improve long distance charging in WSNs. Section 3 illustrate the design of MRC based drone model. Further, in Section 4, Introduction to MRCRLB architecture is repre- sented followed by its technical specifications. Section 5 represents the results and discussion after the implementation of proposed model on various modulation schemes. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

Extensive simulation results show that selection of appropriate modulation scheme depends upon the type of application and parameter in WSNs. Further, to regenerate the power in wireless sensor nodes, UAV is deployed which is based on magnetic coupling-based recharging and load balancing to enhance the life- time of sensor networks. Indeed, MRCRLB has the advantage of re- generating power along with the load balancing. In this paper, the proposed MRCRLB model when implemented on real-test beds can be used to increase the lifetime of WSNs, but to examine its feasi- bility with modulation scheme, BPSK, QPSK, 16QAM and 64QAM modulation schemes are tested in rechargeable scenario. The out- comes of simulations (in NS2) proved that 64QAM is inappropriate model for rechargeable sensor nodes, while QPSK is optimum solu- tion in terms of AVGd when the network size is small. However, when the network size grows, BPSK and 16QAM are more efficient. Besides this, BPSK modulation scheme best fits with rechargeable sensor networks if the considered parameter is number of packet drops. It works best for both small and large network size. There- fore, type of modulation scheme to be selected for wireless rechargeable sensor network totally depends on the size of net- work and the parameter to be considered.

