Intruders can even check if there is something secret in it. In that case, they deal with the possibility of changing cover contents. Such analyses are known as steganalysis techniques [18]. With these consid- erations in mind, the performance of steganography is evaluated with the ability to increase the data hiding rate, decrease the distortion rate of the carrier and resist attacks.

[25] increased the number of edge pixels by applying morphological operator dilation on edge image owing to improve the edge pixels and thus, the embedding capacity. The author also applied hybrid edge de- tectors for the same purpose. In addition to the edge detection tech- nique, Kusuuma et al. [26] in 2018 applied an encryption method for the secret message to strengthen the security of hidden data. Khan et al.

Studies in the state of the art reveal that edge detection-based em- bedding schemes suffer from less embedding capacity. Therefore, as the demand for data hiding increases, so does the challenge with the capa- bility of such schemes, because the number of edge pixels obtained in such a conventional way may be unable to conceive the demanded in- formation. Such good methods will then be ineffective. Our target is to

We have adapted the technique of combining the results of multiple edge detectors owing to increase the number of edge pixels, further. We have also made our scheme enable to concealment of a different number of bits in edge and non-edge pixels. Therefore, the proposed scheme increases both the embedding capacity and the visual quality of stego images. At the same time, it shows strong resistance against statistical attacks.

Throughout this manuscript, Section 2 discussed previous existing studies related to this manuscript. Section 3 presents the proposed method neatly. The simulated results of our scheme are demonstrated in Section 4. Section 4.6 is devoted to testing the robustness of the pro- posed scheme against attacks. Section 5 narrates the implications and limitations of our work. Finally, Section 6 draws a conclusion of the article.

We developed two different programs for each of the proposed meth- ods, Bai et al., Setiadi D. R. I. M., Sultana et al. and Rasol et al. where one is for data implantation and the other is for retrieving the implanted

Although this model has many advantages it also has some limi- tations. This model cannot work without edge detectors. This model consumes time when applying predictor and it is not a big matter. If a steganography approach generates someone to suspect the carrier medium, thus the model has been unsuccessful.

