In this article, we discuss the automatic inference of sufficient pre-conditions by abstract interpretation and sketch the construction of an under-approximating backward analysis. We focus on numeric domains and propose transfer functions, including a lower widening, for polyhedra, without resorting to disjunctive com- pletion nor complementation, while soundly handling non-determinism. Applications include the derivation of sufficient conditions for a program to never step outside an envelope of safe states, or dually to force it to eventually fail. Our construction is preliminary and essentially untried, but we hope to convince that this avenue of research is worth considering.

Section 2 introduces sufficient conditions at the level of transition systems. Sec- tion 3 presents some algebraic properties of backward functions, which are exploited in Sec. 4 to design under-approximated operators for polyhedra. Section 5 discusses related work and Sec. 6 concludes.

Generator representations are not unique, and the output of o depends on the choice of representation. The same issue occurs for the standard widening. We can use a similar fix: we add to A o B any generator from B that is redundant with a generator in A. Our lower widening can also be refined in a classic way by

Since their introduction by Dijkstra [8], weakest (liberal) preconditions have been much studied, using a variety of inference and checking methods, including inter- active theorem proving [9] and automatic finite-state computations. These meth- ods are exact (possibly with respect to an abstract model over-approximating the concrete system, so that sufficient conditions on the model do not always give suffi- cient conditions for the original system). Fully automatic methods based on under- approximations are less common.

In this article, we have discussed the inference of sufficient conditions by ab- stract interpretation. We have presented general properties of backward under- approximated semantics, and proposed example transfer functions in the poly- hedra domain. Much work remains to be done, including designing new under- approximated operators (tests and lower widenings, in particular), considering new domains, experimenting on realistic programs. Our construction and results are very preliminary and remain mostly untried; our hope is only to convince the reader that this constitutes a fruitful avenue of research.

