So there cannot be a version of predictive labeling with models and arbitrary in- terpretations. 3 Nevertheless, R is innermost terminating. Therefore we investigate whether one can use predictive labeling with models for innermost termination, where one can freely choose interpretations and where the algebra only has to be a model of the usable rules. As the previous results on predictive labeling only work for quasi-models, one cannot reuse them for innermost rewriting, e.g., Example 2.3 below shows that the main theorem of predictive labeling [4, Theorem 18] does not hold for innermost rewriting.

Note that R is innermost terminating. The reason is that test-ab(x) can only be evaluated to true if x is instantiated with a(b). But this is not allowed as a(b) is not in normal form. We choose the algebra A with carrier A = {0, 1}, interpretations

The previous example does not show that semantic labeling with models is unsound for innermost termination because there are no decreasing rules when using models. Indeed, in the next section we show the soundness of semantic labeling with models for innermost termination. Actually, we prove a stronger results by incorporating usable rules.

Note that Lemma 3.3(i) and (ii) will allow us to transform innermost reductions of R into infinite innermost reductions of lab(R). This is needed for the proof of the main theorem of this section (Theorem 3.4). Property (iii) is only needed to prove Lemma 3.3.

We have analyzed how the powerful technique of semantic labeling can be used to prove innermost termination. It turned out that semantic labeling can be used for models but not for quasi-models. We extended our results to predictive labeling such that one only has to find a model for the usable as opposed to all rules. This approach was further improved by incorporating argument filters. The latter extension was finally integrated with predictive labeling for termination.

Semantic [9] and predictive [4] labeling with infinite (quasi-)models for termination have been implemented in the automatic termination prover TPA [6]. The under- lying theory is worked out in [8] and [7]. In the latter paper predictive labeling for termination is combined with dependency pairs. Modifying these results to cover innermost termination is straightforward. Incorporating argument filterings will in- crease the search space but otherwise poses no challenge. We anticipate that the power of TPA and other termination provers will be increased by the results of this paper.

