In transportation engineering, the topmost consideration should be safety. Therefore, professional scientific effort should be made by both private and public sectors to comprehensively interpret service conditions and the changing mechanism of road roughness levels. The international roughness index (IRI) was initially pro- posed in a research project conducted by the University of Michi- gan (Cebon, 1993) for monitoring the overall roughness condition of certain pavements. The IRI mainly measures the longitudinal profile condition of a travelled roadway according to the vehicle vibration condition. The most widely used units for measuring the the IRI. Therefore, fuzzy time-series methods should be investi- gated to bridge the gaps in current literature with regard to intel- ligent IRI predictions. Fuzzy time-series prediction methods have been successfully applied to several fields such as stock predic- tion and weather prediction, and these applications serve as in- valuable reference for the IRI prediction research conducted in this study.

Considering the background described above, the present study aims to develop an IRI prediction approach based on an innovative fuzzy time-series analysis. To fulfill this purpose, multifactor and multigranularity analyses are considered for time-series forecast- ing. First, the automatic clustering technique (ACT) is adopted to generate a series interval within each granular space, which should be defined in advance. Next, a second-order fuzzy-trend matrix (SFTM) and fuzzy-trend relationship classification (FTRC) method are proposed to predict the fuzzy-trend of each factor. Then, the fuzzy-trend states of multiple granular spaces are generated while giving full consideration to various uncertainties. Finally, the par- ticle swarm optimization (PSO) technique is employed to forecast the optimal IRI value. Comparative experiments are performed to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

fuzzy time-series analysis. On the basis of this theory, Song and Chissom (1993) developed the first fuzzy time-series model in 1993, which was a remarkable breakthrough. Later, several stud- ies were conducted on the optimization (Chen & Jian, 2017; Chen, Manalu, Pan, & Liu, 2013; Yu, 2005) and application of time-series analysis. A few representative examples are listed here: Chen (1996) aimed to optimize the complexity of a fuzzy time-series model, Huarng (2001) proposed a heuristic algorithm (Kuo et al., 2009) to improve the accuracy of the prediction result of a fuzzy time series, and Zadeh (1996) proposed a time-series model optimized for computing with words prediction analysis.

val and the next cluster, which is {dm, dn}, as the current class. (2) Judge whether the current interval is [di, dj ) with the current class of {dk }. If so, convert the current class {di, dj } to interval [di , dk ).

Generally, GrC is realized based on three basic notions: gran- ules, granular space, and hierarchy structures (Wang, Zhang, Ma, & Yang, 2011; Yao, 2005). Granules are the unit elements of a GrC model and are distributed in their specific granular spaces. The in- dividual granular space (father granular space) can be composed of several subgranular spaces (child granular spaces), and both the father and child granular spaces themselves can be hierarchically distributed as well. Thus, the comprehensive hierarchy of multiple granular spaces can be used to model the multifactor and multi- scale organized datasets, especially for handling problems that in- volve both certainty and uncertainty influences that should be con- sidered simultaneously (Chen & Tanuwijaya, 2011).

Specifically, each IRI measurement factor is considered as an in- dividual granule. Therefore, three granules can be defined by three IRI factors, which are the principal factor and two subfactors. Then, we define three granular spaces: (1) the first granular space con- taining only the principal factor, (2) the second granular space con- taining the principal factor and one of the subfactors, and (3) the third granular space containing the principal factor and both the subfactors.

The PSO algorithm is a global random search algorithm based on swarm intelligence and hence is more intelligent than tradi- tional methods. The main idea behind this method is the simula- tion of the migration and clustering behavior during bird foraging. Various organisms in nature have certain group behaviors; thus, one of the main research areas of artificial life is to explore the group behaviors of natural organisms, thereby constructing intelli- gent models for solving practical problems with scientific perspec- tives.

In most situations, PSO is used to optimize the solutions of other methods instead of providing independent models. Specifi- cally, potential solutions to a certain problem are regarded as birds, called particles, in the solution space. Each particle has a fitness value that is determined by the defined fitness function and has a velocity that determines the direction and distance from which the particle is to move toward the optimum position. When the spe- cific optimization problem has been established, a group of ran- dom particles (random solutions) is generated to initialize the par- ticles. Then, the moving velocity and positions of the particle are iteratively updated to find the optimal solution. In each iteration, the particle updates itself by tracking two extremums: the optimal solution found by the particle itself, which is called the individual extremum, and the optimal solution found among the entire pop- ulation in the current state, which is called the global extremum. Finally, the optimized model is obtained when the satisfied fitness value is achieved.

Therefore, the primary consideration of utilizing PSO in this re- search is based on the three abovementioned reasons, which can be summarized as follows: (1) PSO is an intelligent algorithm that outperforms traditional methods, yet few studies have used this approach to analyze pavement roughness conditions. (2) PSO is best utilized when it is combined with other methods to solve cer- tain optimization problems instead of being independently used for model building. In this manner, PSO can serve as an effec- tive approach to solve complex optimization problems. (3) The PSO method has been proven to be significantly effective in solving dif- ferent types of problems; hence, this research aimed to determine the effectiveness of the PSO method in solving the problem of IRI prediction.

Define fuzzy sets for both the principal factor and sub- factors: Consider that A1 , A2 , . . . , Ap represent the fuzzy set of the principal factor and B j,1 , B j,2 , . . . , B j,mj represent the

Fuzzify data: Based on the fuzzy sets defined previously, as- sign all the recorded historical data to the intervals they be- long to. If a certain value is within the interval of ui, then fuzzify that value into Ai. Similarly, if that value belongs to the interval vj, k, then fuzzify it into Bj, k.

IRI prediction experiments are performed using the proposed multigranularity fuzzy time-series method. Original IRI data are extracted from the LTPP database. Different from the traditional methods, which consider only a single factor when predicting IRI changes, the proposed method utilizes multiple factors. Specifi- cally, the average IRI values are selected as the principal factor, and the IRIs measured in the left and right wheel paths are used as the subfactors. The model predicts the average IRI in the next state with comprehensive consideration of the IRI values in the current state. Therefore, the results are more reliable.

repairing operations have been conducted in section Florida 3804 according to the records in the database. The first op- eration was a minor maintenance task, which reduced the IRI from around 2.5 to 2.0. After two years, a rehabilita- tion was carried out, which reduced the IRI to close to 1.0.

Because times-series prediction relies highly on historical data, the data from 1997 to 2014 are collected for model training. Then, the trained model is used to predict the IRI value for the year 2015. The IRI values extracted from the LTPP database are considered as ground truth values to calculate the errors of the model. Thus, the IRI values used for model training are considered as the current state, whereas the IRIs for the year 2015 (the last year) are re- garded as the next state to be predicted.

The proposed model employs the multigranularity method to provide highly reliable IRI predictions. By comparing the IRI prediction errors of the proposed method with those of the polynomial fitting, ARIMA, and BPNN methods, it is found that the proposed method has the smallest RMSE (0.191) and RE (6.37%) values, which indicate the effectiveness of the pro- posed approach.

Wei Li: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing, Fund- ing acquisition. Ju Huyan: Conceptualization, Methodology, Valida- tion, Formal analysis, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Writ- ing - review & editing. Liyang Xiao: Methodology, Validation, For- mal analysis, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Writing - re- view & editing. Susan Tighe: Validation, Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing, Funding acquisition. Lili Pei: Validation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Writing - review & editing.

