Today, the number of interactive services proposed on the Internet is exploding. Most of them use cryptographic protocols to guarantee some level of security. They can be seen as relatively simple programs which are executed in an unsecure envi- ronment. There are different approaches for modeling cryptographic protocols and analyzing their security properties. One of them is the approach of Dolev and Yao [12], which models the attacker capabilities by a deduction system. This model is often used to analyze the security of protocols against a passive attacker, i.e an in- truder which obtains information by eavesdropping on the communications between honest participants and deduces some information from these messages. The ques- tion whether a passive attacker gets a certain information from observed messages on the network is called the intruder deduction problem.

Algebraic Properties: Usually the capabilities of the intruder are based on the so-called perfect cryptography assumption, i.e. it is impossible to obtain any information about an encrypted message without knowing the exact key necessary to decrypt this message. Unfortunately, this perfect cryptography assumption is too idealistic: There are protocols which can be proved secure under the perfect cryptography assumption, but which are in reality insecure since an attacker can use properties of the cryptographic primitives in combination with the protocol rules to learn some secret informations (see [2] for a survey). It is necessary to relax this assumption by increasing the deductive power of the intruder. One possibility is to add the capability to take into account some algebraic properties to model an intruder in a more realistic way, which may find new attacks.

In the rest of the paper, to prove the locality of the deduction system, we define a new notion of subterms (Definition 5.7) and some transformations of proof which enable us to prove that any proof can be transformed into a normal proof. Hence we prove that a normal proof is in fact a local proof in Theorem 9.1, yielding the decidability of the intruder deduction problem, using Theorem 4.2.

Any proof can be transformed into a simple proof since we can always cut some branch or piece of branch of the proof. In any proof we can always merge two consecutive applications of a rule (CK ) (respectively (DK ) and (GX)) and get a flat proof. Hence a flat proof can always be transformed into a flat and simple proof.

