Customer attrition in the banking industry occurs when consumers quit using the goods and services offered by the bank for some time and, after that, end their connection with the bank. Therefore, customer retention is essential in today's extremely competitive banking market. Additionally, having a solid customer base helps attract new consumers by fostering confidence and a referral from a current clientele. These factors make reducing client attrition a crucial step that banks must pursue. In our research, we aim to examine bank data and forecast which users will most likely discontinue using the bank's services and become paying customers. We use various machine learning algorithms to analyze the data and show comparative analysis on different evaluation metrics. In addition, we developed a Data Visualization RShiny App for Data Science and Management regarding customer churn analysis. Analyzing this data will help the bank indicate the trend and then try to retain customers on the verge of attrition.

The success of any business model relies on having a large customer base, which entails achieving two primary objectives: acquiring new customers and retain existing ones. Winning new customers involves designing products and advertising them to the appropriate demographics. The second challenge, retaining customers, is essential for any business model to thrive, as lost customers are highly unlikely to return. Our problem statement primarily addresses the concern about maintaining customers and predicting their patterns, which eventually contributes to solving the customer attrition problem (De Caigny et al., 2020; Lee and Shin, 2020; Shirazi and Mohammadi 2019). To address customer attrition, previous studies have discussed customer relationship management (CRM) systems and three approaches for retention (De Caigny et al., 2020; De Lima Lemos et al., 2022; Rahman and Kumar, 2020) These articles include post- purchase evaluations, periodic satisfaction surveys, and continuous satisfaction tracking. They provide an excellent foundation for exploring the reasons for customer dissatisfaction.

This study makes several important contributions to the body of knowledge regarding customer churn analysis and ML in the banking sector. The first part of the article presents a comprehensive preprocessing method that guarantees data correctness and consistency, addressing the critical issue of data preparation unique to customer churn analysis in banking. Second, the study thoroughly examines different ML methods and evaluates their effectiveness in anticipating customer attrition. This comparative analysis offers valuable insights into the performance of various churn prediction algorithms in the banking industry. Furthermore, by offering a user- friendly tool for displaying churn-related insights, the development of the Data Visualization RShiny App enhances the practical application of churn analysis. Finally, this study yields useful implications for banks, emphasizing the importance of understanding customer attrition and providing practical recommendations to improve client retention.

This section introduces different ML techniques and applies them to the dataset. We focused on core ML approaches, including logistic regression, support vector machine (SVM), random forest, and eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost). In this section, we then introduce a visualization tool for stakeholders tailored explicitly to summarize different data in a single mode.

An SVM provides the distance to the border, and several steps must be undertaken to convert it to probability (Cervantes et al., 2020). When applied to specific issues, one technique may outperform another (Sothe et al., 2020; Anton et al., 2019).

The key findings of this research indicate that the random forest model performed best in terms of accuracy (78.3%) and sensitivity (69.3%), followed by XGBoost, with an accuracy of 83.9%. The analysis revealed critical factors influencing customer churn, such as nationality, gender, number of products owned, and account balance. For example, German customers were found to have a higher likelihood of churning than French or Spanish customers. Male customers have a lower probability of churning than female customers. Additionally, customers with two bank products are more likely to stay, whereas those with three products are more likely to churn. Customers maintaining a balance above 85,000 are also more likely to churn, potentially because of attractive offerings from other banks.

Effective decision making: The Data Visualization RShiny App developed in this study provides stakeholders with a comprehensive visualization, enabling them to make informed decisions. By utilizing the app and insights derived from this research, banks can gain a clearer understanding of churn trends, customer behavior, and the effectiveness of retention strategies. This will empower them to make data-driven decisions and effectively allocate resources to improve customer retention.

Furthermore, the findings of this study affect numerous other industries in addition to the banking sector. The examination of customer attrition and comprehension of the underlying variables are applicable to a variety of businesses, including insurance, telecommunications, subscription- based services, and e-commerce. Adopting a thorough preparation strategy and combining various pieces of data guarantee the accuracy and consistency of data analyses across sectors. Similarly, using ML algorithms to forecast customer churn or other important business outcomes enables the optimization of proactive client retention and marketing strategies. Decisions in areas such as CRM, marketing initiatives, resource allocation, and product development are supported by the creation of the Data Visualization RShiny App. The research conclusions thus have useful ramifications that may be applied to a variety of sectors, directing data-driven decision making and improving client retention methods.

