A hereditarily finite set S can be canonically represented through a pointed finite graph G in which each node represents a different element of the transitive closure of {S} and the edges of G model the membership relation. Since the notion of bisimulation can be naturally defined also on graphs, this means that in the canonical representation of S there are not two different bisimilar nodes. Well- founded sets are represented by acyclic graphs, while non-well-founded sets are represented by cyclic ones (e.g., see [2] for more details).

Now a quite general question arises: is there a natural way to inductively rea- son on both well-founded and non-well-founded hereditarily finite sets represented through graphs? In other terms, is there a way to inductively construct/deconstruct graphs representing hereditarily finite sets? Such question has been previously for- malized and studied in [14] where the authors ask whether given the canonical representation of a set, it is always possible to find a node which can be removed producing the canonical representation of another set, i.e., without causing any bisimulation collapse. A definitive answer is not provided in [14]. In this paper we further investigate in that direction proving that there are cases in which it is not possible to remove any node without causing collapses. On the other hand, we provide positive evidence on the fact that there always exists an edge which can be safely removed. This result is achieved by introducing the notion of n-well-founded part of a non-well-founded graph and by applying Ackermann code on it.

Proof. If v is not disposable, then there exists a weakly connected component of G \ v that is not hyper-extensional and there exists a bisimulation that is not the identity for it. By extending this bisimulation with the identity over the other weakly connected components, we obtain a bisimulation for G \ v that is not the identity. Thus, G \ v is not hyper-extensional and v is a keystone for G.	2

Proof. If G had two roots, p1 and p2, then, by definition of root, both p1 is reachable from p2 and p2 is reachable from p1. It follows that G is cyclic and this contradicts our hypothesis. Hence, G must have one root p.

Notice that wf n(v) can be represented as a graph. In particular, this can be computed taking the unravelling of G of order n starting from v and using only the non-well-founded nodes reachable from x. Then the well-founded trees are attached to the leaves.

If there exists i such that xi is well-founded, then k = 1 and x1 is the root of G. In this case, it is easy to prove that there exists an edge x1 e y that is disposable. Let us consider the case in which all the elements of H are non-well-founded.

In this paper we considered the problem of removing parts from an hereditarily finite set without causing bisimulation collapses. We exploited a SAGE pipeline that we implemented to prove that the problem has a negative answer if one is interested in removing a node. On the other hand, we gave a positive answer in the case of removal of one edge, provided that only nodes in the same weakly connected components are compared.

The results in [16] are based on a Markov chain Monte Carlo-based algorithm, initially proposed for generating acyclic digraphs [11,12]. The key fact needed in order to show that the Markov chain converges to the uniform distribution were the irreducibility, aperiodicity, and symmetry of the chain. The idea exploited in the construction of the Markov chain was to show that a pair of elementary operations on graphs (implemented as basic transition rules of the Markov chain, akin to the elimination of a node) could be used to transform any graph G into another graph G0 within the same family. A positive answer to the one-node elimination problem would have allowed to immediately extend such results to non-well-founded sets, getting a random generator for HF1/2.

