Recently, D. viscosa extends to infectious agents where it was found to be antiviral and antimicrobial activities. In addition to its special use as a spasmolytic and hypotensive agent. Regarding medicinal effects of the plant parts, the leaves were reported to possess bioactive elements resembling the activity of local anes- thetic, smooth muscle relaxant, antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory and anti-ulcerogenic agents [1,10]. However, lack of literature on medicinal properties of the selected plant indicates that no work has been done on the Omani species. On the basis of medical importance of the selected plant, now, it is commercially cultivated all over the world including Sultanate of Oman. Therefore, it is nec- essary to evaluate the biological activities of D. viscosa, which is abundantly available in Oman mainly in Al Jabal Al Akhdar and Al Hamra. The present investigation involves to prepare different crude extracts from the leaves of Omani D. viscosa species, and to isolate and characterize antioxidant compounds from crude extract having the highest antioxidant activity and to determine their antioxidant activity.

The leaves of D. viscosa sample were collected from AL-Hamra in the month of September 2016 at 10 am and identified at the Bio- logical Science Division, University of Nizwa, Oman. The leaves of the selected plant were identified by local people and confirm by the website. The collected leaves sample was transported to the Research Laboratory, University of Nizwa, Oman for cleaning and the healthy clean leaves were separated from the stems and dried under the shade for 7 days.

The highest antioxidant hexane extract (1.20 g) and ethyl acet- ate crude extract (1.50 g) was used for the separation of antioxi- dant compounds by using column chromatography with different organic solvents as a mobile phase. According to the same Rf val- ues, the isolated fractions from the column chromatography were combined together and evaporated the mother solvent at ambient temperature. Based on the TLC, these similar TLC pattern eluents were combined together to give Fraction 1, Fraction 2, Fraction 3, Fraction 4, Fraction 5 and Fraction 6. Similarly, the same chromatographic techniques were used to separate the ethyl acet- ate crude extract by using different polar solvents. According the TLC, four fractions (Fraction 1, Fraction 2, Fraction 3, and Fraction 4) were obtained from the ethyl acetate extract. All fractions were evaporated at ambient temperature inside the fume hood. The iso- lated fraction was again purified by preparative thin layer chro- matography (PTLC) to give the pure compounds. The structures of purified compounds from both crude extracts were elucidated by using MS and 1D and 2D NMR.

Huge number of medicinal plants has been investigated world- wide by the scientists for their biological activities. Most of the sci- entists are interested to find out the naturally occurring new drugs with significant medicinal values from the nature without side effect for the treatment of diseases. The plant crude extract con- tains several chemical compounds which is responsible for biolog- ical activities. The bioactivities of crude extracts obtained from the plants are completely depends on the bioactive constituents. The selected medicinal plant species showed several biological activi- ties like antioxidant, antimicrobial, anticandidal, antidiabetic, anti- fungal, and antidiarrheal activities [1,12] and the plant is used traditionally for the treatment of different diseases. The leaves of the selected medicinal plant species are used traditionally world- wide including Oman for the treatment of itching, swelling, aches, developing solvent was used to separate the pure compounds from the fraction 1 by using preparative TLC. Again, repeat the prepara- tive TLC and crystallization to get the pure compound 1. Similarly, the pure compound 2 was obtained from fraction 2 of hexane extract by several chromatographic systems.

separated compound 2 was crystallized from dichloromethane to give white crystals. The pure isolated compound 2 was identified on the basis of MS and 1H NMR, 13C NMR and 2D NMR. It had molecular weight (M+, 442) with corresponding molecular formula is C29H50O2. In the 1H NMR spectrum, the isolated compound 2 showed one proton each position at C-3 and C-6 as multiples at d

