Bayesian networks are graphical models for efficiently organising probabilistic in- formation [1,3,8,15,16,17]. These models can be used for probabilistic reasoning (inference), where the updated probability is inferred from certain evidence. These techniques are extremely useful, for instance in a medical setting, where symptoms and measurements can be used as evidence, and the inferred probability can help a doctor reach a decision.

e. This forms the E-part of what is called Expectation-Maximisation (EM), see [9]. In the M-part the channel e becomes a learning goal in itself. In Expectation- Maximisation these E- and M-parts are alternated. But here we concentrate on the E-part only and assume that the channel e is given and remains fixed.

Our second example from [10] also claims to be an instance of expectation- maximisation. However, what happens there is completely different from expectation-maximisation as used in [18]. A crucial point of this paper is that the difference can be explained in terms of M-learning versus C-learning along a channel.

We thus notice in these Examples 5.3 and 5.4 that [10] and [18] perform com- pletely different computations in their explanation of expectation-maximisation, using, respectively, in the terminology of our setting, M-learning and C-learning along a channel. It is unclear why they do different things and still use the same Expectation-Maximisation terminology.

We conclude this section with some general observations. The most interesting one is that C-learning along a channel is additively compositional. This means that it can handle additional data as it arrives, by performing another C-learning step. This is a clear advantage of C-learning over M-learning.

Extending the channel-based analysis from the E-part of the EM-algorithm to the whole of EM. This involves, in the context of the diagram (10), not only learning the state, but also learning the channel (as M-part). The Expectation- Maximisation algorithm involves iterating these E- and M-parts until some level of stability is reached. It will be described in an extended version of this paper.

