We propose a lexicalized formulation of dependency grammar that addresses both immediate dependence and linear precedence. Our approach distinguishes two orthogonal, yet mutually constraining dependency trees: an ID tree of syn- tactic dependencies and a LP tree of topological dependencies. The ID tree is non-ordered, non-projective and its edges are labeled by grammatical functions. The LP tree is ordered and projective and expresses licensed linearizations; its edges are labeled by topological fields. The LP tree can be regarded as deriving from the ID tree through a process of emancipation controlled by lexicalized con- straints and principles. In the present article, we formalize valid ID/LP analyses and show how they can be characterized as the solutions of a constraint satisfac- tion problem. The latter can be solved by constraint programming and forms the basis of our implementation.

constraints and of principles governing climbing conditions. In [4], we described its application to an account of word-order phenomena in the German verbcomplex. In the present article, we focus on its formalization and state a formal well-formedness condition that precisely characterizes the valid analyses. Furthermore, this condition can also be interpreted as a constraint program and forms the basis of our implementation.

Principle 2. A node may not climbthrough a barrier, i.e. none of its ID an- cestors up to (but not including) its host may block its emancipation. We consider only a simple version, where a node can block a set of syntactic relations.

Principle 2: a node may not climb through a barrier. We consider in this article only a very simple notion of barrier: a node may be a barrier to specific syntactic relations; we say that it blocks them: e.g. a noun blocks det. The nodes which w must climbthrough are:

For verbs, our grammar distinguishes between coherent (field vc) and extraposed position (field xf). While xf is called the extraposition field, it should not be regarded as uniquely dedicated to the phenomenon of ex- traposition. For example, both Oberfeldumstellung and extraposition are explained here by migration to the xf field. As we previously described in [4], a number of phenomena, such as VP extraposition, partial VP extra- position, optional auxiliary flip, V-projection raising, intermediate place- ment, obligatory auxiliary flip, double auxiliary flip, obligatory coherence can be modeled as emergent from the interaction of our lexicalized con- straints.

