Zingiber cassumunar (ZC) is used by tribal people in northern Thailand in traditional remedies for anti- obesity and in food recipes. Extracts from this plant have been studied for several pharmacological effects including anti-obesity, but with no clear evidence on cellular mechanism of activity. This study aim to investigate the lipolytic and anti-adipogenic activity of crude extracts from ZC on in vitro cultures of the mouse adipocyte cell-model, 3T3-L1. Dry rhizome powder was extracted with absolute ethanol and boiled-water. On the exposed pre-adipocytes to the extracts, cytotoxicity was not detected by using the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. Lipid content and glyc- erol release were assessed using Oil Red-O and a commercial Adipolysis Assay kits respectively. The extracts exhibited no significant lipolytic activity on the exposed mature-adipocytes, in serial dilutions ranging from 1 to 800 mg/ml. However, anti-lipogenic activity was presented. All extracts significantly firmed by the expression of selected genes, determined by using real-time PCR techniques, in four groups namely: adipocyte differentiation genes, glucose uptake genes, lipid metabolism genes and fatty acid oxi- dation genes. 1H NMR spectrum of the extracts exhibited the prominent olefinic protons of phenylbu- tanoids, the group of compounds previously proved with several bioactivities. This study provided evidences of mechanisms that apparently verify the traditional use of ZC to prevent obesity.

The rhizome, young leaves and flowers of Zingiber cassumunar Roxb. (ZC) (Zingiberaceae) have long been used as a flavorings in Thai cuisine and as fresh ingredients in northern Thai salads. Syno- nyms of the scientific name include Zingiber montanum (J. Koenig) Link ex A. Dietr. (ZM) and Z. purpureum Roscoe. [1]. The Thai name of this monocotyledonous plant is Phlai or Plai [2,3] and the interna- tional common name is cassumunar ginger [4]. ZC has been investi- gated for several pharmacological properties, including antioxidant [5], anti-inflammation [6], anti-allergic [7], anti-proliferative [8], antiulcer [9] and insecticidal [10]. Anti-adipogenic activity of closely (Grand Island, NY, USA). Insulin, 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX), dexamethasone (DEX), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), iso- propanol, sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and gelatin Type B from bovine skin from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Oil Red-O (ORO) from Bio Basic (Amherst, NY, USA). Absolute ethanol, hydrochloric acid and formaldehyde from RCI Labscan (Samut- sakorn, Thailand) and 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5diphenylte- trazolium bromide (MTT) from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA).

At the end of each extraction, the mixture was taken to gauze filtration. The filtered solutions from each solvent were then re- filtered through WhatmanTM no.1 filter paper, using a vacuum pres- sure pump. Each of the final filtered solutions was concentrated with  a  rotary  vacuum  evaporator  (Rotavapor  R-114,  Buchi, including initial media (mixtures of completed media, 0.5 mM IBMX, 1 mM DEX and 167 nM insulin). The cultures were then replaced every 2 days with insulin media (a mixture of completed media and 167 nM insulin), until day-14 to obtain MAs.

The lipid content of MAs was quantified by ORO staining, as pre- viously described by Kinkel, et al. [18]. Briefly, cells in a pre-coated 96-well plate, were rinsed with phosphate buffer saline twice, fixed for 1 h in 10% (w/v) formaldehyde and then washed thoroughly with distilled water. Isopropanol (60% v/v) was added to wash and dehy- drate the wells and discarded afterward. Then the cells were air- dried and stained for 15 min with ORO solution (1.4 g ORO + 400 ml isopropanol + 144 ml distilled water) and completely rinsed 4 times with distilled water. In order to determine lipid con- tent, isopropanol was used to elute the ORO stain. Finally, absor- bance was monitored at 492 nm with a microplate-reader. Relative lipid content was calculated by comparison with untreated controls.

PAs were seeded in 96-well plates at 5000 cells/well and incu- bated for 24 h, under standard culture conditions. Then the cultures were exposed to the crude extract solution at serial 10- dilutions (see above) and incubated for a further 72 h. Viable-cell numbers were detected by colorimetric MTT assay (described above). The inhibition concentration (IC) of the crude extract was evaluated by using the PriProbit Program ver. 1.63 [19]. The IC of 50% of the cell population in cultures (IC50) was used to assess the activity of cytotoxic assay. Non-toxic concentrations at IC10 to IC20, with values rounded to whole numbers, were obtained for use in the adipogenic assay.

A sub-stock solution at IC10-IC20 (see above), of each extract, was freshly re-prepared by dissolving the designated concentra- tion of the stock solution in the completed media. A set of serial 5-dilutions was then prepared from the IC10-IC20 sub-stock solu- tion. The concentration of each crude extract in the 5-dilutions therefore differed among the extracts.

PAs were cultured in pre-coated 96-well plates and induced to differentiate into MAs, by the methods described above. The resul- tant MA cells were then exposed to the 5-dilutions of each extract on the last day of adipogenesis (i.e. day-14) for 3 days, under stan- dard culture conditions. The lipid content of the MAs was then detected by ORO colorimetric assay. The number of viable exposed MA cells was counted by colorimetric MTT assay on another similarly-treated plate, set up alongside. This 3-day treatment was set up to focus on the dose-dependent effect of each extract on the cells.

From the results of the 3-day treatment, the most effective lipolytic concentration of each extract was selected. This single concentration (S-Conc.) was re-prepared and applied for 6 days, to evaluate the time-dependent effect of the extracts. The proce- dure of exposure was similar to that of the 3-day experiments.

To evaluate the chemical composition of crude extracts, 10 mg of each, ZCE and ZCW, was dissolved in 0.7 ml of deuterated methanol (CD3OD) and in 0.7 ml of deuterium oxide (D2O) respec- tively. Each solution was then transferred into an NMR tube. 1H NMR spectra of the extracts were recorded on a Bruker Avance 300 spectrometer (1H at 300 MHz).

With the synonym of scientific name to ZC, the review of ZM have been considered in parallel. Percentage yield of extractions from different works was found with result variations depended on the methodology of extraction and solvent [7,22]. In this work, the lesser-polar fractions, ZCE, exhibited with lesser % yield than the higher-polar fraction, ZCW.

that are closely related to ZC, gingerol (a phenolic compound from Z. officinale) enhances glucose uptake by increasing cell surface GLUT4 on L6 rat skeletal muscle cells in vitro [28]. The same com- pound from Z. zerumbet prevents adipocyte proliferation in a dose- and time-dependent manner and prominently inhibits adipogenic differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells [13]. Shogaol, another type of

tion of lipases to break down lipid. Normally, up-regulation of PGC- 1b increases fatty acid oxidation in the mitochondrial pathway [46,47]. However, in this study when we measured the level of PGC-1b, there was no change in all experimental groups. PGC-1b

Admitting ZC in this study showed the supported evidences of anti-obese activity, according to the Thai tribe traditional used, but precaution must be highlighted with over-dose consumption. Rats fed with single dose of ZC extracts at 5000 mg/kg.bw showed a remarkable decrease of body weights, but significant weight increase was detected in certain internal organs; spleen and epi- didymis in male, while lung and kidney in female [2].

genesis, the differentiation of mature adipocyte from the pre- adipocyte. However, both ethanolic and aqueous extracts of ZC sim- ilarly reduced lipogenesis, the synthesis of lipids within the differ- entiated adipocytes, at the gene level, through inhibition of genes involved in adipocyte lipogenesis, glucose transport and fatty acid synthesis. Phenylbutanoid compounds in the extracts were believed to play an important role in such the activities. Whilst ZC is certainly not a cure for obesity, it may have applications in preventing the onset of obesity or preventing obese patients from becoming more obese. But before such recommendations can be considered, animal and human trials should be carried out to test the efficacy of the crude aqueous extract. If successful, further research, to determine which of the vast range of compounds pre- sent in the ZC extracts are responsible for inhibiting lipogenesis might yield more refined dietary supplements of medicines capable of controlling the onset or exacerbation of obesity.

We are very grateful to the National Research Council of Thailand (Project code: 130031-2556A10402008) for financial support of this study and to the Research Professional Development Project (under the Science Achievement Scholarship of Thailand (SAST)) for providing a Master degree scholarship to Mr. Natthawut Wong-a-nan. We also thank the Human and Animal Cell Technol- ogy Research Unit and Medicinal Plant and Reproductive Research Unit of the Department of Biology and the Department of Chem- istry both in the Faculty of Science, Chiang Mai University and also for institutional support. Appreciation of supports are also belong to Chulabhorn Graduate Institute, Chemical Biology Program, Chu- labhorn Royal Academy, and Chulabhorn Research Institute, Bang- kok. Finally, we thanks Dr. Stephen Elliott for his kindly revision on the first draft and for lots of useful comments.

