Given a railway network together with information on the population and their use of the railway infrastructure, we are considering the e ects of introducing new train stops in the existing railway network. One e ect concerns the accessibility of the railway infrastructure to the population, measured in how far people live from their nearest train stop. The second e ect we study is the change in travel time for the railway customers that is induced by new train stops. Based on these two models, we introduce two combinatorial optimization problems and give NP-hardness results for them. We suggest an algorithmic approach for the model based on travel time and present a real-world application with its rst experimental results.

We will consider two e ects of such new train stops. The rst one concerns the accessibility of the railway network: Assuming that living closer to a train stop increases the attractiveness of the railway network (and ultimately increases the tendency to use a train instead of other means of transport), we study the problem of locating (few) new train stops so that (many) people live within a short distance from a train stop. This accessibility model will be speci ed more precisely in Section 2, and a corresponding optimization problem will be shown to be NP-complete.

The second e ect of new train stops we will study concerns the travel time for the customers already using the railway network. On the one hand, passengers sitting in a train that now stops at the newly opened train stops are slowed down by the additional stops. On the other hand, customers living closer to a newly opened train stop than to any previously existing train stop need less time to reach their closest train stop. Summing up each of these two contrary e ects over all railway customers and subtracting the sums, we obtain a measurement for the e ect in overall travel time that a set of new train stops is having for the existing railway customers. Section 3 will specify this travel time model and also give an NP-completeness result for the corresponding optimization problem. Section 4 will suggest an algorithmic approach for this optimization problem based on a genetic algorithm, and Section 5 will give experimental results for the complete railway network of the Deutsche Bahn AG in Germany.

Let P denote the set of coordinate points, each of them representing a settle- ment, and let L be the set of feasible points along the tracks of the railway company. We assume that the set of tracks is piecewise linear, i.e. it is given as the union of a nite number of line segments Si 2 IR2, i = 1;::: ; L:

A solution X to the problem is given by a set of points in the plane, representing the stops that should be installed. X is feasible, if X  L, i.e., if each x 2 X satis es x 2 L.

If c contains a set of points A of P with jAj  2 (i.e., c contains more than one point of P), then replace c by a disc with center point q and diameter d, where q is the center point of the smallest enclosing circle of A.

Note that in the special case of only one line segment in L, Covering Along Lines turns out to be a set covering problem whose constraint matrix is an interval matrix. Hence, in this case the problem is polynomially solvable by linear programming. This result can be extended to sets of line segments, if no settlement can be covered by two stops from di erent line segments.

Proof. We reduce Covering Along Lines to Saved Travel Time. Given an in- stance of Covering Along Lines with P, L, d and K < jPj as in De nition 2.1, construct a network G = (V; E) out of the line segments in L in the natural

The travel time model can be viewed as a location problem in which the new facilities must be located on a given network, while the existing facilities are given as points in the Euclidean plane. (For a recent survey of theory and applications in the eld of location theory, see [1].) This means that neither planar location models nor network location theory really ts. Moreover, even in the case of locating only one new stop, the objective function of Saved Travel Time is not convex. For both reasons, the classical approaches of location theory are not applicable, and new solution algorithms have to be developed. Our rst approach | a genetic algorithm | is presented in the next section.

