to be identified with a process that may not be able to perform any actions, let alone a receive action. In fact, augmenting the lts with the above rule makes the contextually unobservable receive actions in the asynchronous world actually become unobservable in their lts model. We will refer to rules such as the above as Honda Tokoro (HT ) style rules.

Another experiment is the following: the observer introduces an output on a (a!) and observes that there is a rise in temperature. Let us name (slightly counterintuitively) this kind of experiment a?. The reason for this label is that this is the capability (input) that has been observed. Also this kind of experiment can be characterised inductively:

We also have P2 P1 and, moreover, P1 P2; the two processes are reduction congruent. In fact, already a!  P2 and a?  P2, although, in each of these cases the other direction does not hold since P2 can reduce. Of course, neither a? / a! nor a! / a?.

We have shown that there is a mismatch between our logbook (the lts) and the actual power of experiments. This can be expressed succinctly by noting that the converse of Lemma 3.3 does not hold and, more than this, no characterisation of the labels by contexts is possible. This is implied by the following result.

The 77 rules certainly increase the size of the lts and introduce some undesir- able properties such as infinite branching. Indeed, when 77 rules can be avoided, one often obtains a more useful lts in the sense that bisimulations are easier to construct. We finish this section with a trivial but illustrative example to show the impact of the (removal of the) rule (outHT) on reasoning with bisimilarity. Consider the processes of La and suppose that we wish to demonstrate that P / Q. Theorem 6.2 would immedi- ately distinguish these processes as there is no ~inHT which relates these due to the presence of an output action on a in P which is clearly absent from Q. Compare this the use of the ~HT relation: consider how Q could match

