In recent years, many-objective optimization problems have been widely used. however, with the increase of the number of objectives, the difficulty of solving increases exponentially, and the imbalance between convergence and diversity becomes more serious. In view of the above problems, this paper combines the idea of three-way decision, redesigns the environment selection strategy, and proposes a many-objective optimization algorithm based on three-way decision. Firstly, the distance from the indi- vidual to the ideal point is used as an index to measure individual convergence, the minimum distance from the individual to other solutions is used as an indicator to measure individual diversity, and the individuals with good convergence and good diversity are selected separately by combining the thresh- olds of the three-way decision; and secondly, A dynamic threshold acquisition method is designed to fur- ther improve the performance of the algorithm; Finally, it is proved that the algorithm can effectively balance convergence and diversity through tests of different data sets, so as to verify the feasibility and effectiveness of the algorithm strategies to select good-quality individuals. GrEA combines Pareto domination with grid sorting to select individuals with good con- vergence and uses grid crowding distance to select individuals with good diversity. NSGA-III algorithm uses a non-dominant sort- ing strategy and reference point strategy. However, with the increase in the number of iterations, the number of non- dominant solutions in the population will gradually increase. How- ever, the reference point strategy only considers the diversity of the population. Therefore, common environmental selection meth- ods will lead to population convergence and diversity will be out of balance. Aiming at how to better balance individual convergence and diversity choice in environment selection, the three-way deci- sion provides a possible idea.

The Three-Way Decision (TWD) theory [11] is a decision- making model developed on the basis of rough set theory [12] pro- posed by Yiyu Yao, which is more in line with human cognition and efficient. It believes that there is enough information to judge whether things are good or bad, to make decisions about accep- tance or rejection. For some problems that do not have enough information to make decisions, you can put things into the bound- ary domain and delay the judgment of things, which is called delayed decision-making. When the evidence is sufficient and complete, make an acceptance or rejection strategy. In environ- mental selection, the distance from an individual to an ideal point is used as an index to measure individual convergence, and the minimum distance from an individual to other solutions is used as an index to measure individual diversity. The decision to accept an individual with good convergence and diversity is made, while the decision to reject an individual with poor convergence and diversity is made. Delayed decisions are made for individuals with good convergence and poor diversity or with good diversity and poor convergence.

Optimization algorithms based on Pareto domination enhance selection pressure by modifying the Pareto domination relation [31]. Sato [25] expanded or contracted the dominant area of indi- viduals by modifying the objective value with customized param- eters, thus changing the dominant relationship between individuals. Sun [26] selected inverted generational distance solu- tions with good convergence and diversity based on the IGD index, proposed a new dominant relationship, and developed an adaptive niche technology based on the perspectives of the candidate solu- tions, to improve the accuracy of IGD sampling reference points. Among algorithms based on Pareto domination, most MOEA shows poor universality for problems with different Pareto domination. Therefore, the algorithm should have good applicability in the pro- cess of solving. Tian [27] proposed an adaptive strategy to dynam- ically adjust the dominance relationship according to the current generation number. The improvement of this algorithm ensures good applicability in solving Pareto frontier problems to a certain extent. While balancing diversity and convergence, how to ensure the scalability of the algorithm is also a problem that needs to be solved. GrEA [9] uses grid ranking, crowding distance and coordi- nate point distance to strengthen the selection pressure of the best direction, while maintaining a wide and even distribution of solu- tions to avoid local overcrowding. At the same time, GrEA [9] guides the algorithm to search in different directions, revealing the role of grid partition parameters.

According to the evaluation index, the distribution uniformity, diversity and convergence of the candidate solutions can be weighed to compare the advantages and disadvantages of the can- didate solutions, to increase the selection pressure of the algo- rithm. Monte Carlo simulation is used in HypE [28] to approximate accurate hypervolume values. The ranking of the solution caused by the overcapacity indication, the algorithm can make a trade-off between the accuracy of the estimate and the available computing resources. IGD is considered to be a reliable performance indicator for quantifying convergence and diversity of many-objective evolutionary algorithms. IGD was used to improve the accuracy of the solution [26], and the reference point set was adjusted according to the index contribution of the candi- date solution to enhance the universality of understanding [27]. Hausdorff distance is a tool to study the distance between objects in different fields, but in multi-objective optimization algorithms, Hausdorff distance does not fit the single outlier of the candidate

Pareto based environment selection strategies, focusing on conver- gence and diversity respectively. SPEA is proposed to find or approximate Pareto optimal set of multi-objective optimization problems. Zitzler proposed SPEA2 [24], which added two new mechanisms to improve its searching ability, one is a more effec- tive crossover mechanism, and the other is an archiving mecha- nism to maintain the diversity of solutions in the objective space and variable space. Selection strategies, including mating selection and environmental selection, are key factors in the design of many- objective evolutionary algorithm. In MaOEA-CSS [35], the algo- rithm takes into account the quality of each selected parent and the effectiveness of the selected parent combination as well as the performance of the population as a whole. At the same time, new measures of distance convergence and angle differentiation are proposed to solve the dimension problem in multi-objective optimization problems. The convergence index of the computa- tional efficiency of the algorithm selects descendant individuals one by one to increase the selection pressure toward the Pareto optimal frontier.

This chapter details the Many-objective evolutionary algorithm based on three-way decision (MaOEA-TWD). The idea of three-way decision is adopted to balance convergence and diversity in the solution process. Then, a dynamic threshold acquisition method of three-way decisions is proposed to enhance the performance of the algorithm. The basic steps of the algorithm are described in 3.1. Dynamic threshold acquisition methods are described in detail in 3.2. Time complexity analysis are described in detail in 3.3.

In this section, the time complexity of the proposed MaOEA- TWD algorithm is analyzed. The main steps of the algorithm include population initialization, population selection, crossover and mutation operations, fast non-dominated sorting, population convergence and diversity calculation, and linear threshold three- way decision selection strategy. Assuming that population of size is N, the objective dimension is M. So, this algorithm to select

In this chapter, we consider the instance problem DTLZ test set and six questions from the WFG test set, DTLZi (i = 1, 2,.. .,7) and WFGi (i = 1, 2,.. .,6) for testing. DTLZ problem Pareto frontier fea- tures are concave, linear, degenerate, bias, etc. WFG problem Par- eto frontier features are Impartibility, Discrete, Convex etc.

In this paper, we consider thirteen instance problems DTLZi (i = 1, 2,.. .,7), WFG (i = 1, 2,.. .,6) and set five different objective quantities (M = 4, 6, 8, 10, 15) to compare the MaOEA-TWD algo- rithm with the classical algorithms GrEA [13], RVEA [14], MaOEARD [15], EFRRR [16], NSGA-III [8]. Get 65 test examples.

Aiming at the problem of convergence and diversity conflict caused by the increase of objectives in the many-objective opti- mization problem, this paper proposes a many-objective evolu- tionary algorithm based on three-way decision (MaOEA-TWD), which integrates the three-way decision ideas into the environ- mental selection, and then selects individuals with strong con- vergence and rich diversity in the population. At the same time, the three dynamic thresholds of decision are combined to improve the performance of the many-objective optimization algorithm. The experimental results show that compared with the commonly used many-objective optimization algorithm, the MaOEA-TWD algorithm proposed in this paper has better perfor- mance and can effectively balance the convergence and diversity of populations.

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foun- dation of China (Grant No. 61806138); the Central Financial Guid- ance for Local Science and Technology Development Fund (Grant No. YDZJSX2021A038); China University Industry-University- Research Innovation Fund - Future Network Innovation Research and Application Project(2021FNA04014); and Taiyuan University of Science and Technology Joint Training Demonstration Base for Graduate Students(JD2022003).

