The mechanism behind the growth and development of tumors is intensively studied using several mathe- matical approaches that rely on linear and non-linear techniques to model the cell population dynamics to better understand the development and progression of cancer. In this paper, we study the progression of a type of malignant tumors characterized by the stem-differentiation hierarchy. Two main issues are modeled and investigated: the differentiation phase and the phenotypic plasticity that suggests the existence of a dynamic interaction among Cancer Stem Cells and non-Cancer Stem Cells populations. Using these mod- els, we study several therapy effects on breast cancer in order to obtain the temporal behavior of the cell populations, taking into account different drug concentrations and oncoantigen-driven vaccinations.

Based upon the models presented in [17,15], we study the progression of malig- nant tumors characterized by the stem-differentiation hierarchy. In particular, we generalize their ODEs systems by taking into account all cancer types described by this hierarchical model. Two main issues are investigated: (i) the differentiation phase (in [17] the authors model only the proliferation phase of all subpopulations), and (ii) the phenotypic plasticity that suggests the existence of a dynamic interac- tion among CSCs and non-CSCs populations. In our ODEs system we also account for the drug effect on the cancer in order to simulate the behavior of the cells, considering different drug concentrations.

In the last 15 years major advances have been made in the understanding of tumor maintenance and initiation of relapse. These studies lead the researchers to move from a traditional view of cancer organization to a new heterogeneity concept. The traditional notion of cancer explains that the malignant tumor consists of a unique type of cell population characterized by the ability to divide without limit. This view has been overcome after the identification of the CSCs that can differentiate into heterogeneous cancer subpopulations.

growth and the progression are driven by the CSCs subpopulations. Moreover, the hierarchical organization of the tumor is guaranteed from the CSC differentiation capacity. CSCs give rise to committed progenitor cells (PCs) which in their turn give rise to cells characterized by a rapid proliferation rate which then originate terminally differentiated cells (TCs).

A CSC is defined as a cell that can divide either symmetrically (originating two cells of the same CSC type) or asymmetrically (i.e., giving rise to a CSC cells and to a PC cell) upon the issuing of an appropriate external signal. Although it is still unknown what might be the mechanism for controlling whether a stem cell divides symmetrically or asymmetrically, empirical evidence shows that some envi- ronmental conditions could influence this phenomenon, so that, becomes crucial the micro-environment, also called niches, where the CSCs reside. Environmental pres- sures result in constantly adapting the cell physiology and gene expression for the appropriate stem cell state [8]: indeed, when moving from CSCs to TCs, it is possi- ble to observe the existence of different niche compositions leading to a progressive loss of proliferation ability, pluripotency and metastatic potential [1]. Moreover, in response to environment signals it is possible that during their early stage PCs can differentiate into CSCs. The possibility of bidirectional interconvertibility is due to some contextual signals that reprogrammed the non-CSCs into CSCs [6].

Due to this cancer structure, the stem-differentiation hierarchy model affects the design of cancer therapies. For instance, many papers [16,9] report the resistance of CSCs to many current cancer treatments including chemo and radiation ther- apy, while these therapies reveal a positive effect on TCs. Treatments designed to eliminate only TC subpopulation will likely be unsuccessful from the point of view of having a clinical impact on the whole tumor. Indeed, if the treatments fail in killing the CSCs, there is a large possibility to regenerate new tumors. Novel cancer therapies must consider these dynamics and must thus be designed to account for both genetic alterations and differentiation states of the CSCs in order to eradicate them.

