Considering the previous research works, this paper introduces a high-order optimal DO (HOODO) for estimating aerodynamic tor- que which, in turn, helps to estimate the wind speed. This paper also utilizes an linear quadratic regulator (LQR), for the speed tracking problem of the generator. The efficiency of the presented optimal composite control scheme is justified by computer simula- tion in MATLAB/Simulink. The main contribution of this work are: 1) The proposed HOODO relaxes the assumption that disturbance is slowly changed. By doing this, it creates a theoretical base for estimation of fast-varying disturbances such as aerodynamic tor- que of WECSs precisely; 2) Moreover, to systematically select the gains of the proposed HOODO, an optimal algorithm is utilized. Via tuning the diagonal of weighting matrices, the gains are easily selected for satisfied performance. Note that the gain tuning rule is

a big issue in most of the existing observers; 3) Four different orders of the HOODO, i. e. first, second, third, and fourth order, are compared, analysed and investigated in detail; 4) A straightfor- ward gain tuning rule is implemented for the LQR, which is practi- cal to implement in real hardware; 5) Detailed analysis on stability of the closed-loop HOODO-based LQR is presented explicitly using the Lyapunov approach.

(15) and (16), it is seen that Ku has dependency on the weight matrices Q and R. Increase of Q positively affects to reference track- ing efficiency with more control efforts applied. Increase of R leads to a small control value and poor reference tracking performance. It is recommended to take into account the indicated influence of Q and R on Ku, and to come to a compromise between control effi- ciency and energy consumption [3]. The weighting matrices are typically chosen as a diagonal ones with non-negative elements on the main diagonal. In this case, however, the presence of some

We note that the estimation performance of the observer depends on the value of k1. Its value can be selected by changing Q 0 and R0. Hence, by referring to [47], the observer can guarantee definitive boundedness and uniform stability of a small ball with the center at ~x  0.

error in estimating the aerodynamic torque of four values of r for the HOO-based LQR control scheme are (eT )max = 1.5688%, 1.3932% and 1.3932%, 1.3932% for r = 1, 2, 3 and 4, respectively. For the wind speed estimation error (x~ )max = 19.0570%, 2.6650% and 2.6650%, 2.6650% for r  1, 2, 3 and 4, respectively. While

This work introduced the high-order optimal disturbance observer (HOODO)-based LQR for PMSG-based WECSs. The pre- sented HOODO is able to estimate an aerodynamic torque consid- ered as a disturbance and, hence, a speed of the wind with fast varying dynamics. Detailed analysis on the stability of the HOODO-based composite controller is carried out via the Lyapunov approach. The simulations show that the HOODO-based LQR has better accuracy than HOO-based LQR method. The presented con- troller with HOODO can guarantee smaller error and faster response time than previous observer-based control schemes reported so far. In addition, its parameter insensitivity property is significantly better than that of the HOO-based LQR. The work performed confirms the effectiveness of the proposed HOODO and its superiority compared to other types of high-order obser- vers. Future work might focus on: 1) building an experimental setup and verify the performance of the proposed methods exper-

Kanat Suleimenov received the B.S. degree in engi- neering and technology from Kazakh-British Technical University, Almaty, Kazakhstan, in 2014, and the M.S. degree in mechanical engineering from Nazarbayev University, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan, in 2019, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Depart- ment of Robotics and Mechatronics. From November 2014 to August 2015, he was with Coca-Cola Almaty Bottlers Company, where he served as an Operator on the production line. From 2016 to 2017, he worked as a Laboratory Technician with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, School of Engineering, Nazar- bayev University. From February 2018 to August 2019, he worked as a Research Assistant in the Power Conversion and Motion Control Laboratory, under the supervision of Dr. Ton Duc Do. His current research interests include control of electric machine drives used in electric cars and wind energy conversion systems.

Altynay Kashaganova received the B.S. degree in engi- neering and technology from Department of Radio Engineering, Electronics and Telecommunications, Fac- ulty of Physics and Technology, L.N. Gumilyov Eurasian National University, Astana, Kazakhstan, in 2014, where she received the M.S. degree of technical sciences from Department of Nanomaterials and Nanotechnologies, Faculty of Physics and Technology, in 2016, and the Ph.

