for object to object relation (allocentric). Imperfections in encoding either relations can introduce imperfections in representations of environments in memory [18]. Some studies done on cognitive map consider it allows one to locate oneself in a familiar environ- ment and to go from one place to another even through parts of the environment never visited before. Others see that it is not a unitary integrated representation, but consists of stored discrete pieces including landmarks, route segments, and regions [15]. There are many studies performed on high-level cognitive maps of adults whose purpose is to navigate to go from one route to another, how to link routes to go from one location to another, and how people have different abilities to form cognitive maps. But, there are no studies done on the origin of the cognitive maps in the fetus stage despite that fetus is able to move its hand to suck its thumb, which means it has the ability to recognize its mouth location and learn how to reach it. Similarly, it can grab its umbilical cord which means it is able to reach it. From these simple moves, we believe that the fetus forms a simple cognitive map that enables him to reach different objects in the womb. Proprioception and perceptual learning affects the generation of a cognitive map. The influence of proprioception on human spatial cognition is investigated in [19] and it is found that proprioception can influence the time neces- sary to use spatial representations while other factors such as visio-spatial abilities can influence the capacity to form accurate spatial representations [20]. This was done by the study of the

include the pressure felt by the tactile sensation [5]. All these sen- sory data are collected and processed. Accordingly, proprioceptions are produced from the sensory length and perceptions are gener- ated from the sensory pressure. Next, all the obtained perceptions and proprioceptions obtained from different sensory neurons are collected in the mechanoreceptors-association-map where associ- ation links are created connecting the perceptions that exist together. The pairs of the proprioceptions and perceptions repre- sent a position in the cognitive map.

