Synchronization phenomena in large populations of interacting components are widely represented in nature and intensively studied as physical, biological, chem- ical, and social systems. In Biology, examples include networks of pacemaker cells in heart [15], nervous system [8], group of synchronously flashing fireflies [6], just to mention some of those analyzed by Strogatz in his exciting book [16]. Understand- ing a synchronized collective behavior is essential in Systems Biology especially for developing methods to control the dynamics of systems with desired properties [10]. The distributed synchronization of biological systems is commonly modeled us- ing the theory of coupled oscillators proposed by several authors Art Winfree [18], Charles S. Peskin [15] and Yoshiki Kuramoto [11]. In this theory, each member of the population is modeled as a phase oscillator running independently at its own

We also provide a Kuromoto Synchronization Logic (KSL) in order to specify properties on synchronization, during a simulation, of Kuramoto based oscillators. Moreover, we propose a model checking algorithm for the logic. We test it by verifying some properties with a prototype simulator and model checker that we have implemented.

The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 introduces related works and the Ku- ramoto model. Section 3 recalls timed automata, defines oscillator timed automata, and specifies the interaction semantics. Section 4 introduces the Kuramoto Syn- chronization Logic (KSL) and its model checking algorithm. Section 5 shows an example of analysis and Section 6 concludes outlining some directions for future work.

During these last decades, several mathematical models have been proposed to study the spontaneous synchronization phenomena in a population of biological coupled oscillators [16]. These models have been inspired by real biological systems, ranging from the mutual synchronization of cardiac and circadian pacemaker cells to the rhythmically flashing of fireflies and wave propagation in heart, brain, intestine and nervous system. In these systems, mutual synchronization could be performed both through episodic impulses and through smooth interactions.

The first case, in which a population of the so called pulse-coupled oscillators communicate by sudden pulse-like interactions - i.e. a neuron that fires - was first studied by Peskin [15], who proposed a model of the mutual synchronization of sinotrial node pacemaker cells. He worked with identical oscillators and he con- jectured that for any arbitrary conditions, they would all end up firing in unison. He proved this property for N = 2 oscillators and later Mirollo and Strogatz [14] demonstrated that the conjecture holds for all N . Peskin also conjectured that syn- chronization would occur even if the oscillators were not quite identical, but that problem remains still open.

We use timed automata with invariants on the states, usually called timed safety automata [9], that are the most common in the modeling and verification tools. They incorporate a strong notion of fairness, due to the invariants, which will be useful for the definition of oscillator timed automata in Section 3.2 and of the interaction semantics in Section 3.3.

The previous transformation ensures that, after a proper initialization, xi mea- sures, at every point of the evolution of S(Ti), the time elapsed since the last occurrence of ai. By the assumption that Ti is an oscillator timed automaton, we can also state that pi minus the value of xi measures the remaining time to the next occurrence of ai. The initialization process is described below.

sures of each oscillator timed automata involved. This means that if, according to the interaction, Ti has to decelerate and Tj has to accelerate during the current slice of global time dt, then Ti performs a step of activity whose duration is shorter than dt, while Tj performs a longer one. The acceleration and deceleration is determined by the interaction function I of the particular chosen model of synchronization. The global observer detects perturbed behaviors because the timestamps of the actions performed by each interacting Ti are re-scaled to the magnitude of the global time slice dt.

Note that traces contain all the actions performed by all the interacting au- tomata. Moreover, the timestamp of each action is the one perceived by the global observer, which can therefore detect the perturbations, due to interaction, on the original standalone behaviors. Projecting a trace on distinguished actions only allows to observe the synchronization process if, eventually, all the distinguished actions occur at the same times.

Use hybrid automata, instead of timed automata, to model oscillators and to define the interaction semantics. 3) Fully implement a model checker and simulator for KSL. A prototype is available at [5]. 4) A long term objective: apply the model checking of the extended logic, together with detection techniques already partially available, to control fibrillation in cardiac cells networks (for more details of this line of research see [4]).

