We modify the model in such a way that both fgf and fgfrs are randomly created, and each receptor is created at a different rate. The model shows that in the very long run most of fgfr4s end in the cell membrane. Because the rates for the creation of fgfr4 are not known, our model may not be realistic, however it sheds light on the fact that with a specific set of rates it is possible have an over-production of fgfr4s. Further sensitivity analysis is necessary to document different realistic scenarios.

The BioAmbient model is clearly not complete, but it describes the main dy- namics of the different sorting of the fgfrs. It can be made more accurate in the future by compositionally adding new components. Our work is of course an ab- straction with respect to reality in the sense of [22]. In simple words, we do not aim to faithfully represent all the details of the biological system, but focus on the issue of activation/deactivation of signalling in different compartments and on relocation of components. We also do not aim to model accurately a set of chemical reac- tions involved in the endocytotic pathway. In this respect our work is orthogonal to [10,13,11], which consider in great details the chemical reactions involved in the early stages of binding of the fgf with the fgfr.

The rest of the paper is organised as follows: in Section 2 we review the syntax and the semantics of Bioambients. We define the stochastic semantics along the lines of [12,24]. In Section 3 we review the fgf endocytotic pathway as described in the literature (see also [8]) and we present a model in Bioambients. In Section 4 we discuss the results obtained by running different simulations and we discuss the predictive capacity of our model. Conclusions follow. We conclude in the paper with an appendix that describes in details what experiments we have simulated [8] and the associated quantitative information.

Growth factors bind to more than one receptor. In many cases it is unclear what the different roles for the separate receptors in signal transduction are. The intracellular trafficking of ligand bound receptors for fgfs was studied in [9,8] to determine whether intracellular sorting of ligand-receptor complexes may modulate the signalling.

The final few experiments were carried out to calculate the rates at which the ligand and receptors degrade. By analysing the results from the experiment we can clearly see that two different routes of movement within the cell exist, depending on which fgfr the fgf1 had bound with. From the experiments it has been found that fgf1 internalised by fgfr1-fgfr3 is generally routed to the lysosomes for degradation and that fgf1 internalised by fgfr4 is mainly routed to the recycling compartment.

When the fgf:fgfr complex enters the sorting endosome, we assume they remain bound. It is known from the literature that the complex decomposes in the early endosome, and follows the route of recycling. We do not model the unbinding directly, but model the fgfr moving in other compartments of the cell.

A recent paper [23] has shown that if fgf:fgfr does not decompose in the sorting endosome then the complex recycles back to the cell surface directly. We leave for future work to compositionally increment our model to take into account this new findings, and to explicitly model the biological switch that causes the unbinding of the fgf:fgfr. The model presented in this paper is the starting point to model the behaviour of fgfrs, whose over-production is deemed to play a key in role in the development of cancer.

We gratefully acknowledge M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman, and D. Parker for very valuable contributions to the initial discussions on the topic of the present article. We gratefully acknowledge Vinod Muganthan and Andrew Phillips for sharing the enterprise of developing BAM [17]. We finally thank Luca Cardelli for very useful discussions on the topics of this article and on system biology in general.

Muffy Calder, Stephen Gilmore, and Jane Hillston. Modelling the influence of RKIP on the ERK signalling pathway using the stochastic process algebra PEPA. In Anna Ingolfsdottir and Hanne Riis Nielson, editors, Proceedings of the BioConcur Workshop on Concurrent Models in Molecular Biology, London, England, August 2004.

Method: FgF1 was labelled with the fluorescent dye, and EgF (epidermal growth factor) and transferrin were labelled with different colour dyes. From previous experiments it is known that EgF moves to the lysosomes and transferrin to the endosomal recycling compartment (ERC) from the late endosomes. By seeing the overlaps in the dyes of the FgF1 and the transferrin or EgF it could be calculated which compartment the different receptors move to. The experiments were left to run for two hours.

