Epilepsy is a well-documented neurological issue that influ- ences roughly 65 to 75 million individuals around the world, of which 10.5 million are children [1,2]. However, the worldwide prevalence of epilepsy varies from 2.8 to 19.5 per 1000 of the general population [3]. Epilepsy is basically a chronic brain disorder characterized by recurrent derangement of the nervous system due to the sudden excessive disorderly discharge of neu- rons that result in almost instantaneous disturbance of sensation and loss of consciousness [4]. Seizures which is usually caused by epilepsy can cause a variety of symptoms depending on the areas of the brain affected. Symptoms may be the complete or par- tial loss of consciousness, loss of speech and uncontrollable motor behavior [5].

ligand to move freely. After docking searches were completed, the best conformation was chosen from the most populated cluster with the minimum binding energy (highest binding score). The interaction of docked protein-ligand complex conformations, including hydrogen bond and hydrophobic interactions were ana- lyzed using Discovery Studio Visualizer 4.1, Ligplot and PyMol visualization software [32].

The positive coefficient in model 1 implies that increase in physiochemical parameters such as minHBint4 (Minimum E- State descriptors of strength for potential Hydrogen Bonds of path length 4), ETA_Alpha (Sum of alpha values of all non-hydrogen ver- tices of a molecule) and GRAV-5 (Square root of gravitational index of all pairs of atoms) will increases the anticonvulsant activities (pED50) of these quinoxaline and thiadiazoles derivatives against GABAAT enzyme, an enzyme responsible for epilepsy. More also, negative coefficient of DPSA-1 (Difference of PPSA-1 and PNSA-1) and WT.eneg (Non-directional WHIM, weighted by Mulliken atomic electronegativity) are inversely proportional to the inhibi- tory activities of quinoxaline and thiadiazoles derivatives.

atoms) are extended topochemical atom and the gravitational index descriptors. These two descriptors (model 1) are directly proportional to the inhibitory activities (pED50) of the quinoxaline and thiadiazoles derivatives (inhibitors). Therefore, increase the value of ETA_Alpha and GRAV-5 will lead to an increase in the inhi- bitory activities of quinoxaline and thiadiazoles derivatives against GABAAT enzyme.

DPSA-1 (Difference of PPSA-1 and PNSA-1), the charged partial surface area descriptor (CPSA) provides information that describes global and local electrophilicity in case of non-covalent molecular interactions [36]. Moreover, DPSA-1 descriptor provides separation information about high binding affinity to estrogen receptor [37]. Therefore, reduced level of DPSA-1 descriptor will increase the inhibitory activities of quinoxaline and thiadiazoles derivatives against an enzyme that causes epilepsy (GABAAT).

The decrease in descriptors such as DPSA-1 and WT.eneg in par- ticular will increase the binding affinity and atomic electronegativ- ity of these inhibitors. A critical look at these two descriptors inferred that the binding affinity and atomic electronegativity have to be considered in order for the inhibitory activities of quinoxaline and thiadiazoles derivatives to be effective in inhibiting the activ- ities of GABAAT enzyme, an enzyme responsible for epilepsy. This is tional methods. The robustness and applicability of the QSAR mod- els have been established by internal and external validation techniques. It has been revealed that the dominant structural fea- tures responsible for the inhibitory activity of quinoxaline and thiadiazoles derivatives against an enzyme responsible for epilepsy (GABAAT) were physiochemical parameters such as minHBint4, ETA_Alpha, DPSA-1, GRAV-5, and WT.eneg. In docking analysis, Compound 5a indicated higher binding affinity with docking score

