Often, formal expressions can be evaluated to a result. For example, the ex- pression 3 + 2 can be evaluated to 5. An algebra of a monad is an object in which (generalized) formal expressions can be evaluated to actual (generalized) elements.

The diagram (6) essentially encodes the first three levels of the bar construction [15, Section VII.6]. In particular, the weak pullback condition of Proposition 2.12 is exactly a Kan filler condition, as for nerves of categories and more generally qua- sicategories, applied to the bar construction. More generally, the bar construction

The composition of 1-simplices, when defined as in the proof of Proposition 2.12, is given by a 2-simplex which is exactly a Kan filler of an inner horn. When T is weakly cartesian, this filler always exists. When T is cartesian, this filler is more- over unique, and the resulting simplicial set is even the nerve of a category [18].

The algebras of the Kantorovich monad must be first of all objects of our cate- gory, i.e. complete metric spaces. Moreover, as we have seen, they should be closed with respect to convex combinations in some sense, as for example convex regions of a vector space. Closed convex subsets of Banach spaces are then an ideal candi- date: they are complete metric spaces, and they are convex. It can be proven [6, Section 5.3] that the P -algebras in CMet are exactly the closed convex subsets of Banach spaces (up to isomorphism), with the structure map given by the (Bochner) integral.

This paper was originally written for the Applied Category Theory 2019 school. We thank the participants of our and other groups for their interest, useful feedback and fruitful collaboration. We also thank Dirk Hofmann, Joachim Kock, Steve Lack, Rostislav Matveev, Paige Randall North, Sharwin Rezagholi, David Spivak, and Tarmo Uustalu for the very fruitful discussions and the helpful advice. Most of this paper was written while both authors were with the Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, which we thank for providing an outstanding research environment.

