However, there are reasons that one might also wish to view open games as the objects of a category. Most obviously, we would like to characterise certain open games using universal properties, in order to reason about them in a more abstract way. In this paper we define a general notion of morphisms between open games, which we call contravariant lens morphisms, and explore the resulting structure and applications.

It is expected that morphisms of open games can also be represented as surface diagrams, cobordisms between the string diagrams representing the open games, and composition of morphisms as glueing surfaces. (More foundational work in 3-dimensional algebra is needed to fully justify this, however.) The long-term aim towards which we are working is to be able to reason about game-theoretic concepts using nothing but surface diagrams. Open games and globular morphisms moreover form a bicategory, but we argue by example that the more general double-categorical structure is useful.

Definition 2.4 A strategy for a player i in an extensive-form game is a map that takes each information set x owned by player i, to a choice of action available at nodes in x. A strategy profile is a tuple of strategies for each player.

Definition 2.6 A subgame of an extensive form game G is a subtree H with the property that if x is any node in H, then any node in G in the same information set as x is also in H. The subtree H inherits the structure of an extensive form game from G.

The term bimorphic lens is proposed here by the author to distinguish it from the more familiar cases of monomorphic and polymorphic lenses. (The definition of polymorphic lens is the same, but interpreted in a polymorphic type system [19], and a monomorphic lens satisfies X = S and Y = R.) Both monomorphic and polymorphic lenses are usually restricted to those obeying certain axioms called the lens laws, but these do not make sense in general for bimorphic lenses, and indeed in compositional game theory we need to consider arbitrary bimorphic lenses.

It is expected that all reasonable definitions of general morphisms between open games will agree on the globular morphisms. However it is demonstrated by example, both in this paper and in [10], that the more general morphisms are necessary. The morphisms we define in this paper are very different to those in [10], but indeed have the same globular morphisms.

In this paper we are concerned with pseudo double categories, in which the vertical morphisms form a category, but the horizontal morphisms form a category only up to invertible 2-cells. Hence, there is a category of vertical morphisms and a bicategory of horizontal morphisms. In this paper we mostly follow the notation of [22], which gives an explicit definition of symmetric monoidal pseudo double categories. In this section we show that there is a pseudo double category whose objects are disets, horizontal 1-cells are open games, vertical 1-morphisms are reversed lenses, and 2-cells are contravariant lens morphisms.

