provided by the network layer; in fact, it allows the operator to spare a huge amount of network resources in many circum- stances. One of the most important applications that benefit form multicast transmissions is the video-clip streaming, where the same content is often sent simultaneously to even millions of users in the internet. Another application is the IPTV, which is going to be released by most of the ISP providers in the next few years. But many others can be cited.

In the last years, the genetic algorithms (GA) are gaining an increasing interest for solving complex problems in the networking field, as network design [10] and unicast routing [11]. GA for multicast routing without constraints was pre- sented by Hwang et al. [12] and Bhattacharya et al. [13], while Chen et al. [14] and Hamdan and El-Hawary [15] ad- dressed the constrained problem taking into account the QoS level provided for real-time applications in single multicast ses- sions. Randaccio and Atzori [16] presented an approach for group multicast routing by genetic algorithm. Chen and Sun

The paper is organized as follows. The problem description and formulation is given in Section 2. The genetic algorithm and its operators are presented in Section 3. Section 4 presents the proposed algorithm. Two examples are presented in Sec- tion 5, the first example with eight nodes and compare the results of our algorithm with the results of [17]. The second example with 20 nodes. Section 6 presents the conclusion.

tree. Where n0 is source node, and U = {u1, u2, ... , um} de- notes a set of destination nodes. Multicast tree T = (NT, ET), where NT C N, ET C E, there exists the path PT (n0, d) from

source node n0 to each destination node d e U in T [17]. e(i, j) is a link from node i e N to node j e N. Three non-negative real value functions are associated with each link e (e e E): cost C(e), delay D(e), and available bandwidth B(e). The link cost function, C(e), may be either monetary cost or any measure of the resource utilization, which must be optimized. The link delay, D(e), is considered to be the sum of switching, queuing,

The chromosome of genetic algorithms is composed of a series of integral queuing with length m, and the gene of the chromosome is the path in k shortest path between n0 and ui. Each chromosome in population denotes a multicast tree. Obviously, a chromosome represents a candidate solution for the multicast routing problem since it guarantees a path be- tween the source node and any of the destination nodes. Since there are so many paths between node n0 and ui, so that the encoding space of chromosomes possibly becomes larger, this decreases the convergence of solution. Now for each destina- tion node d e U, by the k the shortest route algorithm, [17]

Genetic algorithms, as powerful and broadly applicable sto- chastic search and optimization techniques, are the most widely known types of evolutionary computation methods today. In the proposed genetic algorithm, we consider the four compo- nents: (1) an encoding method that is a genetic representation (genotype) of solutions to the program. (2) A way to create an initial population of chromosomes, (3) the objective func- tion (4) the genetic operators (crossover and mutation) that al- ter the genetic composition of offspring during reproduction.

The crossover operation is used to breed a child from two par- ents by one cut point. The crossover operation will perform if the crossover ratio (Pc = 0.95) is verified. The cut point is se- lected randomly. The crossover operation is performed as follows:

This paper proposes a genetic algorithm for solving multime- dia multicast routing based on bandwidth and delay con- straints. The proposed algorithm uses the kth shortest paths algorithm, [18] to construct route set. The encoding space can be improved by finding out all routes that satisfy band- width constraint from source node to destination node and composing routes set as candidate routes set of genetic algo- rithms encoding space. The algorithm guaranteed and speeded searching ability of the optimal solution and the global conver- gence of solution by heuristic crossover and mutation opera- tion can be achieved.

