In the case of our basic system Kn, a counterpart for the above result would not try to recover all classical inferences. The natural candidate, in that case, would be a weaker system, which we briefly mention. Let DM be the system obtained by adding rules (dm1.1), (dm1.2), (dm2.1) and (dm2.2) to system DL, let DMi be DM plus (dm3.1), and let DMe be DM plus (dm3.2). Adding both (dm3.1) and appropriate, however, to devise complete systems in which each one of those axioms could be introduced in separate. An obvious alternative to deal with such difficulty related to frame incompleteness is simply to change the semantical framework. Such a strategy is common in the literature on systems of intuitionistic modal logics, in which a second relation (a quasi ordering) is added to the frame, coupled with the consideration of truth-increasing valuations. This seems very well-motivated, and would allow one to prove in particular that truth is hereditarily preserved towards the future, according to the order introduced by the second relation, and falsity is hereditarily preserved towards the past, according to the same order (for the posi- tive case, cf. [7]; for an application to the case of our modal negations, cf. [11]). The additional advantage of this alternative framework, besides bringing the heredity conditions to the fore, is that it allows one to add each axiom in separate, and continue thinking thus about the two non-classical negations as really independent of each other. However, that strategy cannot be extended without modification to our richer language. The reason is simple: the restoration connectives were in a sense designed to fail the heredity conditions, as they allow one to recover standard classic-like models when they are applied to sentences of a given theory. It rests as a challenge, thus, to identify the right semantic framework in which the study of ex-

to be paracomplete; an analogous phenomenon happens if (~/) is added, and nega- tion ceases to be paraconsistent; if both rules are added, Classical Logic is obtained. Now, if one considers DM from the start, a four-valued semantics is still available, but negation is non-deterministic: there are two possibilities of output for each of the four inputs. Such negation may be partially determinized by adding rules (dm3.1) or (dm3.2); adding both rules would result in the full determinization that corre- sponds to De Morgan Logic. Our non-classical negations go the other way round, by

