Converging of MANET with WSN used in ubiquitous smart environments opens new prospect in monitor- ing the large scale urban area and makes a new communication platform for different applications in Internet of Things (IoT) domain. Sensors used for IoT applications, sense the environment and send the data to the gateway node, which in turn send the collected data to the MANET node, especially used for data harvesting. Here we considered two IoT applications which are monitored by wireless sensor nodes. The challenging part of this work is to make a platform by converging sensor network with the MANET network because nodes have different power levels, heterogeneous protocols and have chances of co-channel interferences. We proposed a total solution which includes network protocols, spectrum distribution, node deployment, MANET routing and mobility pattern and finally implementation of the IoT applications which are simulated using Omnet++ simulator and shown their performances and feasibility.

A recent paradigm of communication which popularly known as Internet of Things (IoT), where all the objects of different kinds of our daily life spanning from smart phones, sensors or devices are associated with network enabled objects (like RFID) can communi- cate with each other and makes a part of Internet. The main aim of IoT is to make Internet more and more inspiring and pervasive. By connecting wide variety of heterogeneous devices and making easy access of the devices, several applications are being used in IoT, which deals with the large number of data generated by the attached devices and make some decisions which is very important for the industry or control the attached devices based on the generated data. There is a huge use of IoT in several domains like medical aids, home automation, industrial automation, mobile

With the advancement of communication technology and microcontroller technology, Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) plays an important role in IoT. Sensor nodes, which are very tiny low cost devices, can sense different parameters in the environment, it can store data in its memory temporarily and can communicate with other electronics devices by using communication technology like IEEE802.15.4 or Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE). On the other hand RFID tag is also a useful device in IoT, which is used to identify an object attached with a RFID tag.

Organisation of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we have discussed the works related to IoT. Architecture and protocols are discussed in Section 3. We have considered two applications of IoT, illustrated in Section 4. Simulation and results are given in Sec- tion 5 and finally conclusion is drawn in Section 6.

In a smart city, the available services are mainly structural health of the building or bridge, noise pollution monitoring, air pol- lution monitoring, waste management monitoring, traffic manage- ment in the road, smart parking, energy consumption monitoring etc. In [21] authors have proposed an architecture of sensor based IoT network, which will continuously sense the building condition and send the data to the internet for further processing to know the health of the infrastructure. Waste management is another important service in the city. Authors [27] have proposed IoT based waste management service, which optimizes the use of the resources like trucks, roads, time etc. IoT networks connects all the vehicles and collect data from those objects for processing, which finally manage the resources in an optimize manner. In paper [1], researchers have proposed an IoT network architecture which consist of GPRS based sensors. These sensors are deployed throughout the city, sense the greenhouse gases and as a result IoT can monitor the emission of such harmful gases. Noise moni- toring [23] is another IoT application in a smart city. In noise mon- itoring, sensor can sense the sound levels of the objects in the environment and monitoring the levels by imposing restriction in the affected zone. Traffic management and car parking [19,18] are being automated by using special sensors in IoT based applica- tion. Congestion can be controlled by using the traffic management application, where as smart car parking makes the people aware of the status of parking slots in advance and remotely through IoT application.

The web applications which are mainly XML based are not suit- able for constrained devices like sensor or RFID devices. So in IoT [29,10,33,32], people have started developing web based applica- tions which are based on CoAP(constrained application protocol) in the application layer. It has been provided for accessing the con- strained devices like sensors through Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI). In paper [35], authors have proposed CoAP, which is demon- strated in Constrained RESTful Environment (CoRE) [34] and com- bined XML format with the format of Efficient XML Interchange (EXI) [28,35].

Almost all these papers are based on conventional IoT architec- ture, where different heterogeneous networks directly communi- cate with Internet through their own gateways. In all referenced paper, authors have proposed different protocols for the con- strained devices of their own models but still there are some issues, which are unexplored. Here we have proposed an IoT archi- tecture, which is different from the conventional one. It consists of four hierarchical levels, which combines MANET nodes, infrastruc- ture based WLAN, WSN nodes and Internet all together with an aim of using all these for different IoT applications in an efficient and effective manner.

General practice of IoT is to connect WSN (Data Source) to Inter- net (where all users are interconnected). This sort of IoT has inher- ent limitation in terms of area coverage, delay in the network, energy and IoT applications. In order to mitigate all the limitation and to bridge the big technical difference between WSN and Inter- net, we have introduced MANET in between and accordingly shown the design aspect from existing technologies as well as some application.

urban area. Several sensor nodes are deployed in these large infras- tructures, which actually collect valuable data like present condi- tion of buildings and bridges, temperature, pressure inside a factory etc. These sensor nodes send the sensed data to a prede- fined gateway sensor node. We have used a backbone of mobile adhoc nodes which will move through the roads of the urban area. The main responsibility of these nodes is to collect data from the sensor gateway nodes and finally send the data to the final destina- tion sink which is an Internet gateway. Sometimes gateway sensor nodes send the received data to the Internet through the access point of WLAN, if available. We have considered more than one sink (Internet gateway) for quick delivery of the sensed data from any point of the network to these sinks.

data to the Internet, so only three protocols layers are used. Access points at the WLAN at level H-3 also use same set of protocols as the MANET nodes. At the top level H-4, Internet use TCP/IP based protocol stack with IPv6 at the network layer. We have also pro- posed webservers in the IoT architecture, which are used by end user to access the intended device information. Webservers use XML based webpage for different applications and use HTTP appli- cation protocol at the application layer.

Internet gateways. Due to large difference in energy levels, data packet size and transmission power levels, converging these two levels in a seamless manner is very difficult. Incorporating MANET nodes between them reduces the differences and difficulties. We have claimed that our proposed model is more effective and effi- cient than the conventional one. As a proof we have given a qual- itative analysis of both models based on some critical parameters. In the simulation section we have also given some quantitative analysis which consolidate our claim. Following are the parameters used for comparison.

Data received by the mobile nodes is reached to one of the Internet gateways through intermediate MANET nodes. It follows the shortest path, which is clear by the proposed MANET routing algorithm (given later in this section). On the other hand in con- ventional model, several sensor gateways are accessing a single Internet gateway from a larger distance either in a time division manner or using CSMA/CA, which actually creates delay as well as loss of energy.

Proof. Let there are M1 number of sensor networks in an IoT sys- tem. In conventional model sensor gateways are sending m num- ber of data packets to the Internet gateway directly. If transmission speed of each data packet of the sensor gateway is T and all the sensor gateways use TDMA based access mechanism one sensor networks and collects data from them. Deployment of MANET nodes in a city is easy and it does not incur very high cost. Expandability is another big factor in any network system for future growth. The proposed design is highly scalable and thus more and more low power sensor networks with diverse technol- ogy can be included with incorporating small number of MANET nodes into the system which increases a little amount of cost.

In the hierarchical based architecture the energy consumption of the whole system is proportionately distributed over all the nodes in the IoT system. Nodes in each levels are spending some amount of energy to help the data packets reach to the Internet. We have shown that our proposed system is energy efficient.

Here we have considered two IoT applications, where the implementation aspect of the proposed model is discussed. In this section, all discussions are related to the nodes at the H-1 level. Among the two applications, the first one is related to hospital management and the second one is about the very worldwide pop- ular soccer game. Though the study of these two models are not new, but we have proposed different solutions for them, which comprise network architecture, protocols, communication technol- ogy of the wireless sensor devices, mobility models of the mobile

The IETF has proposed a paradigm known as Representational State Transfer (ReST) which is used for extending the web services over IoT. There is a similarity between conventional web services and IoT services following the ReST paradigm which helps the developers and users to use the traditional web knowledge in IoT web based services. The low complexity counterpart of the tradi- tional web protocol XML and HTTP are the Efficient XML Inter- change (EXI) and the Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP), where application layer protocol CoAP which allows ReST based communication among the energy constrained devices in IoT network.

