Food safety is considered nowadays as a critical issue for the imported food to EU. EU regulation imposed the traceability to all imported kinds of food. Over a long period of time, food in- dustry had very simple traceability systems, but after increasing implementation of current Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP), the traceability systems have become important in the pro- duction chain.Traceability can be defined as the ability to retrieve the history or geographical origin of an article or its relevant components or an activity through a registered method for stan- dardization (ISO, 2007). Installing these documentary systems in developing countries like sub-Saharan Africa is facing a lot of difficulties that is why new traceability strategies have been developed. In order to follow the farming types of peach fruit products during processing, we proposed to identify and vali- date some linked and important biological markers that come from the original habitat of these fruits.

The peach (Prunus persica) is defined as a deciduous tree that is native to Northwest China, in the region that present between the north slopes and Tarim Basin of the mountains of Kunlun Shan, where it was first cultivated [1]. It has an edible juicy fruit that is called a peach. The name of the species P. persica is linked to its spread cultivation in Persia. It also belongs to the genus Prunus that includes the cherry and plum in the family Ro- saceae. Finally, the peach is classified with the almond in the subgenus Amygdalus that is distinguished from the other sub- genera by the corrugated shell of seed.

The collection of these fruits was done to preserve their initial micro flora. They were directly collected from the tree using gloves and kept in sterile bags on Oct. 2012. The col- lected samples were stored in a refrigerator then transferred via plane to Cirad Montpellier (France). The bacterial and yeast DNA were extracted from the fresh fruits. The farming types of the samples were defined as well as the harvest date.

The second band was identified as Lactobacillus coryniformis which is regarded as the main bacteria in conventional farming type of peach. This strain is one of the most important lactic acid bacteria. Lactic bacterial cluster name is due to the ability of bacteria to convert lactose into lactic acid. The production ability of lactic acid makes its media acidic that in turn in- hibits growth of some other harmful or pathogenic bacteria and fungi and favors good plant growth and development [16]. Furthermore, these bacteria may have some potent therapeu- tic properties (anti-inflammatory, anti-cancer activities etc.).

Finally, Tremella flava (TF) was detected as the predomi- nant yeast in the conventional farming type of peach at the end of the trail. This strain is a genus of fungi of the family Tremellaceae and this species has anti-inflammation and anti- infection applicability [18]. So, many researchers suggested that TF might be a novel, natural alternative for use as anti- inflammation and an anti-infection agent, so it is valuable for fruits in this farming case.

The differences in microbial environment resulted from dif- ferences in the band profiles that are greatly influenced by the farming types. The processing system types applied could also influence the microbial populations of peach fruits. Some common bacteria and yeast bands were observed in the DGGE gel in all of the peach fruit samples.

We saw also that there was a complete statistical linkage between the bacterial and yeast populations and the farming mode, if we compared by FCA for DGGE profile for different farming modes of fruits. We can conclude that there were suf- ficient environmental differences between the two different farming types where the Jordan peach fruits were harvested to have a major effect on the bacterial and yeast ecology. Based upon this, we could make a statistical relationship between the farming mode and the bacterial yeast populations.

