Weak bisimilarity on BPP is PSPACE-hard [14], and it is not even known whether the notion is decidable; this is a long-standing open problem. For normed BPP, weak bisimilarity remains PSPACE-hard but decidability has been achieved for slightly more restricted classes [5,16]; one of them is the class of totally normed BPP [5]. However, both algorithms seem to have non-elementary complexity. Branching bisimilarity [17], which like weak bisimilarity reflects a notion of ob- servable behaviour, is also decidable on totally normed BPP [5].

It is standard to define classes of infinite-state processes in terms of rewrite systems [2,13]. For example, BPP are captured by what is commonly referred to as (1, P)-PRS [13]. Our notion of CRS generalizes (1, P)-PRS in two ways. Firstly, we allow processes to communicate; the type of communication will be specified by means of a synchronization algebra, a concept that originates from the semantics of concurrency [18]. Secondly, we allow a process to evolve into a tuple of processes rather than only one. This ensures we can capture generalizations of transition systems such as that used by distributed bisimilarity but it is also crucial to capture branching bisimilarity.

Our unique decomposition result is achieved with the help of an important tool of Luttik and van Oostrom [12]: a partial commutative monoid has unique decompo- sition iff it has a decomposition order. The concept of decomposition order captures the algebraic properties that typically underly unique decomposition proofs in pro- cess theory. Each normed CRS induces a notion of norm-reducing bisimulation. We will show that congruences which are norm-reducing bisimulations have a natural decomposition order, and hence by [12] they satisfy unique decomposition. Not only will this result imply unique decomposition for bisimilarity but it will also provide the backbone of our general decision procedure.

We now prove our unique decomposition results. As explained in the introduction we build on a theorem by Luttik and van Oostrom that characterizes when a par- tial commutative monoid has unique decomposition. We first introduce this tool, specialized to the case of commutative monoids.

In the following, we first present some preliminaries. In particular, we will define when, wrt. to a given complexity class 7 , we consider the presentation mapping to be 7 -effective. We will then prove our main result: whenever a presentation mapping is 7 -effective then the bisimilarity problem can be decided in 7 . Finally, we provide the proofs that have been left out in the main text.

decomposition of Xi+1 in Di+1. Otherwise declare Xi+1 to be prime in Di+1. It is clear that Properties (1) and (2) are satisfied. By Claim 5.10 the extension of Di to Di+1 can be computed in 7 . Then overall, Dk can also be computed in 7 .

Based on the insight, we will now derive another normed CRS P that captures weak bisimilarity. This new P will be similar to the previous one; however, the presentation mapping will be, in contrast to the previous one, PSPACE-effective. The only new ingredient is the treatment of the indices k.

