Fuzzy set theory, which is proposed by Zadeh [10] in 1965 to describe uncertainties in mathematical language, plays an impor- tant role in the modern society that is full of all kinds of uncer- tainty. As a powerful tool to deal with uncertainty, it has received a great concern and has been studied by many researchers for some relative practical applications. Intuitionistic fuzzy set (IFS), which presented by Atanassov [11], is doubtless one of the greatest extensions of fuzzy set theory. Since it can describe uncer- tainties from positive and negative perspectives by using the mem- bership degree and non-membership degree, respectively, it is more effective than fuzzy set. In intuitionistic fuzzy set theory, dis- tance measure, the representation of the deviation between IFSs, is widely used in practice, such as pattern recognition [12,13], deci- sion making [14,15,16] and medical diagnosis [17]. It was first defined by Szmidt and Kacprzyk [18] in 2000. And then, in order to pursue higher accuracy and more practical significance, various distance measures have been proposed. In this paper, we will adopt H-max distance measure [15] to quantify the differences between investments.

The advantage of intuitionistic fuzzy set in dealing with uncer- tainties implies that it can effectively solve the portfolio selection problem in uncertain environment. Yue et al. [19] proposed a fuzzy linear higher order moment portfolio selection model; Guo et al.

For the sake of ranking the investments conveniently, the method called technique for order preference by similarity to ideal solution (TOPSIS) is introduced. TOPSIS is presented by Hwang and Yoon [22] in 1981, which points out the best alternative is one that has not only the shortest distance from the Positive Ideal Solution (PIS) but also the farthest distance from the Negative Ideal Solution (NIS) [23]. In recent years, TOPSIS has been extended to fuzzy envi- ronment and widely applied to solve MCDM problems [8,16,21,23]. However, there is still not substantially improvement on its model. As pointed out by Dwivedi et al. [16], one of the limitations of the conventional TOPSIS method is that it does not take care of the weights of PIS and NIS distances. Although there have been some modifications on closeness coefficient, which plays a significant role in TOPSIS method, it is a pity that these modifications are not perfect enough. Besides, for portfolio selection, the conven- tional TOPSIS method cannot give investors a hand to allocate investment ratios for each selected investment, which cannot effectively spread the risk and is fatal in portfolio selection.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, some basic conceptions of IFS and TOPSIS method are introduced for preparation. The conventional TOPSIS method is modified in Sec- tion 3. In Section 4, three kinds of linear portfolio optimization pro- gramming models based on distance measure are given. Section 5 presents a numerical application to check the effectiveness and practicality of the models and then a sensitivity analysis is held. Finally, the conclusion is drawn in Section 6.

Entropy acts as an important role in the intuitionistic fuzzy the- ory for the reason that it represents the degree of uncertainty to IFS. Thus, it is also applied in many fields. In this paper, we will use entropy to assign weights to each criterion in TOPSIS method [25]. The greater the entropy, the more the uncertainty and the less investment intention, we should make the returns of portfolio as great as possible while making the risk as small as possible. Since the APIS and ANIS are regarded as the greatest returns and the ceil- ing of the highest risk, respectively, it is taken for granted to pursue the maximization of total weighted ANIS distance and the mini- mization of total weighted APIS distance. In addition, each selected investment should be invested so that all the investment ratios should be positive. Hence, a linear portfolio optimization program-

criteria. We can find that C1, C2, C3, C4 are returns criteria and the rest is risk criteria. The investor can express his/her acceptance and rejection degree of each company under different criteria, so that it is easy to get the assessment matrix in intuitionistic fuzzy form.

ELECTRE approach, proposed by Benayoun et al. [26], is also a MCDM method widely used [27]. This method is initially applied in some MCDM problems with crisp assessments. And then, to solve uncertainty problems, Wu and Chen [28] developed the IF ELECTRE method.

Similarly, we can find that A1 is better than A2, which is pointed out by R'', R and the conventional TOPSIS method. However, R' reverses the ranking of A1 andA2. From this per- spective, we can conclude that R' is also not effective enough.

According to the steps of IF ELECTRE, we can find that it is more complicate than our modified method. It needs to cal- culate three concordance sets and three discordance sets for the construction of the concordance matrix and discordance matrix by pairwise comparison. In contrast, our method just needs to compare each investment with APIS and ANIS, which is more time-saving.

Remark 10. In fact, although it seems that there is little difference in the results of Case 2 and Case 3 in condition (iii), their essences are lar- gely different. After calculating in more detail, we can find that the accurate total weighted APIS distance is higher than 0.2631 in Case 2, but it is lower than 0.2631 in Case 3, which is due to their different constraints.

is completely neutral for the reason that the investor does not take any preference of returns or risks into account. Whereas, Model (21) can ensure that the risk will not exceed a certain ceiling and Model (22) can ensure that the returns will not fall below a certain baseline. Therefore, to the inves- tor, these two models still indicate his/her preferences to some extent.

The modified TOPSIS can help investors to properly estimate the returns and risks of the stocks when the historical data is insufficient or unavailable. That is important, because the estimation result will directly affect the effectiveness and rationality of the portfolio strategy offered by the model. In fact, without the modified TOPSIS method or other effec- tive evaluation method to quantify the returns and risks as input data, investors cannot construct the corresponding portfolio model, not to mention to make rational portfolio selection.

