We introduce a method, based on graphical representation, for formulating sound and complete calculi for multi-modal logics. This approach provides uniform tools for expressing and manipulating modal formulas. We illustrate the method by constructing, in a natural manner, correct graph calculi for some multi-modal logics, which may include the global and difference modalities, and may have some special properties.

Considering multi-modal logics [3], we introduce a method, based on graphical rep- resentation, for formulating correct (sound and complete) calculi, yielding decision procedures (when possible) for them. The formulas of the calculi are diagrams and their rules transform diagrams to diagrams. These rules capture graphically the semantical properties of the modal operators, so their formulation is very natural and their application is quite intuitive, since they mirror reasoning at the semantical level. This flexible approach provides uniform tools for expressing and manipulat- ing modal formulas: it gives elegant and simple ways for representing and reasoning about modalities, which contrast sharply with those using unorthodox rules [1].

The structure of this paper is as follows. Section 2 introduces our graph approach to modalities. Section 3 reviews some concepts and results about graphs. Section 4 introduces a basic graph calculus for modalities, which we indicate how to extend to some special cases in Section 5. We formulate our method and analyze it in Section 6. Section 7 presents some comments on our graph approach to modalities.

A graph will be a finite set of (alternative) slices. A slice S will consist of an underlying draft S together with a distinguished node (marked, e. g. z). 5 A draft will be a finite sketch. A sketch will consist of sets of nodes and arcs. Slices and graphs will represent sets of states, while sketches will represent restrictions on sets of states (see also Section 4: Basic Graph Calculus for Modalities).

Clearly, a nice sketch is zero iff it has some expression witness that is nice. For a non-zero nice sketch, the identity assignment satisfies it in its natural model (cf. Example 2.5: Reflexive model). Hence, a nice slice is null iff it is zero.

Thus, S0 ~ S1 ~ S2 and each new arc with complement added has shorter label than the originating one. Also, note that slice S2 is closed: shifting will not produce any new arc. We now examine these slices, considering 2 cases.

Using graphs in connection with proofs is not so novel (see e. g. [2,7]). Also, inference systems internalizating Kripke semantics have become common recently (see [9] and references therein). We have already introduced correct graph calculi for some modal logics [13] and for PDL [14]. Their graphical rules mirror the semantical properties of the modal operators, so their formulation and application are quite intuitive; correctness indicates that the rules do capture the intended meanings.

