This blow-up in the size of the formula suggests that one cannot decide effi- ciently whether properties have an efficient, compositional, and precise verification of partial models. The results in this paper corroborate this suspicion since we secure hardness results matching those for the validity problem of the respective logics. Alas, our hardness results only come with an upper bound of an exponential gap. To add to this frustration, we cannot show any hardness results for deciding whether a formula and its negation do not lose precision in the sense discussed above.

lose precision [5]. For another, temporal logic formulas used in practice tend to be rather short, and so an exponential or double exponential worst-case inflation in their size may sometimes be feasible. But we still think that the results reported here are of interest. They pose the question of the exact computational complexity of the decision problems associated with semantic minimizations. And they also suggest connections with recent work on the complexity of decision problems for modal and mixed specifications [3,2,4]. Such specifications are related to the partial models we study in this paper.

In Section 2 we provide background on the verification of partial systems and on the concepts presented informally in the introduction. Our technical results, upper and lower bounds on the computational complexity of decision problems for semantic minimizations in temporal logics, are featured in Section 3. Related work is discussed in Section 4, and we conclude the paper in Section 5.

We assume the usual satisfaction semantics between pointed Kripke structures and formulas of the propositional modal mu-calculus (MC), both of which we define below. Refinement and this standard satisfaction notion let us define two judgments, one for generalized model checking [8] (SAT, called GMC in loc. cit.), and one for its logical dual (VAL).

The results and proofs in this paper will only apply to sentences. We therefore abuse notation by referring to MC, PML, and PL also as the subsets of sentences of these respective logics. Context will always determine the proper interpretation of these symbols.

is minimal amongst all models satisfying (5). Since there is some x with M (x) = 1/2, the algorithm will encounter the first if-statement and its guard will be true. Therefore, its for-statement will be executed and, for the first (indeed all) x it executes we can now reason that the algorithm will accept.

Sentences in set V lose precision in the pessimistic and in the optimistic compo- sitional semantics. Since unsatisfiable sentences are in PSM, sentences in set V must be satisfiable. Deciding membership of set V is also at least as hard as the satisfiability check of the relevant logic. To see this, consider

Since OSM and PSM are in coNP so is their union. But then set V is in NP as the complement of a language in coNP. Since we already showed that set V is NP-hard, we get that set V is NP-complete.

Blamey [6] studied partial-valued logics and their applications to linguistics and model theory and proved the existence of semantic minimizations (in our terminol- ogy) for propositional logic. The notion of supervaluational meaning was defined and studied by van Fraassen [21]; it is the definitional template for the generalized model checking judgements for temporal logics in this paper. Reps et al. [20] use BDD-based prime-implicant algorithms for a more efficient implementation of the more complex. For the propositional modal mu-calculus and propositional modal logic we showed that deciding optimistic and pessimistic self-minimization is at least as hard as the respective validity problems, but that we can show membership of this decision problem only for a complexity class exponentially higher than that. For semantic self-minimization, we could not show a hardness result for any logic considered. For propositional logic we could show that optimistic and pessimistic self-minimization both match the complexity of validity and that the set of formu- las that are neither optimistically nor pessimistically self-minimizing matches the complexity of satisfiability. We also discovered that two sets, for which we had ex- ponential gaps for the propositional modal mu-calculus and for propositional modal logic, are coNP-hard sets in DP in the case of propositional logic.

