In a preceding version of this paper [10] we have found canonical forms for DPH distributions of order 3 with all possible eigenvalue structures except one (referred to as PNP case) and presented a conjecture for that case. In the mean time it turned out that the conjecture for the PNP case in [10] was not valid. In this paper we repeat the proved findings of [10] for order 3 DPH distributions and devote special attention to the PNP case. The findings of [10] for order 2 DPH distributions are not presented here.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section provides a short introduction of DPH distributions. Section 3 summarizes the results of [10] on the canonical representation of DPH distributions of order 3 with all possible eigenvalue structures expect the PNP case. The new results of the paper are presented in Section 4, which discusses the canonical representation of order 3 DPH distributions with PNP eigenvalue structure. The difficulty of the PNP case comes from the fact that the methodology which allowed to prove the canonical forms for order 3 CPH and order 3 DPH with non PNP eigenvalue structure is not applicable for the PNP case.

For a given distribution of the 6 zero elements such a proof is feasible and its complexity is comparable with the complexity of the proofs of Section 3. The weak- ness of this approach is the high number different distribution of the 6 zero elements. We collected the possible non-symmetric and non-circular symmetric distributions of the 6 zero elements in the representation and eliminated the obviously meaning- less ones (e.g. where the matrix has lower rank) and we remained with more than 300 different structures (actually we worked with 319 structures, but some of them might still be redundant). This high number of the different distributions of zero elements inhibited as to prove Observation 1 along this approach.

By implementing a general transformation method which transforms to the 300 different structures with 6 zero elements we computed numerically how many of them are Markovian for a s1, s2, s3, a1, a2 tuple. Our numerical experiences verified Observation 1 together with Theorem 4.3, Theorem 4.4 and Observations 2 and 3. Outside the Markovian area of the PNP1, PNP2 and PNP3 representations non of the other representations were Markovian, while inside the areas typically more than one of the 300 different structures were Markovian, and at least one of the PNP1, PNP2 and PNP3 representations was always among the Markovian ones.

