The clique graph can be thought as an operator from Graphs into Graphs. The iterated clique graph Kk(G) is the graph obtained by applying the clique operator k successive times. It was introduced by Hedetniemi and Slater in [20]. Much work has

For the clique-Helly graph class, graphs which are convergent to the trivial graph have been characterized in [3]. Cographs, P4-tidy graphs, and circular-arc graphs are examples of classes where the different behaviors were also characterized [7,22]. On the other hand, divergent graphs were considered. For example, in [31], fam- ilies of divergent graphs are given. Periodic graphs were studied in [8,26]. It has been proved that for every integer i, there are graphs with period i and graphs which converge in i steps. More results about iterated clique graphs can be found in [9,10,23,24,25,32].

A biclique is a maximal bipartite complete induced subgraph. Bicliques have applications in various fields, for example biology: protein-protein interaction net- works [6], social networks: web community discovery [21], genetics [2], medicine [30], information theory [18], etc. More applications (including some of these) can be found in [28]. The biclique graph of a graph G, denoted by KB(G), is the inter- section graph of the family of all bicliques of G. It was defined and characterized in [16]. However no polynomial time algorithm is known for recognizing biclique graphs. As for clique graphs, the biclique graph construction can be viewed as an operator between the class of graphs.

The iterated biclique graph KBk(G) is the graph obtained by applying to G the biclique operator k times iteratively. It was introduced in [15] and all possi- ble behaviors were characterized. It was proven that a graph is either divergent or convergent, but never periodic (with period bigger than 1). Also, general char- acterizations for convergent and divergent graphs were given. These results were based on the fact that if a graph G contains a clique of size at least 5, then KB(G) or KB2(G) contains a clique of larger size. Therefore, in that case G diverges. Similarly if G contains the gem or the rocket graphs as an induced subgraph, then KB(G) contains a clique of size 5, and again G diverges. Otherwise it was shown that after removing false-twin vertices of KB(G), the resulting graph is a clique on at most 4 vertices, in which case G converges. Moreover, it was proved that if a graph G converges, it converges to the graphs K1 or K3, and it does so in at most 3 steps. These characterizations led to an O(n4) time algorithm (later improved to O(n + m) time [13]) for recognizing convergent or divergent graphs under the biclique operator.

In this work we study edge-biclique graphs not only because of their mathe- matical interest but also because in real-life problems, bicliques often represent the relation between two types of entities (each partition of the biclique) therefore if would make sense to study when two objects (bicliques) share a common relation- ship (an edge) more than just an entity (a vertex). In particular, we focus on the iterated edge-biclique graph, denoted by KBk(G), and defined as the graph obtained by applying the edge-biclique operator k successive times to G. We give some non- trivial sufficient conditions for a graph to be convergent or divergent under the KBe operator and we propose some conjectures that would help to fully characterize the behavior of a graph under the KBe operator.

This work is organized as follows. In Section 2 the necessary notation is given. In Section 3 and Section 4 we present some results about convergent and divergent graphs, respectively. Finally, in Section 5 we state some conjectures on the subject.

