Proposition 4.4 abstracts considerable information. We unpack its definitions to get several corollaries. The first corollary is a special case of [30, Theorem 4.4.8] when N and M are identity functors. It will be key to defining the interpretations of recursive session types in section 7.

Semantics of programming languages should, ultimately, help users reason about programs. To this end, it is useful to have an arsenal of identities for the mathematical objects used to define the semantics. In our case, the semantics of recursive types motivated the definition of a dagger operation in section 4. In that section, we studied its 2-categorical properties. We now show how these 2-categorical properties imply a large class of identities useful for reasoning about recursive types. In particular, we show that they imply the Conway identities [10, 12] up to isomorphism. The Conway identities in turn imply a class of identities useful in the semantics of programming languages.

sian) Conway identities together with an additional identity axiomatize the class of iteration theories [10, Remark 3.4]. Moreover, Hasegawa [20, Theorem 7.1] and Hyland independently discovered [5, p. 281] that a cartesian category has a trace operator [22] if and only if it has an external dagger operator satisfying the (cartesian) Conway identities.

We say that an O-category K has strict morphisms if it has zero morphisms and 0AB is the least element of K(A, B) for all objects A and B. We say that K supports canonical fixed points if it has an initial object, strict morphisms, and is O-cocomplete. Let CFP be the full subcategory of O whose objects are O-categories that support canonical fixed points. It is 2-cartesian closed [16, Theorem 7.3.11].

for many of the categories used in semantics, the least fixed point operator induces a dagger operation satisfying the Conway identities. They generalized this work to 2-cartesian closed categories in [12] and gave sufficient conditions for a dagger on horizontal morphisms to satisfy the Conway identities. They did not explore the 2-cartesian structure of daggers or the action of daggers on vertical morphisms.

Simpson and Plotkin [35] gave an axiomatic treatment of dagger operations satisfying Conway identities. They gave a purely syntactic account of free iteration theories. They give a precise characterization of the circumstances in which the iteration theory axioms are complete for categories with an iteration operator.

