In this paper we will show that partially ordered monads contain sufficient structure for modelling monadic topologies, rough sets and Kleene algebras. Convergence represented by extension structures over partially ordered monads includes notions of regularity and compactness. A compactification theory can be developed. Rough sets [23] are modelled in a generalized setting with set functors. Further, we show how partially ordered monads can be used in order to obtain monad based examples of Kleene algebras building upon a wide range of set functors far beyond just strings [19] and relations [27].

set functors for convergence were taken in [10] including a general structure the- ory. The observation that functors extended to monads [22] provide more power to convergence is due to [11]. Concrete examples, in particular involving the fuzzy filter monad, were developed in [7], followed by monad techniques for compactifi- cation constructions in [8] based on a compactification construction [24] for filter based limit spaces. The introduction of partially ordered monads and its use within extension structures is due to [13,14], with a follow-up on considerations for com- pacatifications in [15].

Topology and convergence were driving forces in the development of partially ordered monads and the demonstration of their power. However, these monads are useful also in other areas. We will show that they contain sufficient structure for modelling rough sets [23] in a generalized setting with set functors. Even for the ordinary relations, the adaptations through partially ordered monads increases the understanding of rough sets in a basic many-valued logic [16] setting. Further we show how these partially ordered monads contribute to providing a generalised notion of powerset Kleene algebras. This generalisation builds upon a more gen- eral powerset functor setting far beyond just strings [19] and relational algebra [27]. Kleene algebras are widely used e.g. in formal languages [26] and analysis of algorithms [1].

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we introduce partially ordered monads. Section 3 is devoted to topology and we show how extension structures allow compactification constructions. Section 4 presents rough sets in a categorical framework entirely new to the rough set community. This opens up several avenues for applications involving more than just relations on sets, i.e. the power set partially ordered monad. In Section 5, we see how Kleene algebra multiplications are Kleisli compositions and Kleene asterates can be defined using the partial order within the monad. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

For historical remarks let us mention the important role that Kleisli and Eilenberg-Moore categories play in the study of the relation between adjunctions and monads [2]. Every adjunction defines a monad, and conversely every monad can be seen as generated by an adjunction, called a resolution for the monad. Eilenberg- Moore and Kleisli categories give rise to resolutions, e.g., they are respectively the terminal and initial objects in the category of all resolutions.

Extension structures [12] generalize the notion of Cauchy structures and are func- torially defined by basic triples. For more elaborate notions, like regularity, basic triples need to be enriched to become partially ordered monads. In this enrichment we are able to provide compactification constructions of related limit structures. The idea is to use completion constructions and to show that completion of some special Cauchy structures coincide with compactifications of their corresponding limit structures.

category of compact Hausdorff (separated) topologies is an epireflective subcategory of the category of all Hausdorff topologies. However, as shown in [3], the more gen- eral category of separated compact filter limit structures fails to be an epireflective subcategory of the category of all separated filter limit structures. The restrictive result in the proposition above reflects this fact.

upper and lower approximation of sets. These approximations represent uncertain or imprecise knowledge. To be more formal, given a subset A of X, the lower approximation of A correspond to the objects that surely (with respect to an indis- tinguishable relation) are in A.

Partially ordered monads enrich monads with an order structure powerful enough to generalize convergence, rough sets and Kleene algebras. Monadic topologies are the result of decades of investigations on functor and monad based convergence. On the other hand, rough and Kleene monads are novelties where their acceptance and potential for applications is yet to be seen. Clearly, both in the case of rough sets as well as for Kleene algebras, when we generalize from ordinary relations and strings to enable more elaborate set functors extendable to partially ordered monads (and there are quite a few of them!), we open up entirely new possibilities for semantic considerations of programming languages and decision support models involving formal logic and uncertainties. Composing partially ordered monads will be as important as composing monads. The term monad, and its generalizations through compositions, will continue to play an important role.

