Background & aims: The rate of mortality from Spontaneous Peritonitis (SP) in cirrhotic patients is still high despite the development of new antibiotic treatments and intensive hospital care. The coexistence of spontaneous fungal peritonitis (SFP) is almost entirely ignored health problem, because it is difficult to be diagnosed at an early stage by conventional culture-based methods. Therefore, this study was designed to employ PCR-based method in evaluating the prevalence of fungal infection in cirrhotic patients with peritonitis who failed to respond to the recommended therapy and to determine its asso- ciation with in-hospital mortality.

Results: During hospitalization, 23 (42%) of patients had died although they received guideline-driven treatment. The demographics, clinical, hematological, and biochemical data were similar in both mortal- ity and survival groups. However, the incidence of fungus infection was the only significantly elevated parameter in the mortality group than in the survival group (7/23;30% vs.0/32;0%, P = 0.0012). This fungal infection was significantly associated with SP drug resistance development (P = 0.007). Intriguingly, all the cases of fungal infection were detected by PCR-based method while culture-based diagnosis was able to detect the fungal infection in only 4 of these cases indicating a diagnostic sensitivity of 57%.

It is widely accepted that resistance to third-generation cepha- losporins is the prevailing cause of mortality among all SP cases. This is evident from the high mortality rate among cirrhotic patients with infection by germs resistant to third-generation cephalosporins in comparison to those infected by pathogens that are sensitive to antimicrobials [9]. Third-generation cephalosporin-resistant SP is a common diagnosis when antibiotic treatment fails to drop the PMN count by at least 25% during 48 h [5]. Several mechanisms have been proposed regarding how antibi- otic resistance occurs in SP. One such mechanism refers to the increased incidence of extended-spectrum-b-lactamase (ESBL) producing enterobacteriaceae, causing resistance to third- generation cephalosporins [10]. The other reported mechanism results in treatment failure with antibacterial agents in SP is the existence of fungal infection [11]. Candida albicansis is the most commonly detected fungus from ascitic fluid of cirrhotic patients and has been reported as potent etiological agents of SP. However, spontaneous fungal peritonitis (SFP) does not differ symptomati- cally from spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP). Furthermore, SFP is difficult to be diagnosed at an early stage by conventional culture-based methods due to the longer time spent on fungal cul- ture results and usually passed unnoticed. Because of these limita- tions, incidence of SFP was reported as rare with ill-defined clinical characteristics and prognosis [12].

These clinical difficulties impose the necessity of accurately detecting SFP at the earliest stage possible before the start of guideline-driven treatments. Recent diagnostic advances, includ- ing detection of fungal cell wall components such as galactoman- nan and B-glucan, or detection of fungal genomic DNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), would improve diagnostic ability and increase clinical awareness for SFP [13]. So far, studies evalu- ating the usefulness of these molecular techniques in the diagnosis of SFP in cirrhotic patients are scarce, especially from our region. Thus, the current study was undertaken to use DNA-based PCR method in evaluating the prevalence of fungal infection in cir- rhotic patients with peritonitis who failed to respond to the recom- mended antibiotic therapy. Furthermore, the present work aimed to gain new insights into the clinical characteristics and prognosis of SFP in comparison with other groups of cirrhotic patients with non-fungal peritonitis.

Blood and ascitic fluid samples were collected from each patient. The blood sample (5 mL) was used for complete blood pic- ture and serum separation. Serum samples were assayed for liver function markers; albumin, bilirubin, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST). Additionally, crea- tinine, random blood glucose, sodium and potassium levels were determined with commercial available kits.

min as a final step, A reagent blank, which contained all compo- nents of the reaction mixture with the exception of template DNA, was included in every PCR procedure. The PCR products were visualized on a UV transilluminator after electrophoresis on 2% agarose gels using ethidium bromide at 0.5 lg/ml.

The aforementioned results provide a rationale to specifically analyze data from patients with spontaneous fungal peritonitis (SFP) in comparison with other groups with non-fungal AFI. The majority of included cases (41/55, 74.5%) had culture negative neu- trocytic ascites (CNNA), characterized by PMN count >250/mm3 and a negative ascitic fluid culture. However, there were 7 (12.72%) patients who had another variant of AFI, characterized

Song KH, Jeon JH, Park WB, Park SW, Kim HB, Oh MD, Lee HS, Kim NJ, Choe KW. Clinical outcomes of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis due to extended- spectrum beta-lactamase-producing Escherichia coli and Klebsiella species: a retrospective matched case-control study. BMC Infect Dis 2009;9:41.

