The paper is structured as follows. In the next section a description of the Bio-PEPA language and DEB theory is reported. Section 3 presents Pouvreau et al DEB model of the Pacific oyster [18] and describes its translation to Bio-PEPA. This allows Section 4 to extract the general features of the translation process and present a generic approach of translation of DEB Theory to Bio-PEPA. Analysis of the Pacific oyster case study is presented in Section 5. Section 6 reports the conclusion.

not in L, the agents proceed independently and concurrently with their enabled ac- tions. In the model component S(x) the parameter x represents the initial amount of the agent. Bio-PEPA also allows the introduction of timed events to the model. For example, in epidemic networks the introduction of a virus at a particular time can be described as an event [7].

maintenance rate divided by the volume-specific cost for growth. These rates again use the specific rates as defined in the DEB model. As V is a generic modifier in the other five actions it influences the kinetic rates and does not increase or decrease when these actions occur.

Conversion of the state variables to agents DEB model state variables usu- ally are V, E and ER. There may be more than one V and E. These will become agents in the Bio-PEPA model. As noted by Gurriero and Heath [11], the translation from simple ODE to Bio-PEPA is straightforward. This is partly true for the DEB model here. It is worth noting that DEB models include timed events such as spawning which are not described in the ODEs of the models, therefore interpretation and implementation of the textual model assumptions must be made.

Adding the forcing variables into the model Values of the forcing variables are usually wet laboratory values that are entered at each data point in time. As it is not possible to add each data point to each time point in a Bio-PEPA simulation, simple functions should be implemented to create similar behaviour of the forcing variables over time. Statistical techniques such as regression can assist here.

The Bio-PEPA plug-in has static analysis, therefore informing the user of any syn- tactic and simple semantic errors in the model before any simulations are run. The outline view in the plug-in shows the actions and agents that are present and further shows which of these actions are sources or sinks. This view informs the user about the model in an abstract way. The problems view highlights any errors in the syn- tax and also shows warnings suggesting that particular actions need to be assessed. This static analysis provides confidence to the modeller in their understanding of the system and syntactic correctness and consistency of their model whereas the ODE DEB model, and typical tools for processing ODE, do not.

The Bio-PEPA model produced comparable results to the original DEB model. It confirms a very good simulation of somatic growth and the replication of a spawn- ing event. The slight differences in batch 1 are derived from the difference in the forcing variable values. Although it cannot be seen clearly on the graphs, the values of reproduction weight released at the spawning event in batch 1 are similar and the time of the spawning is the same.

cycle and also the two spawning periods. The first spawning event is at the beginning of June and the weight lost is approximately 0.15g in the stochastic simulations and 0.28g in the ODE simulation. The second spawning event takes place around the end of August and the weight lost is approximately 0.61g in the stochastic simulations and 0.82g in the ODE simulation. These results are comparable to the original DEB model with 0.2g for the first event and 0.5g for the second.

the maintenance costs. This demonstrates the assimilation is just sufficient to meet the maintenance costs when food is limited during the winter period [18]. It is noted that the parameters of scaled energy density and functional response also displayed the same internal relationship values as the original DEB model.

For batch 1 spawning starts to occur at day 77 with 1.3% of the simulations reaching the target value of 1 around mid September. 90.7% of the simulations reach this target between day 78 and 80. By day 82 all simulations reach the target. This certifies the spawning event occurring at a precise time. Batch 2 and 3 simulations never reach the target value of 1 indicating that a spawning event will never occur in either experiment.

Simulations start to reach the target value of 1 at day 223. All the simulations had reached this target value by day 272. This indicates a large window of time for the first spawning to occur (beginning of June to mid July). The distribution is skewed:

Pouvreau et al [18] estimate some model parameters, as is common in modelling; for example, finding the values of volume specific cost for structure [EG] and the maximum energy storage density [EM ] in a starvation experiment [20]. Parameter optimisation can be used on Bio-PEPA models to find unknown values for certain parameters by comparing the time series data from the relevant experiment, remov- ing the need to carry out additional wet laboratory experiments for these certain parameters. Given experimental data, this is easily available for Bio-PEPA models via either SBSI [3] or the EPA framework [16] (recently adapted to accept Bio- PEPA input). This analysis has not been carried out for this model due to lack of access to experimental data.

The generic translation approach has been implemented to easily convert math- ematical DEB models to Bio-PEPA models. A concrete example model of the translation process has been constructed and its results have been compared to the original DEB model and published wet laboratory results. New analysis has been carried out on a specific DEB model in the Bio-PEPA plug-in by using simulation distributions and new results have been generated about the system demonstrating the utility of the translation process.

The Pacific oyster Bio-PEPA model also shows that it is generic, producing results for different environmental conditions and for different state variables. The model can therefore be used again for other related bivalve experiments, potentially feeding back to further, more targetted, wet lab experiments. This exemplifies the cycle of systems biology originally put forward by Kitano [13].

The translation to Bio-PEPA is the first stage of a research programme, with the goal of providing more complex, multi-scale model features. For example, inter- actions between a population of oysters, or interactions between oysters and their environment. A further line of reasearch could be to develop a tool to implement the generic translation from DEB models to Bio-PEPA models.

