Several methods have been proposed to synchronize codeword frames without using syncwords. For example, a previous study proposed a method [15] that is a variation of the brute-force approach. This method buffers two frame lengths of symbols and attempts decoding at each possible offset until an offset is deter- mined for which decoding is successful. However, this method is computationally more complex and does not perform as well as frame synchronizers that utilize syncwords.

This study proposed to use as a syncword a permutation where the minimum Hamming distance to all its circular shifts was the maximum. Furthermore, a correlation processing of data fragments received from the communication channel was introduced to rec- ognize a syncword. Interleaving accumulated fragments acceler- ated the synchronization convergence. To evaluate the permutation-based frame synchronization method, a Python soft- ware model was constructed.

occurrences. Here, false synchronization probability increases with a higher probability p0 and with a lower accumulation factor l. In this case, the frame synchronization procedure should ensure that the probability of establishing false synchronism cannot exceed a given threshold for any arbitrarily high probability of a bit error.

Rk. Here, if synchronization is not established in this step, the recei- ver also accepts new fragments and writes them to a general buf- fer. Then, the synchronization system again distributes the fragments randomly between the K sets of fragments. This approach to fragment processing is referred to as interleaving because the specified random distribution of fragments between K sets can be achieved by interleaving fragments in a common array in the buffer.

The paper has presented a permutation-based frame synchro- nization method for data communications with short packets. In this method, the binary representation of permutation used as a syncword must satisfy the a single condition, i.e., the minimum Hamming distance to all its circular shifts is the maximum.

The authors are grateful to the Honorary Prof. of Cherkasy State Technological University, Dr. Valerii Shvydkyi for helpful remarks and discussion of the obtained results. This research was funded from the Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine under grant 0120U102607. E.F. was supported by the nominal scholarship to young scientists - Doctors of Sciences for 2021, founded by the Ver- khovna Rada of Ukraine, under grant 0121U112454.

