apex on thick walled epidermis; conjoint, collateral closed, endarch vascular bundles; rosette crystals of calcium oxalate in ground tissue. Ash and extractive values, micro and macro elements and nutritive factors were estimated. Leaf powder showed fluorescence under the influence of different solvents. Preliminary phytochemical screening showed the presence of alkaloids, saponins and triterpenoids. High Performance Thin Layer Chroma- torgraphic (HPTLC) analysis yielded eight bands in leaf extract. The study forms the first report on pharamcognostic characters for A. coynei, which could be useful for identification and authentication of the plant.

Achyranthes coynei Santapau (Amaranthaceae) is one such plant, which is a profusely branching perennial shrub growing up to a height of 2.0e4.5 m. The plant is endemic to India and reported from Maharashtra and Karnataka states [4]. The plant was categorized as rare in Red data book of Indian plants [5]. This plant is locally known as Kempu Uttarani (Kannada) and Lal Agada (Marathi) and used to treat various ailments by folk healers, most of the times, similar to that of Achyranthes aspera [4]. Leaves are reported to have antibacterial [6] and antioxidant [7] activities.

According to Hegde et al., every plant shows unique nature in terms of its botany, chemistry and therapeutic potency and it is essential to study pharmacognostic characters of a me- dicinal plant, not only for its proper identification, but also to understand its structure and biology [8]. The available litera- ture revealed that, no such studies have been carried out for A. coynei. Hence in the present investigation, the leaves of A. coynei was studied for its pharmacognostic characteristics.

Leaves of A. coynei along with petiole were collected from Madhanbhavi, Belgaum district, Karnataka. The plant spec- imen was authenticated and herbarium was deposited at Regional Medical Research Centre, (ICMR), Belgaum, Karna- taka, India for future reference (Voucher number: RMRC 784).

Total ash, acid insoluble ash and water soluble ash param- eters indicate the presence of inorganic and silica components in the sample studied [8]. The ash content of A. coynei lies within the range of A. aspera as reported in Ayurvedic pharmacopeia [14]. The results of the water and ethanol extractive studies reveal the presence of secondary metabolite in the powder sample [8] and Upadhya et al. reported consid- erable amount of total phenolic content in the leaves of A. coynei, which was further reported to be responsible for in vitro antioxidant activities [7]. Leaf powder display the florescence activity due to the presence of diverse chemical entities under the influence of ultraviolet light and different reagents.

The results of HPTLC analysis for triterpenoids from A. coynei leaf extract were in accordance with the reports of Ton- don, wherein they have differentiated the TLC profile on the basis of Rf values. The band with Rf value 0.57 was attributed as oleanolic acid for A. aspera [13]. In the present study, similar observations for Rf value of 0.53 with intense blue colour band was recorded. This indicated the presence of oleanolic acid, as also reported by Upadhya et al., using HPLC method [16].

Authors are grateful to the Director-in-Charge, Regional Medical Research Centre, (ICMR) Belgaum for the facilities and ANCHROM, Mumbai for providing HPTLC facility. Authors are also thankful to Mr. Bhoopal Talawar, lab attendant for his help in processing plant material. VU is indebted to Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi for Senior Research Fellowship during the study.

