revealed G0/G1 arrest associated with decrease in proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). In tumor tis- sue of CSNPs-PE treated mice, compared with free PE, there were; 1) induction of Bax and p53, 2) activa- tion of caspases-3,-8 and -9, and CD95, 3) decrease in Bcl-2 expression of 4) inhibition of VEGF and CD31 expressions in tumor tissue. In conclusion, encapsulation of PE into CSNPs provided a good platform for cancer chemotherapy and raised existing application of different polyphenols for nanochemotherapy/ prevention.

angiogenesis [8]. Meanwhile, nature provides plenty of medicinal products that consider as a great source of nontoxic drugs for can- cer treatment. Plant derived compounds rich in polyphenols proved to possess great therapeutic characteristics by targeting molecular pathways of apoptosis [9]. Among natural dietary com- pounds is green tea polyphenols which showed impressive chemo- preventive potential in several cancer types [10] including prostate cancer [11], human melanoma cells [3] and lung cancer [12].

0.2%; catechins, 1.1% and caffeine, 0.7% [15]. PE remarkably down-regulated several miRNA expression profile in MCF-7 cells [16], induced apoptosis in human bladder cancer cells [17] and inhibited metastatic progression of prostate cancer [18]. It also inhibited N-ethyl-N-hydroxyethylnitrosamine induce carcino- genicity on renal cells [13].

Chitosan nanoparticles (CSNPs) were prepared using ionotropic gelation technique [20] with a slight modification. Briefly, an aque- ous CS solution (0.1% w/v) was obtained by dissolving CS in 0.1% w/v acetic acid. Then, 0.1% STPP aqueous solution was added drop wise to CS solutions under mild magnetic stirring for 20 min. Opales- cent suspensions were formed spontaneously at room temperature which were further examined as the hydrogel NPs. The PE-60 loaded CSNPs were prepared using the same procedure but with dissolving a 250 mg/kg body weight of the PE-60 in the CS solution.

The morphology and particles size measurements of the devel- oped hydrogel NPs were performed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL, JEM-1230, Japan Ltd.) at accelerating volt- age of 200 kV. Samples were prepared for imaging by drying the NPs on a copper grid that is coated with a thin layer of carbon. The size of the plain and PE-60-loaded CSNPs was also determined by dynamic light scattering (DLS) (Malvern nanosizer, Malvern Instruments Ltd., Worcestershire, UK).

neously on the back of each moce. Day of injection was assigned as day 0. On day 5 the animals were randomized and divided into 4 groups each containing 10 animals: Control group (C), which mice were transplanted with EAC cells. The second group was orally administrated with 0.1 ml chitosan nanoparticles (Cs) on day 5 after transplantation 3 times a week for 30 days. The third group (CSNPs-PE) was administrated with CSNPs-PE on day 5 of EAC cells injection 3 times a week for 30 days with total volume

0.1 ml orally using stomach tube. The forth group (PE) was orally administrated with 0.1 ml free polyphenon-E (PE) on day 5 after transplantation 3 times a week for 30 days. In all cases the concen- tration of the PE is 250 mg/kg body weight.

Annexin-V FITC/PI, ApoAlert kit from Clontech (Palo Alto, CA) was used to distinguish between apoptosis and necrosis according to the instructions described by the manufacturer. Before staining, cells were fixed using 2% paraformaldehyed and permeabilized with Saponin, (0.5% v/v in PBS, pH 7.4). The cells were washed and suspended in PBS (pH 7.4) with 0.2% BSA, divided into aliquots for flow cytometric analyses. The flow cytometry analyses were performed on an FACSCaliburTM cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) using CellQuest Pro software (Becton Dickinson) for data acquisition and analysis [24]. A total of 10,000 events were acquired and the cells were properly gated for analysis.

For determination of the expression of p53, Bax, Bcl-2, CD95 and caspases 3 and 9, tumor cells were permeabilized and fixed as described earlier. Cells (1X106) from each group were incubated for 30 min with anti-Bcl-2 antibody, anti-Bax antibody for flow cytometry analysis of Bcl-2 and Bax, respectively. A mouse anti- P53 FITC, was used for P53 analysis by flow cytometry. In case of

The PCNA and VEGF were assessed and scored independently by two investigators using light microscopy. The numbers of positive cancer cell nuclei were scored in 400 cancer cells and the ratios of stained to total cells expressed as percentage were defined as PCNA or VEGF indices [23]. Scoring of CD31 expression was performed on computer assisted digital image analysis (Digital morphometric study). Tissue sections were photographed using Olympus digital camera fitted on Olympus microscope. The images of tissue sec- tions were analyzed using Video-Test Morphology software (Rus- sia) adapted for percent area measurement and object counting.

The cell cycle progression was analyzed to investigate if the reduction in tumor growth induced by CSNP-PE administration is due to inhibition of tumor cell proliferation. The percentage of cells in S-phase was significantly decreased in tumor obtained from CSNPs-PE than PE treated and control mice indicating the effective- ness of nanoformulation. The cell cycle analysis also revealed cycle arrest at G0/G1 in tumor obtained from mice treated with CSNPs- PE compared with other treated groups. These data also demon- strated that PE in nanoformulation is more effective than free PE. Furthermore, The CSNPs-PE group tumors, relative to control tumors, had significantly decreased PCNA expression that match to the reduced cell population in S-phase results suggesting a decrease in the proliferation of tumor cells by CSNPs-PE. This effect is remarkably evident in CSNPs-PE treated mice compared with free PE indicating the advantage of encapsulation PE in chitosan nanoparticles. These data also support the reduced tumor growth observed in this study.

mitochondrial and transmembrane death receptors pathways which comprise of the activation the effector caspases via the ini- tiator caspases in cell death [32]. Consistent with increased expres- sion of p53 in Ehrlich tumor of mice treated with CSNPS-PE, there was greater activation of CD96, caspases 3, 8 and 9 with up- regulation of Bax and down-regulation of Bcl-2 compared to free PE and void CSNPs. Changes in the Bax to Bcl-2 ratio resulted in the destabilization of the mitochondrial membrane and liberation of the proteolytic caspases and cleavage of PARP [33] that lead to cell death [3].

These results confirm previous study that PE increased lung cancer cell death by inhibition of Bcl-2 related apoptosis through reducing mitochondrial membrane potential and enhancing PARP cleavage [34]. Furthermore, PE induced growth inhibited in colon cancer cells [35]. The later authors demonstrated similar potencies of PE and EGCG and preferred PE for easier preparation and syner- gistic effect of mixed catechins. In a recent report, PE caused severe and prolonged endoplasmic reticulum stress in prostate cancer cells leading cell death through a caspase-independent pathway of necrotosis [15].

