In an emergency, predicting the evolution trends of network public opinion is of great significance for governments to manage the situation and associated social public opinion trends. Most of the existing public opinion prediction models have the disadvantages of long time consumption, limited types of pre- dicted public opinion categories and low-accuracy prediction results. To improve the ability to predict the evolutionary trend of complex public opinion, an improved multiobjective gray wolf optimizer (IMOGWO) is proposed. IMOGWO uses logistic and Lotka-Volterra models to initialize the wolf popula- tion and improve the population validity; it designs a nonlinear function to adjust the population update factor to improve the exploration and exploitation ability and the local search ability of the wolf popu- lation; and it introduces the elite retention policy and a Pareto-optimal solution set to achieve multiple objectives using the principle of a nondominated solution set. In simulation experiments, various net- work emergencies were taken as empirical analysis cases. The experimental results show that the improved multiobjective GWO has good accuracy and universality on complex public opinion evolution prediction and can better predict the evolution trends of various types of complex public opinion than other tested methods.

ties and options. After major emergencies, public opinion on the internet can rapidly develop into a powerful social force. Therefore, the effective guidance of online public opinion is not only related to the success or failure of on-site emergency response, but also to the stability and harmony of society [1].

Research on the prediction of evolutionary trends of public opinion with data from the internet is very much applicable the Chinese context, and many scholars have studied the evolutionary process of public opinion diffusion [2]. Research methods usually involve the use of mathematical statistical models, Backpropoga- tion algorithm, traditional system theory methods, machine learn- ing, etc. [3]. Yang Wenyang used a genetic algorithm to generate an optimization model for the public opinion spreading process to better plan the spreading path of online public opinion [4]. Nie Lisheng used kernel principal component analysis (KPCA) and the particle swarm random forest algorithm to predict public opinion trends, and this algorithm significantly improved the prediction accuracy compared with back propagation algorithms [5]. The paper [6] used a fused particle swarm and k-means clustering algo- rithm for microblog public opinion trend analysis and detection. Lv Z [7] constructed a model based on a neural network to solve the

The evolutionary development of public opinion is the result of mutual checks and balances of multiple factors, which exhibit complex nonlinear characteristics and spiraling trends [10], and the time-series data of public opinion often present time-series correlations and have a large data volume. By combining the rele- vant literature published at home and abroad in recent years, it is found that the research on complex public opinion prediction by domestic and foreign scholars is still in the exploratory stage, and there is a lack of research on complex public opinion predic- tion at home and abroad. Most of the existing research on public opinion prediction relies on time series analysis or neural net- works. Complex public opinion prediction involves not only the prediction of the prevalence of a single public opinion but also the prediction of multi-information public opinion. Among the rel- evant studies on the prediction of the evolution of online public opinion, few researchers have studied public opinion events in which both public opinion information and intervention informa- tion about the information exist simultaneously. To address the shortcomings of the above studies, to solve the problem of predict- ing the evolutionary trend of public opinion and to improve the prediction speed and accuracy of the evolutionary trend of public opinion, this paper proposes an improved multiobjective gray wolf optimizer by combining various strategies. The gray wolf optimizer (GWO) has strong convergence performance, and there exists a convergence factor that can be adaptively adjusted as well as an information feedback mechanism, which has good performance in terms of the accuracy when solving the problem. The convergent GWO has good performance in terms of both accuracy and conver- gence speed, and it has higher performance than the particle swarm algorithm in exploring unknown and challenging search space problems. In this paper, we use logistic and Lotka-Volterra models to initialize the wolf population, improve GWO with mul- tiobjective and added sine functions and logarithmic function opti- mization to fit the curves when public opinion changes suddenly, expand the search range and increase the convergence speed of the algorithm, and then verify the usability and stability of the algorithm by fitting experiments to several sudden events.

Phase I: Public opinion information is spread separately. At the early stage of the emergency, only public opinion information exists in the public space. Increases in the number of supporters is similar to those found in the number of patients during a single type of mass attack in ecology, and propagation conforms to the logistic model.

The propagation of complex public opinion follows a specific development pattern, including butterfly effects and collective reactions. Some public opinion events with correlation and over- lapping audiences begin to merge with each other as online pub- lic opinion evolves continuously, so there does not exist a model with specific parameters that can predict the evolution direction of all public opinion trends; as an alternative, a mathematical model that conforms to the law of public opinion evolution can be applied, and then appropriate parameters are set accord- ing to the characteristics of each public opinion event. According to the laws and characteristics of complex public opinion evolu- tion, to solve the difficulties caused by different types of public opinion arising from the same public opinion event before and after the turning point in the prediction of public opinion evolu- tion and the multiple types of information about complex public opinion, this paper chooses to use the logistic model and Lotka- Volterra competition model to initialize the parameters of the predicted public opinion evolution model, iteratively update the prediction using the improved MOGWO parameters of the public opinion evolution model, and finally find the optimal model parameters.

After intervention information is released, growth in the popu- lation of supporters of public opinion information is inhibited by the competitive effect of the intervention information. Similarly, the growth of the supporters of intervention information is affected by their own growth potential, the potential for growth in the environment and competition for public opinion informa- tion. Therefore, we make use of the increased Lotka-Volterra model to predict the trends of online public opinion at the stage of public opinion and intervention data co-transmission. The mathematical model is:

The gray wolf optimizer (GWO) is a new swarm intelligence algorithm that utilizes the potential of Miljalili et al. in 2014. It is flexible, scalable, and achieves accurate stability between explo- ration and development. The GWO simulates the conduct of a predatory gray wolf population in accordance with the cooperation mechanism among wolves. Each wolf performs a function in the population conforming to natural law and strict social systems [14].

The degree of public awareness and its influence on public opinion and intervention information changes over time. With the passage of time, the attractiveness of public opinion informa- tion may gradually decline and tend toward zero. In contrast, the attractiveness of intervention information initially decreases and gradually increases to maximum attractiveness. The attractive- ness of public opinion and intervention information is defined as follows: where iter is the population of iterations,Maxiter is the largest quan- tity of iterations, and r1, r2  0, 1 . When the wolf catches quarry (i.e., when it attacks its target), the replacement of the male or female gray wolf is decided in accordance with the three types of wolves, and the model is as follows:

where the best answer is most likely to occur to enhance search efficiency. The function log() has fast exchange in the initial stage and gradual and mild exchange in the later stage. Therefore, ln() based completely on formula(9) is used to make the convergence element exhibit a steep nonlinear convergence exchange at the ini- tial stage and mild exchange at the late stage. The multiplied F (34) is generated as follows:

Multiobjective optimization refers to the need to address mul- tiple objectives simultaneously. The greatest advantage of multiob- jective optimization over single objective optimization is the ability to deal with multiple conflicting objectives simultaneously and to obtain a set of Pareto-optimal solutions. In a multiobjective problem, a Pareto-optimal solution [15] is defined as follows: for any one solution in the solution set, no other solution can be found in the variable space that is superior to that solution; i.e., if all objective function values are superior, then the solution is the Pareto-optimal solution. The multiobjective optimization problem contains many subobjectives, and each subobjective has the possi- bility of conflicting with each other, and the metrics between sub- objectives may also be different. It is impossible to obtain the optimal solution for each objective function under a certain deci- sion vector.

the algorithm to converge toward the real data trend of real events, and the algorithm of this paper achieves these results in all exper- iments. Moreover, the algorithm converges within 5 s in almost every experiment, which proves that IMOGWO in this paper is effective. It is proven that IMOGWO in this paper is effective in improving the convergence accuracy and convergence speed of the algorithm, which suggests that the algorithm in this paper has a strong fitting prediction ability on single-opinion information events.

