Lung diseases induce breathing system and pulmonary dysfunc- tion and encompass diverse lung diseases. It includes pneumonia, tuberculosis, influenza, and lung cancer [1]. COVID-19 is a fatal lung ailment, and patients who survive are prone to asthma, pneu- monia, and leukemia [2,3]. COVID-19 also causes respiratory fail- ure death [4]. COVID-19 survivors have a reduced immune system, putting them at risk for pulmonary diseases. Multiple fac- tors cause lung illnesses. Some are viral, bacterial, and fungal ill- nesses; others, like asthma, lung cancer, and mesothelioma, are environmental [5]. Bacterial and viral lung infections limit the

A sputum cytology test can detect lung cancer cells. Patients who are having cough and producing sputum then observing the sputum under a microscope can detect cancerous cells. The diag- nostic tool used earlier was bronchoscopy, by taking the samples of tissues, and the accuracy rate was 88 % [10]. In radial probe endobronchial ultrasound, a 360-degree image is obtained of the surrounding structure. Further, the targeted location is determined by inserting the probe into the traditional bronchoscopy for the exact lump position determination. A biopsy is again performed by the traditional biopsy technique [11]. The electromagnetic nav- igation system was used for tracking the working channel of bron- choscopy and to deploy the flexible tip of the probe by using a sensor attached to the probe. The sensor helps in creating a 3- dimensional position structure on computerized tomography (CT) scan and images obtained are used to determine the exact location of the lesions according to the sensor position with 68 %, accuracy [12].

The reasons for the spread, and types of lung cancer help in pin- pointing the position of cancer. Pneumonia and lung cancer symp- toms are quite similar like cough, chest pain, and shortness of breath. Furthermore, symptoms of pneumonia are rapid weight loss, high calcium levels, and more [15]. The indications which are not encompassed in lung carcinoma are chilling, shaking, and a large amount of sputum [16]. Research says, patients suffering from pneumonia often, tend to have lung carcinoma later. The causes of this cancer are mainly smoking, tobacco, and inhaling of chemicals in the surroundings as it causes cancerous cells to activate in the body [17,18]. Furthermore, cigarette smoke is haz- ardous as it contains known 60 carcinogens that include nitrosami- nes, and hydrocarbons, where p450 cytochrome enzymes activate polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon. Lung cancer initiates by chronic DNA adduct formation in genes such as p53 [19,20].

The most difficult aspect of the planned research will be the early diagnosis of lung cancer, as it is typically diagnosed in its last stages, and its treatment at this stage is quite difficult [40]. The delay is caused in developing countries due to the communication gap between the medical professionals and the patients as many cannot afford the fees of private clinics [41]. The clinical diagnosis of lung cancer is an important topic in the modern era, and several early diagnostic systems for lung cancer have been proposed, mostly employing ML classification methods [42]. In these sys- tems, the extraction of relevant characteristics posed the greatest challenge. To propose an effective approach for early diagnosis through the identification of robust features, the combination of feature transformation and ML algorithms has been used.

In developing nations, the delay in cancer diagnosis is due to administrative, financial, and a shortage of available facilities, among others. In order to overcome the problem, the current research focuses on reducing the features of the available dataset of lung cancer patients through transformation and enhancing the performance of the diagnosis system through extensive learn- ing. The purpose of this study is to detect lung cancer at an early stage. For this purpose, an ML algorithm comprised of a novel com- bination of regression and feature transformation techniques would be developed. Dimensionality reduction of the presented dataset would be achieved using feature transformation tech- niques. In order to determine the optimal framework for the diag- nostic system, a series of experiments would be conducted using root mean square error (RMSE) and R2-Score as performance met- rics for the implemented schemes.

To detect disease in its earliest stages, numerous scientists have proposed various methods. Scientists have predominantly used image recognition for cancer detection. According to related research, diagnostic systems based on classification techniques have been proposed for the prevalent detection of cancer tumors. This study focuses on collecting sociodemographic, clinical, and laboratory investigation-based datasets of lung cancer patients and proposing an ML-based diagnosis system that includes a fea- ture transformation technique and regression model for early detection. Optimization is quite challenging as in the recent world data is generating gigantically all the time and its simultaneous processing is quite big issue. So, the novelty and contribution of the presented research is identification of optimized combination contain regression technique and feature transformation technique.

The purpose of this study is to propose a framework for the early diagnosis of lung cancer by transforming features. In addi- tion, evaluate multiple dimensionality reduction techniques for feature transformation and select the optimal combination of regression model and feature transformation technique for early lung cancer diagnosis. In addition, the purpose of this study is to improve the accuracy of the model by using available datasets through enhanced pattern learning.

The results of the selected model are shown after performing a series of experiments. Different techniques and models are used to validate the system for feature transformation of a complex socio- demographic, clinical, and lab investigation based dataset of lung cancer patients. The framework is the general representation of the experimentation that has been performed, and the results are shown step by step.

Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) works for both classification problems and regression problems. This algorithm is supervised, it learns a function f(.): R^m -> R^o, by training on a dataset. The number of inputs is denoted by m, and the number of outputs is denoted by o, for the given dataset. It consists of hidden layers,

Due to the variations and amount of data ML-based different models are emerging. Innovative ML procedures have made it easy to handle critical datasets. However, at the time of training, the dataset can influence the performance of the algorithm. The com- plexity of the algorithm also differs with the size of the dataset which has a great impact on the training and testing procedures and results.

using strategies like feature selection and feature extraction or fea- ture transformation. The feature selection technique only consid- ers the features that have great influence and the rest are not selected [54]. In the feature extraction or feature transformation technique, new features are formed from the present features. The dataset of high dimensionality is reduced to a small dimen- sional space.

The researchers gave importance to the feature transformation technique for dimensionality reduction and according to them, original features are replaced by the functions of the provided fea- tures, this phenomenon is known as feature transformation. The function could be of an individual feature or a group of features, where this function itself is a random variable. According to the scientists, feature transformation exactly acts like changing the bases in calculus, and the bases of feature space were changed in feature transformation. It had helped in working and debauched speed. [55].

Isomap is a method that works well for the non-linear dataset. It is one of the dimensionality reduction techniques which uses a Geodesic distance approach for the multivariate data points. Some methods work for the linear dataset, which reduces the dimensions based on Euclidean distances [60].

