In this paper we present a novel approximation technique. We leave the state space of the model unchanged (i.e., we do not perform reductions and aggregations) but we simplify the analysis by making assumptions on the transient probabilities of the model. In particular, we assume that the transient probabilities are of product form. This assumption allows us to have a compact description of the transient probabilities and hence to analyse systems whose state space would otherwise be of prohibitive size.

The result most related to our technique is the one presented in [2] where the authors provide a necessary and sufficient condition for a network of Markovian queues to have transient product form. The condition is that the network is com- posed of infinite server queues. Clearly, not all reaction networks correspond to a network of infinite server queues and hence the product form assumption does not hold in general. We will show however, through numerical experiments, that the closer the reaction network is to a queueing network of infinite servers, the better the approximation will be.

The paper is organised as follows. In Section 2 the considered system of reactions are described in brief. In Section 3 we introduce our approximation approach. Properties of the approximation are discussed in Section 4. Numerical examples are provided in Section 5. In Section 6 conclusions are drawn.

In this paper we derived a product form approximation for the transient proba- bilities of Markov chains representing reaction networks. The computational effort of the method grows only linearly with the number of reactants and hence it can be applied to reaction networks for which the exact analysis of the corresponding Markov chain is unfeasible. We tested the method on several examples and found that if the average behaviour of the system is captured well by the mean-field ap- proach or the transient system behaviour is close to product form then the proposed approximation provides a good picture of the variance and the distribution of the quantity of the reactants.

