Adipose tissue regulates insulin sensitivity via the circulating adipocytokines, leptin, resistin and adiponectin. Hypoadiponectinemia contributes to the development of obesity and related disorders such as diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and cardiovascular diseases. In this study, we investigated the effects of Brazilian propolis on adiponectin levels in type 2 diabetes mel- litus (T2DM), the mechanism of signaling pathway was explored as well. T2DM was induced in male Wistar rats using high fat diet and low dose of streptozotocin (STZ, 35 mg/kg, i.p.). Propolis was administered by oral tubes. Peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma various body organs, such as blood vessels, eyes, kidneys and nerves [3,4]. Among different types of diabetes mellitus, Type 2 account for 90% of diagnosed patients. Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a metabolic syndrome, which is character- ized by both fat accumulation and impairment in insulin action, insulin production, or both; a condition called insulin resistance. Insulin resistance leads to the development of

Adipose tissue secretes many proteins and hormones such as adipocytokines, resistin, leptin, and adiponectin to control insulin sensitivity [9]. Adiponectin is a protein hormone se- creted into the blood stream in average 0.01% of total plasma proteins. The important role of adiponectin comes from modulation of glucose and lipid metabolism in insulin sensi- tive tissue [10,11]. Accumulating evidence showed that hypoadiponectinemia played a key role in the pathogenesis of obesity and related diseases [12,13]. Furthermore, adiponectin administration to obese or diabetic mice can reduce body weight and blood glucose levels while enhancing insulin sen- sitivity [14,15]. Based on these data, adiponectin was conceived to be a novel therapy target for obesity and insulin resistance [16].

bees collect from tree buds, sap flows, or other botanical sources. Its color varies depending on its botanical source, the most common being dark brown [19]. The chemical compositions of propolis are mainly flavonoids, aromatic acids and esters, aldehydes and ketones, fatty acids and esters, terpenes, ste- roids, amino acids, polysaccharides, hydrocarbon, alcohol, hydroxybenzene and other compounds [20]. Brazilian propo- lis composed mainly of phenolic compounds artepillin C. Besides, it was reported to contain 3-prenyl-4-hydroxycinnamic, p-coumaric, caffeic acid, and caffeoylquinic acids, cinnamic acids and the flavonoids pinobanksin and kaempferol [21]. Bra- zilian propolis has been reported to possess various biological activities including antioxidant, anti-microbial, liver protec- tive, immunoregulatory, anti-inflammatory, and anticancer effects [22]. In addition, it was reported to have hypoglycemic and hypolipidemic effects. Further, propolis was also demon- strated to control metabolic disorders in diabetic rats and to accelerate the tissue regeneration and repair of damaged pan- creatic cell [23].

At the first steps, diabetes induction by STZ caused rapid reduction in body weight. This was in agreement with previ- ous reports [30]. The body weight loss in diabetic rats could be explained by many reasons, including dehydration as well as excessive fats and proteins catabolism [31], which ultimately leads to muscle wasting [32]. On the contrary, propolis treated rats showed non significant increase in body weight com- pared to control group, which could be attributed to better control of hyperglycemic state compared to the untreated dia- betic group.

Several studies have documented the association between diabetes mellitus and abnormalities in lipid metabolism [33]. Dyslipidemia is believed to be a major risk factor for devel- opment of various diabetic complications. Diabetes-associated dyslipidemia resulted from excessive production of free fatty acids along with abnormal lipoprotein metabolism. Hence, dia- betes mellitus is associated with an increase in TG and LDL, and decrease in HDL [34]. Similarly, the results of our inves- tigation revealed disturbance in lipid metabolism in diabetic untreated rats. These effects were attenuated by propolis treat- ment. Of note, our findings provide ample support to the notion that propolis preparations could modulate lipid metabolism [35].

Insulin resistance is considered as a hallmark of T2DM. Ac- cumulated fat in different body cells disturb their response to insulin, leading to insulin resistance and elevated blood glucose levels [36]. Previous studies have convincingly showed that propolis treatment decreased insulin resistance in obese dia- betic rats [37]. In addition, propolis was found to enhance translocation of glucose transporter 4 and glucose uptake in mouse myocyte cell lines, as well as in the ICR mouse strain [38]. In confirmation with these reports, our results demon- strated that propolis markedly reduced fasting plasma glucose level in treated rats compared to untreated diabetic groups. This suggested that propolis could be a beneficial anti-hyperglycemic agent in T2DM.

leading ultimately to hyperglycemia and diabetes [40]. More- over, Elevated free radical concentrations stimulate various signaling pathways that lead eventually to degradation of insulin receptors [41]. Therefore, targeting oxidative stress could be a potential therapeutic approach in T2DM. In the present study, diabetic treated rats showed significantly lower MDA levels and restored GSH levels nearing normal control values. This finding is consistent with the earlier report that propolis caused the

Adipose tissue is an endocrine organ that plays a crucial role in pathophysiology of T2DM [46]. Adiponectin is defined as anti-diabetic hormone secreted by adipose tissue. Adiponectin was shown to be associated with various meta- bolic disorders, including obesity, insulin resistance, and obesity related cardiovascular and fatty liver diseases [47]. Moreover, adiponectin production was reported to be negatively corre- lated with accumulated visceral fat [48]. Further, reduced adiponectin levels were observed in obesity [49] and knock- adiponectin in diabetic rats. Interestingly, adiponectin levels in our study were inversely correlated to the levels of blood glucose, insulin, total lipids and MDA. On the other hand, a high adiponectin level is found to be a consistent indicator of lower risk of T2DM because of its anti-diabetic and anti-atherogenic effects [51]. In line with this study, our results revealed that propolis restored reduced adiponectin levels in treated dia- betic rats compared to untreated diabetic rats.

