CyclophoSphamide (CP) has been used in the treatment of cer- tain types of cancer (lymphoma, leukemia and multiple myeloma) and non-malignant diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis [1]. How- ever, CP has numerous adverse effects, a major one being hemor- rhagic cystitis (HC), which arises from acute inflammation of the urinary bladder [2,3]. Acrolein, a metabolic product of CP, rapidly reacts at numerous cellular sites and depletes cellular antioxidants [4]. It can also react with certain protein residues and nucleophilic sites of the DNA [5].

Biological systems possess numerous biomolecular agents to protect themselves from damage through free radicals. Glu- tathione (GSH) is the most abundant intracellular thiol-based anti-oxidant and has an important role in the cellular defense cas- cade against oxidative injury [15]. GSH, a cofactor for glutathione peroxidase, catalyzes the reduction of hydrogen peroxide to oxy- gen and water, thereby limiting the formation of hydroxyl radicals, which are highly toxic ROS [16].

CP (Endoxa) was purchased from Baxter Oncology Chemical Co. (Egypt) and dissolved in 0.9% NaCl solution to prepare a stock solu- tion, which was intraperitoneally (i.p.) injected into the mice. Sp was provided as a fine dark blue-green powder by the Botany Department Faculty of Science Zagazig University (Zagazig, Egypt) and was dissolved in sterile distilled water to prepare a stock solu- tion which was orally administered to mice using intragastric gavage.

All mice were sacrificed at the end of the 9 days. Blood samples of mice from each group were collected by cardiac puncture on the day of termination. Whole blood was withdrawn from each mouse, 2 ml of which were mixed with ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid for complete blood count using automatic hematology analyzer (Sysmex Corp., Kobe, Japan), and the remaining blood was left to stand in a plain tube for preparation of serum from clotted blood by centrifugation at 2000 rpm for 5 min. Serum was divided into

CP belongs to a class of alkylating agents known as nitrogen mustard derivatives. It is a common immunosuppressive and chemotherapeutic agent used for the treatment of certain autoim- mune diseases and a wide range of neoplasms, also in combination with other drugs [19]. In patients receiving CP for the treatment of solid tumors, leukemia or lymphomas or for conditioning prior to bone marrow or stem cell tranSplantation, side effects are well known.

CP is one of the most damaging alkylating agents that can cause oxidative stress due to the over-production of ROS [19,20,7]. It affects the DNA of replicating and rapidly multiplying cells partic- ularly in the gonads and pituitary, which results in miscoding, crosslinking and DNA breakage by transferring alkyl groups to the guanine components of DNA [21]. A potential approach to interfere with CP-induced toxicity is to lower the induced oxida- tive stress.

Sp is one of the most widely used herbal medicines for the treatment of various diseases. The pharmacological properties of Sp have been reported to include anti-inflammatory, anti-cancer, anti-diabetic, anti-microbial, anti-histaminic, anti-infertility and hypotensive effects [25]. Clinical trials have shown that Sp can serve as a supplementary cure for numerous diseases as well as improving immunological function; Sp has also been used in health foods, animal feed and for biochemical products since the 1980s [26].

The present study revealed that after CP treatment, MDA, an indicator of oxidative stress, was markedly increased in urinary bladders mice, suggesting that it caused oxidative damage to the proteins and lipids in this organ. In the Sp + CP group, MDA levels were significantly lower than those in the CP group but were not significantly different from those in the control group (P > 0.05). It was therefore indicated that pre-treatment with Sp prevented CP-induced elevation of MDA.

The protective effects of Sp against CP-induced acute urotoxic- ity in mice are associated with its anti-oxidant properties. More- over, the protective effects of Sp may be due to a decrease in oxidative stress via reduction of the accumulation of protein- acrolein adducts. This can be explained by the free radical scaveng- ing properties of the Sp. CP-induced histopathological changes in the urinary bladder were observed to be prevented by pre- treatment with Sp [29].

Zn and Se have a vital role in numerous physiological processes, including the function of the immune system, and the develop- ment and healing of inflammatory tissue lesions. Se has been shown to have a positive effect on the outcome of cancer and infec- tious diseases [30], whereas a deficiency of Zn may negatively affect the immune system and cell growth. In the present study, Sp ingestion increased the concentration of Zn and Se in the blood of mice compared with that in CP-treated mice, indicating that supplementation with Se and Zn contained in Sp may have a role in alleviating CP-associated toxicity.

CP-treated mice may be of the type caused by chronic disease; however, other causes include autoimmune hemolytic anemia, iron deficiency anemia, anemia of chronic renal failure and CP- associated myelotoxicity. Thrombocytopenia occurs in CP-treated mice and it is part of a broader hematological disturbance. In the present study, all of these disturbances of hematological parame- ters were alleviated by Sp treatment, since Hb, RBCs, WBCs and platelet count were increased compared to those in CP-treated mice. These findings are in good agreement with the result of a previous study, which reported that Sp supplementation in drink- ing water for 30 days induced significant increases of RBCs and Hb in rats [32]. It was also found that disturbances of hematological parameters were attenuated to a greater extent if Sp was given prior to CP rather than thereafter, which indicates that Sp may have a marked effect on the process of erythropoiesis. However, Sp treatment alone did not significantly affect any of these hema- tological parameters compared to those in the control group.

These findings suggested that Sp may also protect against toxi- city induced by other chemotherapeutic agents whose mecha- nisms of action are similar to that of CP. Finally, chronic CP-associated urotoxicity may be alleviated by Sp. The combina- tion of CP with a potent anti-oxidant may be appropriate to reduce its urotoxicity, which was supported by the results of the present study on the treatment of CP-induced mice with Sp.

CP treatment is associated with an increased risk of HC and bladder cancer, while the effectiveness of Sp in preventing cystitis is largely based on its anti-oxidant properties. In the present study, the anti-oxidants GSH, Zn and Se were significantly reduced in CP- treated but elevated in Sp-treated mice; however, CP caused an elevation of MDA levels as well as severe damage to the urinary bladder. The present study showed that Sp protected from CP- induced urotoxicity and hemorrhagic cystitis, probably due to its anti-oxidant and anti-apoptotic properties. Thus, Sp can be recom- mended as a food supplement to alleviate the side effects of numerous drugs and to stimulate the immune system of drugs users.

