We introduce the notion of pseudo-commutative monad together with that of pseudo- closed 2-category, the leading example being given by the 2-monad on Cat whose 2-category of algebras is the 2-category of small symmetric monoidal categories. We prove that for any pseudo-commutative 2-monad on Cat, its 2-category of algebras is pseudo-closed. We also introduce supplementary definitions and results, and we illustrate this analysis with further examples such as those of small categories with finite products, and examples arising from wiring, interaction, contexts, and the logic of Bunched Implication.

structures interacting with each other, for instance in work on linear logic or more recently on Bunched Implication [11]. Several delicate constructions are made using symmetric monoidal structure. For instance, one often considers the free symmetric monoidal category, possibly with additional structure, on 1, and one sometimes sees study of the free symmetric monoidal closed category on a symmetric monoidal category. One also sees constructions on categories possessing a pair of symmetric monoidal structures as in Bunched Implication. This all motivates us to seek a calculus of symmetric monoidal categories, possibly with a little extra structure subject to mild axioms as illustrated above. By a calculus, we mean a mathematical account of what constructions one can make on symmetric monoidal categories and still obtain a symmet- ric monoidal category. For instance, it is routine to verify that a product of symmetric monoidal categories is symmetric monoidal. Formally, such a cal- culus amounts to study of the structure of the 2-category SymMon of small symmetric monoidal categories and strong symmetric monoidal functors. It has long been known that this is an instance of algebraic structure on Cat [2] and therefore has well-behaved limits and bicolimits, in particular products and bicoproducts for example. But is the 2-category SymMon, or at least the variant SymMons of small symmetric monoidal categories and strict symmet- ric monoidal functors, itself a symmetric monoidal category? And is there an axiomatic proof of such a result that would apply to variants of the notion of small symmetric monoidal category such as that of small category with finite products? Positive answers would substantially increase the range of construc- tions available for use: for instance, considering the free structure on 1 as for example in [5], implicit is the idea that structure on C, which is isomorphic to Cat(1, C), lifts to structure on the category of structure preserving functors

These examples are used widely for modelling contexts, or parallelism, or interaction in computer science [1,4,5,9], and one can build combinations as used in [11] or variants. In more detail, finite products are used extensively for modelling contexts, for instance in [4]. A subtle combination of finite products and symmetric monoidal structure is used to model parallelism in [9]. And symmetric monoidal structure is used to model interaction in [1]. And in current research, Plotkin is using a category with an action of a sym- metric monoidal category to model call-by-name and call-by-value, along the lines of symmetric premonoidal categories being represented as the action of a symmetric monoidal category on a category [12]. For a non-example of the

We compare this definition with that of closed category in [3], where the theory of enriched categories was introduced. Its primary definition was that of a closed category; it then defined monoidal closed categories and proceeded from there. The only reason more modern accounts start with the notion of monoidal category is because it is first order structure: but the closed structure is typically more primitive.

rather than an isomorphism as in [3] is significant. We have no choice if we are to include our leading example: one might hope that the 2-category of small symmetric monoidal categories would have invertible e, but it does not; and because e is not an isomorphism, we do not have the Eilenberg and Kelly versions of conditions 2 and 4 which are expressed in terms of i; and those conditions would fail in our leading example. Moreover i is only pseudo- natural in examples. We note that we are able to give our restricted definition so that T -Alg will be an example where all the structure maps other than iA are strict maps of T -algebras.

On the other hand, it does not contain all axioms that hold of our class of examples either. In particular, our pseudo-natural transformation i and our pseudo-dinatural transformation j satisfy strictness conditions along the lines that, for some specific classes of maps, the isomorphism given by pseudo- naturality is in fact an identity. However, at present, we have no theorems that make use of such facts, and adding them to the definition would complicate rather than simplify it, so we have not introduced them as axioms.

