Layers divided in to three groups; Group 1 (Control group) e The layers fed with standard commercial food masses with Biobantox, BMD and formaldehyde. Group 2 (EM Treatment 1) e The layers fed with standard commercial food masses with AEM solution (5 L/ton feed). Group 3 (EM Treatment 2) e The layers fed with AEM (5 L/ton feed) treated com- mercial food masses + AEM treated (2 L/1000 L) drinking water. Increased monthly average egg production, egg weight and the decreased mortality ratio and egg wastages identified with the group 3 EM treated layers. The values of egg shell weight, thickness, yolk weight, yolk index and Haugh index found higher in group 3 EM treated layers. The content of calcium, sodium, potassium, magnesium, iron, zinc and total protein identified maximum in the group 3 EM treated layers. The concentration of total cholesterol, saturated fat, trans-fat found reduced and the monounsaturated, polyunsaturated found higher in EM group 2 and 3 layers. The total cost identified as Rs. 110.80, 38.00 and 52.50 (in Indian Ru- pees) for group 1, group 2 and group 3 treatments respectively. It has inferred from the present findings that, the effect of EM treatments in commercial layers of the egg pro- duction showed good quality parameters and economic value.

in female animals and nearly all animals produce them, some animals including birds lay their eggs external to their body and it is unquestionably one of the most nutritionally balanced foods for man. In poultry product egg is a major product composed of albumin (58%), egg yolk (31%) and egg shell (11%). In addition, albumen contains half their contents of the egg portion and the yolk contains the major portion of the vitamins and lipids [10,11]. In general, the quality of the egg started with the consumer's needs and the treatment

hydrolyzes in the intestine. Further, the saturated and trans fat found decreased in the EM treated layers this might be due to the inhibit hydroxymethyl-glutaryl-coenzyme A, an enzyme involved in the gastrointestinal tract [23]. The cost analysis of chemical and EM treatments showed tremendous gain in the reduction of the chemical usages.

