In this study, the functions of eight popular DRM products currently available on the market are reviewed, and the impact of using of these DRM products is evaluated quantitatively. A group of metrics is defined reflecting the potential costs and impact to the organization incurred by implementing DRM products. Stochastic models are used to quantitatively evaluate the costs and impact of implementing a particular DRM product. In this study, it is found that although DRM products protect digital assets by encryption and by providing central control on information within the organization, this comes at a cost, since these security mechanisms typically reduce the productivity of the staff. The reduction in productivity is in turn measured in the form of non-productive time (NPT) which is an inherent part of the stochastic modeling process.

1 The authors want to express their sincere appreciations to Simon Parkin and Rouaa Yassin Kassab at Newcastle University for their constructive suggestions and feedbacks during both the research and writing stages of this work. Detailed, critical reviews by four anonymous reviewers from the workshop committee significantly improved the quality of this manuscript. The authors feel deeply obliged to their contributions.

Although hacker attacks, virus epidemics and system vulnerabilities have been identified previously as the main causes of loss of sensitive information, the number of security incidents caused by internal attacks has increased significantly in recent years[2]. In a comprehensive survey conducted by[2], 400 surveyed organizations admitted to 6244 incidents of employee negligence, 5794 incidents of excessive priv- ilege and access control rights. The number of internal security incidents totaled 57,485[2]. Therefore, the behavior of internal staff has a significant impact on infor- mation security and attacks associated with the inappropriate behavior of internal staff are on the rise and are posing a great threat. For example, some staff members save sensitive information on laptops, USB devices or smart phones for convenience purposes. When these devices are lost, organization will not be able to exert any control on the information saved in these devices. In addition, employees in the company might occasionally send e-mail messages that contain confidential files as attachments without noticing that the files should not be distributed, or otherwise that the recipient should not see the files or is an unintended recipient who has been incorrectly (accidentally or otherwise) chosen to receive the e-mail. All of these behaviors could cause digital information to leak outside the company. It is essential that companies and organizations keep these information and document safe. Digital Rights Management (DRM) systems are developed to address these concerns and needs.

The term, Digital Rights Management (DRM), is used to describe any technol- ogy that delivers the capability of controlling the access rights of digital content both within and outside a digital environment[3]. Commercial DRMs are DRM systems that protect digital content in music, film and print industry. Enterprise DRM is one of many information security products and DRM claims to have the ability to protect the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information in the organiza- tion. Since organizations have to invest a significant amount of capital and continue to have operational expenditure on enterprise DRM products and enterprise DRM products might have negative effects on the efficiency of the organization, it is nec- essary to demonstrate that the benefits from DRM products exceed the costs of information security investment. However, it is challenging to quantitatively evalu- ate the potential impact of DRM products on the organization. For example, DRM technologies use access control (username and password) to limit unauthorized use of sensitive documents. However, authorized users might be unable to open a doc- ument and lose significant amount of time in finding the correct password to open the protected document. Thus, the business process is halted and productivity of employees is reduced.

Eight of the currently popular DRM products are selected and reviewed in this docu- ment from the following four aspects: administrative models, content management, users monitoring, rights management[4]. Most of these products are developed by leading computer technology firms. The aim of this part is to understand the common features of DRM products and the working of DRM within the business processes of an organization. This serves as the fundamental work to analysis their effectiveness and costs.

The organization also can control all the encrypted information centrally regard- less of its location[4]. Dynamic policy centralized control allows the administrators to change the policy of the document no matter it has been distributed or not. The policy becomes effective immediately, when users open the document. This helps preventing unauthorized users from accessing documents.

All eight DRM products reviewed use encryption to keep the information secure no matter where it has been transferred[4]. Authorized users use decryption keys to open the document and access the information. This helps organizations comply with government regulations. All of the products provide creation functions for each authorized user so that they have the ability to create various types of digital documents with unique identity for each document and secure these documents with rights for other users[13].

e.g. user name and password, email address and password, fingerprint, and etc. In addition, administrators have the ability to restrict the usage of documents by defining usage policies for the documents; for example, number of times accessing document, expiration date of access rights to the document, and etc.[13].

All eight DRM products reviewed provide functions for organizations to provide rights for each document and each user[4]. Full control, modify, read, print are basic rights for DRM products. All DRM products can provide limited document usage by using expiration dates. After expiration date, only administrators can access an expired documents.

A petri net consist of place, transition and arcs that connect them. Input arcs start at places and end at transitions, while output arcs start at a transition and end at a place. Places can contain tokens, which are used in the network to simulate the dynamic and concurrent activities of the system. The current state of the modeled system (the marking ) is given by the number of tokens in each place. Transitions are active components, when a transition fires, the model activates, then tokens move in the model, which changes the states of the system. Transitions are only allowed to fires when they are enabled, at least a token in every input place. More rules of transition enabling and firing are defined at[18,14].

For Petri net, if a firing delay associated with each transition, which specifies the time that the transition has to be enabled. Before it can actually fire, if the delay is a random distribution function, the Petri net is called Stochastic Petri net. Stochastic Activity Networks (SANs) are stochastic extensions to Petri nets[19]. SANs consist of four primitive objects: places, transitions, input gates and output gates. A place represents each state of the modeled system; transitions represent actions of the modeled system that take some specified amount of time to complete; input gates are used to control the enabling of activities and define the marking changes that will occur when an activity completes; and output gates are used to define the marking changes that will occur when activities complete.

organizations to keep a minimum number of IT staff (administrators). However, if a significant number of users are trying to seek help from the administrators at the same time, some users will have to wait. This result in non-productivity time (NPT) and reduces the operational efficiency of the organization. In some cases, users might give up waiting and choose to proceed in their work without appropriate information.

Authorized users (Users) use four documents per day during working hours (the time taken to use the documents is given by Open Doc). When authorized users try to open documents, two things might happen, if the document is a secret document (Secret Doc), firstly, the user needs a username and password in order to login to the system (given by the time taken by Login In Account ). If the user passes user authentication, the user needs to input in a document password (Enter PassWord ), which takes time (given by the time taken by Ask Password ). If the user passes the document authentication, then the user can open the document and become an ac- tive user (Active User 1 ), but if the user cannot pass the document authentication or the user cannot pass the user authentication, the user would contact the adminis- trators (Need help 1 ) for help. If the user can get help from the administrators (the time taken is given by Admin help 1 ), the user inputs the document password to

If the document is a normal document (Normal Doc ), the user just needs to input a username and a password to open the document (the time taken for this is given by Login Account ). If the user can open the document, the user can open the document (Active User 2 ). Otherwise the user needs to contact the administrators (Need Help 1 ) for help. Active users might change protected documents (change 2 ), but they might not be given enough usage authority to change documents, so they will contact administrators to ask for help (Need Help 2 ).

To measure the number of authorized users that can read documents, the sum of the throughput of transitions: Usage Doc 1 (case1&2), Usage Doc 2 (case1&2) are computed. To measure the number of documents that authorized users can change, the sum of the throughput of transitions: Changble 1 (case1), Change- able 2 (case2), Admin Help 2 (case2) are computed. To measure the numbers of documents that authorized users have tried to use, the sum of the throughput of transition: Open Doc (case1&2) is computed. To measure the non-productive time (NPT), the fraction of time users spend in any place other than (Users) are com- puted, it is considered time loss because of MS IRM provide identity and access control technology.

DRM products use encryption to make information in the organization secure so that only authorized users can access the documents. However, it is found that DRM products reduced the availability of documents within the organization even to authorized users. The authentication processes will result in non-productive time (NPT) for the employees, therefore, reducing the overall operational efficiency of the organization. This is particularly the case when authorized users cannot open secured documents for various reasons and have to wait the assistance from the administrators.

