This brings us to the notion of quasi-continuity in Domain Theory. Quasi- continuous dcpos are often considered by domain theorists (e.g. [7,6,15,11,10]) as they enjoy many properties that the smaller class of continuous dcpos possesses. Thus a natural first question is to ask for some of the necessary and sufficient conditions of Yoneda complete quasi-metric spaces for which their posets of formal balls are quasi-continuous dcpos.

In this paper, we propose a definition of quasi-continuous Yoneda complete quasi- metric spaces. We give a positive answer to the above questions by showing that this notion generalizes that of the continuous Yoneda complete quasi-metric spaces. Furthermore, we have that the poset of formal balls of a quasi-continuous Yoneda complete quasi-metric space is a quasi-continuous dcpo. We also obtain the con- verse, albeit in the presence of some other condition.

We outline the paper as follows. In Section 2, we provide the relevant defini- tions and also some basic results related to the hyperspaces of quasi-metric spaces. We then study some properties of the formal balls of quasi-continuous Yoneda complete quasi-metric spaces in Section 3 and obtain our first main result, which characterizes quasi-continuous Yoneda complete quasi-metric spaces using certain quasi-continuous dcpos of formal balls. We then proceed to consider the notion of the hyperspace of finitely-generated subsets of a quasi-metric space in Section 4 and show that it can characterize quasi-continuous Yoneda complete quasi-metric space, which is the second of our main results. This new characterization extends [11, Proposition 4.5]. Finally, we conclude in Section 5.

In this section, we gather some notions of hemi-metric and quasi-metric spaces which are essential for the discussion in the paper. We point the reader to [16] for basic topology, [4] for order theory and [1,6,8] for domain theory. For a more in-depth discussion on hemi- and quasi-metric spaces, the reader may also refer to [8].

Following Proposition 2.13, any complete metric space and the Sorgenfrey line are quasi-continuous as quasi-metric spaces as they are already continuous. For an example of quasi-continuous Yoneda complete quasi-metric space which is not continuous, we can simply retrieve it from the quasi-continuous posets.

So far we have given examples of quasi-continuous Yoneda complete quasi-metric spaces using continuous Yoneda complete quasi-metric spaces and quasi-continuous dcpos. We shall see in Example 2.16 that the class of quasi-continuous Yoneda complete quasi-metric spaces which is not continuous is strictly larger than that of quasi-continuous dcpos which are not continuous.

In [18, Lemma and Definition 3.2(4)], Waszkiewicz considered the notion of interpolative mappings and he obtained as a corollary to Lemma 3.2 that wd is in- terpolative when (X, d) is a continuous Yoneda complete quasi-metric space. Using the close relationship between the quasi-continuity of Yoneda complete quasi-metric spaces and the quasi-continuity of their formal balls as shown in Theorem 3.25, we obtain the following analogous result for quasi-continuous Yoneda complete quasi- metric space (X, d) where (Pf (X),Sd) is standard and (X, d) has a particular property.

