We introduce Timed Counter Systems, a new class of systems mixing clocks and counters. Such systems have an infinite state space, and their reachability problems are generally undecidable. By abstracting clock values with a Region Graph, we show the Counter Reachability Problem to be decidable for three subclasses : Timed VASS, Bounded Timed Counter Systems, and Reversal-Bounded Timed Counter Systems.

Our contributions. A major interest in verification is reachability ; in this paper, we address the Counter Reachability Problem for Timed Counter Systems, in which the exact clock values are left apart (as usually done with timed automata). We prove it to be decidable for subclasses of such systems, in which the Region Graph belongs to a class of counter systems for which this problem is decidable. We also identify three of these subclasses.

In order to study the behaviour of a TCS, one can look in 3 directions, according to which kind of variables are interpreted. Indeed, a TCS can be unfolded along its clocks only, or along its counters only, or along both at the same time. We say that a TCS whose interpretation considers only clocks (resp. counters) is called a Timed (resp. Counting) Transition System ; if both clocks and counters are interpreted, then the full semantics of a TCS is given by a Transition System.

The Counter Reachability Problem is obviously undecidable for TCS, because it is already undecidable in CS. In order to be able to analyze CS, some restrictions leading to decidability (e.g. flat [12], reversal-bounded [19], VASS [20], ...) have been proposed. As we will show in section 5, some of these restrictions can be lifted up to the level of TCS. The main idea we will develop in this paper uses the fact that the undecidability of TCS is caused by the presence of counters. Therefore, we try to benefit from known decidability results on TA (detailed in section 4) and on some subclasses of CS (detailed in section 5).

We are now ready to prove that we can analyze the TCS through the counting semantics of its region graph, yielding a system which is an exact (w.r.t. Counter Reachability) abstraction of its full semantics. Indeed, from Propositions 2.6 and 4.2, we deduce the following property :

We introduced a new model for systems mixing clocks and counters, and proved the Counter Reachability Problem to be decidable for three of its subclasses. Other subclasses might be interesting to study in order to broaden these results, such as flat TCS, following the approaches of [12] or [7]. Our ultimate goal is to extend the tool for counter systems Fast [5,6] so that it also handles clocks. Moreover, our main result, as stated in Theorem 4.4, can be extended to other dataypes than counters (e.g. pushdown stacks, lossy channels, etc...).

