In component-based modeling techniques the size of the global state space of a system is in the worst case exponential in the number of its components. This problem is often referred to as the effect of state space explosion. Thus, checking properties of a component-based system by exploring the state space very quickly becomes inefficient. Here we explore the complexity-theoretical classification of reachability.

Interaction systems are a component-based formalism, i.e. a system is composed of subsystems called components. Components are put together by some kind of glue-code. Interaction systems are defined in two layers. The first layer, the in- teraction model, describes the interfaces of the components and the glue-code of a system by connecting the interfaces of the components. The second layer describes the behavior of the components, which is here given in form of labeled transition systems.

A tree-like communication structure induces an important class of component- based systems. Many interesting systems belong to this class, e.g. hierarchical systems or networks built by a master-slave operator [9]. For these reasons, this class of component systems has been studied intensely e.g. in [3,4,5,12].

We will show that reachability in tree-like interaction systems is PSPACE-complete. The PSPACE-hardness will be proved by a reduction from QBF [7]. PSPACE- hardness of reachability in general interaction systems was shown by a reduction from reachability in 1-safe Petri nets [15]. To show the PSPACE-hardness of reach- ability in 1-safe Petri nets a reduction from QBF was used [6].

In the following we will assume that a QBF formula is built over this grammar. Let H be a QBF then the question is if H is true. The language TQBF is defined as the set of true QBF instances and is well known to be PSPACE-complete.

The local behavior of the components is given by labeled transition systems. Every system has one state labeled t and one labeled f . These states model the fact that either true respectively false was assigned to this component or it was evaluated true respectively false. The initial state will be denoted by an ingoing arrow.

By minor modification of the reduction given above it is possible to show the PSPACE-completeness of the progress property in tree-like interaction systems. At first we give some definitions to introduce progress in interaction systems and then give an overview why it is PSPACE-complete to decide this property in tree-like interaction systems. In general interaction systems progress is PSPACE-complete [15], so progress in tree-like interaction systems is in PSPACE.

It is easy to see that the connector evaluated true is the only connector that is enabled if the state qt is reached. In this case, evaluated true will perform in- finitely often, i.e. the component pro will participate infinitely often. Therefore the component pro may progress iff H is true.

We investigated a complexity issue for component-based systems. In [6] the reach- ability in 1-safe Petri nets was proven to be PSPACE-complete and [15] used this result to show the PSPACE-completeness of the reachability problem in component- based systems. Here we restricted ourselves to tree-like systems and showed that even in this class deciding reachability is PSPACE-complete.

