Integration of extended reality (XR) in education is becoming popular to transform the traditional classroom with immersive learning environments. The adoption of immersive learning is accelerating as an innovative approach for science and engineering subjects. With new powerful interaction techniques in XR and the latest de- velopments in artificial intelligence, interactive and self-directed learning are becoming important. However, immersive environments. This paper proposes a novel approach that uses machine learning agents to facilitate interactive kinesthetic learning in science and engineering education through real-time hand interaction in the virtual world. To implement the following approach, this paper uses a chemistry-related case study and presents a usability evaluation conducted with 15 expert reviewers and 2 subject experts. NASA task load index is used for cognitive workload measurement, and the technology acceptance model is used for measuring perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness in the evaluations. The evaluation with expert reviewers proposed self-directed learning using trained agents can help in the end-user training in learning technical topics and controller-free hand interaction for kinesthetic tasks can improve hands-on learning motivation in virtual laboratories. This success points to a novel research area where agents embodied in an immersive environment using machine learning techniques can forge a new pedagogical approach where they can act as both teacher and assessor.

Extended Reality (XR) is transforming learning technology by providing the ability to create more interactive learning content (Skult & Smed, 2020) and simulating immersive user experiences to understand complex technical concepts more practically (Dawley & Dede, 2014). The use of XR as learning technology, explained by Dengel (2022) as immersive learning, has increased quickly in the last couple of years due to the higher immersion capabilities. The adoption of Head-Mounted Displays (HMDs) and smart glasses is increasing with time due to improved interaction techniques, more accessibility, decreasing cost, and increasing portability. Following these developments in HMDs and computer graphics, immersive learning technology has gained enough potential to take technology-enhanced learning in resource-constrained environments closer to real-world settings (Gao et al., 2021). Among all other novel approaches in learning technologies, Immersive Learning Environments (ILE) are the most revolutionary interactive platforms (Freina & Ott, 2015), that can become more productive with self-guided cording to individual needs. Interestingly, concepts such as real-time hand interaction for hands-on kinesthetic learning and agent-oriented approaches to support self-guided learning are still not widely investi- gated in immersive learning. This research has proposed higher user interaction with the latest real-time hand-interaction technologies and incorporating intelligent agents in immersive learning to make it more user-centered and self-guided. The principal contribution of this research is to implement the AGILEST AGents to facilitate Interactive kinesthetic LEarning in STEM education using a Touchless interaction approach with HMDs, using touchless hand interaction and machine learning agents.

(IVR) experiment with Oculus Rift for learning organic chemistry, proved its capability of emotionally involving students with higher motivation and making the learning process more engaging for peda- gogical objectives. Based on the IVR practical experiments for chemistry learning, Miller et al. (2021) suggested that IVR can effectively reinforce learning and increase student success in formal classroom settings. Ac- cording to Araiza-Alba et al. (2021), using IVR to learn and practice problem-solving skills proved that immersive technology could engage interest, motivate the users and assist in cognitive processing. The exploration of using immersive technology for nursing students by Kim and Ahn (2021) found learning satisfaction as one of the most significant factors for adopting immersive technology. Lowe and Liu (2017) re- ported use of AR with see-through head-mounted displays (HMDs) for conventional experimental approach as a worthy tool for increasing learning gain in the chemistry experiments with illustrative scenarios. Another approach by Fujiwara et al. (2021), for collaborative chemistry learning using VR technology supported the evidence for distance learning approach with remote collaboration in VR spaces.

hypotheses testing with different settings of immersive learning with different display and tracking devices (Beck, 2019; Hurrell & Baker, 2021; Jantakoon et al., 2019; Ummihusna & Zairul, 2022). An immer- sive learning approach adopted by Edwards et al. (2019) with haptic technology for learning chemistry called VR Multi-sensory Classroom (VRMC) achieved a higher engagement, motivation, and interest in a controlled learning environment. Furthermore, using machine learning in immersive learning environments for confidence estimation found that Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) model can help to understand

By incorporating artificial intelligence agents in immersive learning environments, Sharma et al. (2019) tested an emergency response sys- tem. By creating an experimental setup, this research proposed the use of immersive learning environment for training security agents for emer- gency response. Elor and Kurniawan (2020) used deep reinforcement learning in immersive VR and presented a novel game mechanic for exercise games that suggested human-level performance is possible with agents in immersive environment if we use right parameters. Jacobson et al. (2008) proposed the implementation of multi-user immersive learning experiences with intelligent agents to support the learning gain and engagements.

These approaches of using immersive technology in different display devices and diverse learning environments are gaining popularity in STEM education. It offers unique opportunities for learners to experi- ence real-world phenomena in safe and controlled environment. Although XR is well investigated in learning but not in the context of its future use in resource-constrained and remote environments, where there may be limitations in funding, access to physical resources, or qualified instructors. Secondly, new horizons in the intelligent agents are not well explored in the domain of XR for learning to make the immersive learning more independent and supportive for personal learning environments where students can learn without the support of an instructor. Considering exciting studies, current challenges and future emerging opportunities presented by Iqbal et al. (2022)., this research focuses on investigating the research gap of exploring real-time hand interaction for kinesthetic learning pedagogy and self-directed learning in immersive environment.

When adopting a new technology, evaluation and assessment are the most crucial components in immersive learning same as other learning applications. Ledo et al. (2018) clarified the importance of adopting the right evaluation approach and how using ineffective or imperfect ap- proaches in the learning systems can risk the successful acquisition of targeted learning goals and outcomes. It can also mislead the user experience with specific technologies creating negative perceptions. To achieve the proof-of-concept, this evaluation study aimed to investigate the effectiveness, interactiveness, and level of value creation in the learning process.

understanding on the content (Appelman, 2005), developing skill and knowledge retention (Webster, 2016). In the context of this research, the learning goal of the experiments is basic chemical reactions at the sec- ondary school level. The learning goal also includes evaluating the learning gain, cognitive load, and user confidence in the adopted approach.

With an average of score of 5.33, participants think machine learning can help in self-directed learning in immersive environments. This result has endorsed the previous studies where machine learning and artificial agents are proposed for immersive learning (Dyulicheva & Glazieva, 2022; Elor & Kurniawan, 2020).

application is 1.8 and 1.6 respectively in average on a scale of 5. It shows interaction with the application and performing experiments in the virtual environment was not causing much workload for the partici- pants. If participants experiencing lower levels of time pressure when performing a task, they perform better to allocate cognitive resources, engage in problem-solving, and apply decisions effectively.

The time pressure of performing tasks and work needed to accom- plish performance is 1.93 and 1.86, respectively, which shows a minimal level on both of these parameters. As discussed by Jeffri and Rambli (2021), there is a positive correlation when mapping task performance against mental workload.

Addressing the RQ2, the integration of AI or machine learning agents in immersive learning has the potential to create personalized, interac- tive, and engaging learning environments. But it is a fact that there are lots of ethical issues (Mystakidis et al., 2021), data privacy concerns (Zallio & Clarkson, 2022), and need to balance automation and human interaction for a beneficial learning experience. The Unity ML-Agents Toolkit has developed over time and offers more stability with every new release. These new releases come up with additional features, and slowly it is becoming possible to implement complex learning systems within the Unity platform. Unity ML-agents can be used to implement gamification concepts in the learning experiences by creating game-based learning environments, which can make the learning pro- cess more engaging and interactive. According to the goal of RQ2, AI or machine learning agents can work as virtual mentors or tutors (Patar- anutaporn et al., 2021) in immersive learning environments to empower independent learning. These agents can be developed to guide learners in learning or performing numerous tasks, simulations, or scenarios and providing real-time support. This approach can enhance the learning process by demonstrating proper techniques, correcting mistakes, and providing expert advice.

this study still has its limitations. The primary limitation of this research is the lack of extensive end-user experiments, which have a fundamental role in assessing the true effectiveness and practical implications of the proposal solution. As we have evaluated with expert reviewers, we still need to conduct assessments with secondary school students who are real end-users to explore more advanced usability factors. There is also a need to conduct control group experiments to draw a comparison with traditional learning. As this study will go through control group exper- iments, there will be different design, ethics and privacy related issues to focus in this proposed solution.

In this tech-savvy generation, immersive learning has professed ad- vantages that encourage embracing technologies like XR as pedagogical tools in STEM education. Although the XR, as a learning technology has shown very positive and encouraging results (Tang et al., 2020; Yang & Goh, 2022), it can be challenging to see how these results could be scaled and repeated for different use cases. This study offers insight into how this could be possible by focusing on controller-free hand interaction for kinesthetic learning and using machine learning as self-guided learning using agents.

reality is determined by the experiences of the learner". Further, with the recommendations and new developments in the multi-sensory haptic technology (Sanfilippo et al., 2022), this approach can further extend to realism with sensing gloves in future work. Finally, this work mirrors current developments in robotics, where NVIDIA uses ML agents trained in physical simulations to perform those actions in real life (Mako- viychuk, et al., 2021). AGILEST approach points to a fascinating and novel pedagogical approach where data can be used to train virtual agents to become our teachers and assessors. This area is not limited to the STEM case study presented in this paper, as it offers a world where virtual agents coexisting in our reality could fundamentally change immersive learning in future.

