Abstract Texture analysis forms the basis of object recognition and classification in several domains, one of these domains is historical document manuscripts because the manuscripts hold our culture heri- tage and also large numbers of undated manuscripts exist. This paper presents results for historical doc- ument classification of old Arabic manuscripts using texture analysis and a segmentation free approach. The main objective is to discriminate between historical documents of different writing styles to three dif- ferent ages: Contemporary (Modern) Age, Ottoman Age and Mamluk Age. This classification depends on a Spatial Gray-level Dependence(SGLD) techniquewhichprovideseightdistincttexturefeaturesforeach sample document. We applied Stepwise Discriminant Analysis and Multiple discriminant analysis meth- ods to decrease the dimensionality of features and extract training vector features from samples. To clas- sify historical documents into three main historical age classes the decision tree classification is applied. The system has been tested on 48 Arabic historical manuscripts documents from the Dar Al-Kotob Al- Masria Library. Ourresults sofar yield 95.83% correctclassification for the historical Arabic documents.

In the last decade scientists are interested in studying and ana- lyzing the historical manuscripts from various points of views. They also study the manuscripts written in various languages (Latin, Arabic, Chinese, Hebrew, etc.), in various geographical areas and in different ages (early, medieval and modern age), to help researchers, historians and librarians to extract and re- trieve information which help them in editing, indexing and archiving processes [1,2]. This work is important for paleogra- phers because it may confirm or invalidate their work and bring more objective conclusions when they face an undated historical document manuscript recognition problem.

The ancient Arabic manuscripts are considered to be more complex than the other manuscripts written in other languages [4]. This complexity comes from two things; first complexity applies to all manuscripts which include (character degrada- tion, stains, low quality images, etc.) and the second complex- ity applies only to the Arabic language which includes (cursiveness of the text, character overlapping, diacritics and variety of calligraphic Arabic handwriting, ornaments, frames, decorations, two columns layout, etc.) / character level. Text dependent statistical evaluations are per- formed on a dataset containing 1000 writers who copied 3 times a fixed text of 156 words. The results have shown that micro-features are better than macro-features in identification tests with a performance exceeding 80%.

individuality. The similarity in handwriting style between any two samples is computed by using appropriate distance mea- sures between their corresponding feature vectors. The features and writer classification operate in the general framework of statistical pattern recognition. Combining texture-level and allograph-level features yields very high writer identification and verification performance, with usable rates for datasets containing 103 writers.

Perantonis S, Gatos B, Ntzios K, Pratikakis I, Vrettaros I, Drigas A, Emmanoulidis C, Kesidis A, Kalimmirakis D. A system for processing and recognition of old greek manuscripts D-SCRIBE project. In: WSEAS international conference on applied infor- matics and communications, 2004.

