Scott style which exactly captures continuous dcpos. They also gave the notion of general algebraic information system which captures algebraic domains by adding other rules on general continuous information system. But there were many rules in their general algebraic information system. In this paper we will introduce a new class of algebraic information system in which there are only four rules.

L-domains were independently introduced by Coquand [2] and Jung [9]. Jung [9,10] showed that L-domains form a maximal cartesian closed full subcategory of the continuous domains. This is the same for algebraic case. Spreen [14] gave a subclass of continuous information systems which can represent L-domains. But the information system has many conditions so it is not easy to judge.  Zhang

The algebraic domain category is denoted by AlGDOM in which algebraic domains are objects and Scott continuous functions are morphisms. The algebraic L-domain category as the full subcategory of AlGDOM is denoted by AlGLDOM in which all objects are algebraic L-domains. More results about domain theory can be found in [1,3,4]. The category theory in this paper can be found in [12,19].

The proof of Proposition 3.9 is obvious by the property of algebraic semilattice. Proposition 3.9 is a simple example of generalization of AL information systems. By adding the other conditions there are easy to obtain some other information systems of subclasses of algebraic domains (e. g. algebraic lattice, algebraic Scott domain). In the next section, we get a brief representation of information system

Algebraic L-domains is very important in Domain theory because they form a maximal Cartesian closed full subcategory of the algebraic continuous domains. However, a brief representation of algebraic L-domain by information system is hard. The main problem in finding an information system description of algebraic L-domains is the characterization of those consistent sets that represent local supremum. In this section a subclass of AL information systems is defined capturing exactly the algebraic L-domains.

