This paper is organised as follows. Section 2 gives an overview of related research areas from which we borrowed several concepts and techniques. Section 3 introduces the new architectural modelling primitives, with a special emphasis on our use of role-based modelling. Finally, section 4 outlines aspects of our approach that are not covered in this paper.

The particular architectural approach that we propose to extend has been de- veloped within an industry/academia partnership [1,2,3]; it models connector types through coordination laws that bring together a number of event-condition-action (ECA) rules, each of which coordinates the joint behaviour that a group of com- ponents (partners) needs to execute in reaction to a trigger generated by another component or outside the system. In the CCC approach partners, over which coor- dinations laws are instantiated, are represented by means of coordination interfaces. In the sense of [1], coordination laws constitute the connector concept while coor- dination interfaces represent the roles of connector types that must be instantiated with components when a law is to be activated on them. As an example, consider the coordination of the way an in-charge doctor interacts with a respiratory-control system within the premises of an emergency room:

The focus of our approach to socio-technical systems is on modelling the social impact of incorporating people within systems in terms of combining human auton- omy, capabilities, and responsibilities using role models. Humans play roles within the context of the collaborative activities in which they participate. These roles derive a substantial part of their semantics from the organizational structures to which they belong as defined in [12].

Putting forward actions for communication also meets the essence of workflow managements systems [24]. These are recognised among other collaboration-based technologies such as Computer Supported Cooperative Work precisely for the way they bring tasks allocation to a first class entity for collaboration rather than another communication protocol. Well-defined workflows pertained with clearly defined ini- tiation actions, termination actions and final goals are necessary to overcome the difficulties of extracting intentions and goals of the performing agent provided that these actions performed intentionally.

Roles are abstract constructs that specify the behaviour expected of social compo- nents by means of operations and ascribed normative aspects that refer to certain organisational positions e.g. Head of Surgeons or a consistent set of assumed capa- bilities which is expected from a qualified doctor. More concretely, we distinguish between having the ability to perform an operation and having the qualification or authorisation to do so: a social component may have the ability to perform an op- eration and still trigger a role violation if it is not an instance of a role that has the right qualification. Here we use the word qualification to mean, for instance, that the organisation has empowered the social component to perform given operations. Delegation of services or operation is vital in any dynamic organisational setting, however, we are not investigating delegation is out of the scope of this research.

