Electronic medicine is a reshaping and adjustment of the traditional medical model by the Internet [1]. It can break through the limita- tions of objective factors such as time and space, and objects, estab- lish a new medical system that adapts to the information age, and at the same time promote the information management of medical records [2]. Compared with the traditional medical model, the value of elec- tronic medical records is no longer limited to the application scope of medical treatment, scientific research and teaching, and more involved in hospital management, insurance claims, judicial evidence collection and other fields [3,4].

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents re- lated work. Section 3 describes the problem statement related to our SSPM scheme, followed by details of the proposed SSPM scheme for electronic medical data sharing in Section 4. In Sections 5 and 6, the se- curity analysis and performance evaluation of the scheme are followed. Finally, we present the conclusions of this paper in the last section.

Unlinkability was introduced by Brzuska et al. [23] as a privacy- preserving property, which can ensure that anyone other than the signer and the sanitizer cannot obtain any information about the new signature after sanitization, even after the original signature has been knowing. Pohls et al. proposed the concept of the hidden property [18], which means that outsiders cannot know which parts of the signed message are allowed to be modified, and the literature [24,25] further gave a for- mal definition of this property. At present, sanitizable signature schemes that satisfy invisibility and unlinkability respectively already exist, but whether the two security properties can be integrated is still an open question.

Our SSPM scheme can meet the privacy. From the Sanit algorithm, The SSPM scheme proposed in this paper can effectively hide the sen- sitive information of patients and protect the privacy of patients to the greatest extent while ensuring that the data integrity can be verified through the document sanitization operation. Therefore, the account- ability of our scheme holds.

With the continuous development of electronic medicine, the ap- plication field of medical records is further expanded. Since medical records contain large amounts of health data and patient privacy, and security and privacy in medical data sharing are paramount. To solve these problems, we propose a sanitizable signature scheme, which is based on the key-exposure free chameleon hash, and converts the sani- tization process of the message to use the trapdoor key to find collisions in the Chameleon hash function. Security analysis and performance eval- uation demonstrate show that our SSPM scheme can not only guarantee the integrity of medical data, but also support patient privacy protec- tion. Further, the scheme achieves public verification, which greatly re- duces the computation cost of the receiver and is easier to deployment in electronic medical data sharing scenarios.

