The results of GABA on human health were the challenge of a huge quantity of interest in food mechanized. In the market, lots of GABA containing food items are available, which includes germinated brown rice, chocolate, wine, and other food products [17]. Natural plants and their products have been used against lots of disease and disorders around the world nearly hundreds of years. Recently, many ethnobotanical studies have been reported the potentiality of medicinal plants and their active molecules  for  diseases  includes  central  nervous  system,

The computational analysis was carried in Maestro v10.2 of Schrodinger suite. The docking tools were complexly programmed in single software as Maestro v10.2 which includes prime applica- tion for homology modeling, Ligprep for ligand preparation, Site- map for validate the binding sites, grid generation for fix the target site and Glide Xtra Precision for docking purpose. Centos Linux was used as the operating system for computational examinations.

The site validation was analyzed on the target inner and surface regions by using sitemap tool [27]. Site map analysis, showed pos- sible active binding sites and one binding site was selected to pro- ceed further. It was chosen based on their site values (site scores and size of site area). Then, the selected site was used for the grid generation. Grid box shape and values were generated in X: 5.3; Y:

The structures of the thirty-two ligand molecules were con- verted to 3D structure from 2D using ligprep tool [29]. The ligands were drawn geometry optimized via Optimized Potentials for Liq- uid Simulations 2005 (OPLS2005) force field [30]. All the ligand molecules were generated 3D structures from 1D (Smiles) and 2D (SDF) representation, probing for tautomers and steric isomers and geometry minimization of ligands [31].

This analysis was carried out by Quikprop tool of Masetro v10.2 [35]. All the ligand molecules were analyzed with the parameters of hydrogen bond donor, hydrogen bond acceptor, blood brain barrier and central nervous system followed by Katsila et al., [36].

The structural validation was analyzed by Ramachandran plot, which shows the residues occurring regions. It also represents the accuracy and reliability of residues between template and target. In this validation, 87.3% of residues mostly occurred in the favor region, 11.7% of residues in additional region, 0.7% of residues in generously allowed region and the remaining 0.3% of the docking with known analogues. Recently, many computational studies have been carried out this binding site analysis method in many kinds of target molecules [38,39]. Moreover, Vijayakumar et al., [40] has described that the potentiality of the binding site analysis in Maestro v 10.2, Schrodinger suite. As a result of this analysis, the qualified binding site was taken for grid generation, which is help to fix the possible binding site in target [41].

ing a side chain contacts with the functional group of ligand. Here, the dotted blue straight line is indicated hydrogen bond side chain. The solid blue straight line is indicated hydrogen bond back chain. And, the dumbbell shaped green line is indicated the Pi-Pi stacking contact. Likewise, our previous computational study reported that the analogue has shown better docking scores with good binding contacts in Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) enzymes. AChE, which is

Curcumin had the third valuable docking score (-8.427). Inves- tigation of the docked complex demonstrates that the contacts were Leu299, Leu301, Ala135, Gln267, Arg164 and Tyr161. In which, the residues Leu299 (OH), Leu301 (O), Ala135 (O) and Arg164 (O) were involved in hydrogen bond back chain contacts protects from liver injury, increases bile secretion, which also pro- tects from cataract formation, protects from pulmonary toxicity and fibrosis. Besides, it has restrained anti-leishmaniasis and anti-atherosclerotic activities. Additionally, the wide range of liter- ature suggests that curcumin has contains effectual biological activities for the prevention and treatment of numerous health complaints [42]. Previously, Erfani et al., [46] stated that the effect

of curcumin on epilepsy. They are pointed out the effectiveness of curcumin at different concentration levels on various clinical experimentation namely Albino rat, Swiss mice and Zebra fish. Firstly, we found that the biological potential of curcumin for epi- lepsy, which has identified by molecular docking approach. In this study, the molecule curcumin is placed better docking scores with good binding affinities than mangiferin and other molecules.

The authors are grateful to the DST-SERB (SB/YS/LS-109/2014) for providing financial assistance in this project. We specially express our thanks to the management of A.V.V.M. Sri Pushpam College (Autonomous), Poondi, for providing them necessary facil- ities and support to carry out this work.

