In the context of homeland security, one of the key challenges is achieving effective, timely and systematic collaboration and information sharing among various gov- ernment agencies at the Federal, state, and local levels. Given the sensitive nature of the information, it is critical that information sharing be based on relevance and security. A majority of the agencies are using the Web as a means for sharing re- lated information, that exists in different forms, and increasingly utilizing XML to represent this information. In case of a crisis, a virtual response team needs to be formed in an ad-hoc manner. Members of this virtual response team come from var- ious government agencies and private organizations. Depending on several factors, including the location and nature of the crisis, the composition of this virtual multi- agency response team may change from one crisis to another. Furthermore, during the course of a given crisis the membership of this virtual multi-agency response team (VMART) may change dynamically to accommodate various needs (e.g., pub- lic health versus fire) and to conform to certain constraints, such as jurisdictions, e.g., the crisis extends, initially from New York to New Jersey.

Role creation becomes necessary when an agency joins a VMART through an existing agency. For example, NYFD may create a new role New Jersey Fire de- partment (NJFD) in case the NYFD needs the help of NJFD and wants to append it to the current VMART. This new role is created according to the role creation policies which are discussed in detail in section 3.5.

For example, Injury part of the XML document is accessible by HHS, whereas Explosion Profile part is accessible by FBI. To achieve having different agencies gain access to different portion of an XML document we discuss a document encryption and key generation scheme in Section 3.6.

The role based access control model (RBAC) [4] seems to be well suited for our envi- ronment. In RBAC, permissions are associated with roles and users are assigned to roles based on their respective functions and responsibilities. RBAC, which simpli- fies management of permissions, is policy-neutral and directly supports important security principles, e.g., separation of duties, least privilege, and data abstraction. We propose two tier RBAC: inter-agency level (VMART members); and intra- agency level.	At the inter-agency level, each member of the VMART fulfills a given role, e.g., NYPD (New York City Police Department), NYFD (New York Fire

In order to support dynamic collaboration among agencies and allow expansion of the VMART, by admitting new collaborators (government agencies or NGOs) as needs arise, we modified RBAC so that a coordinator Web service can create other roles. This modified RBAC model is similar to the self-evolving RBXAC model[6]. At the inter-agency level, an agency coordinator Web service enforces both the role permission assignment and the role creation for the other collaborating agencies. On the other hand, at the intra-agency level, an agency coordinator Web service enforces only role permission assignment for the roles within the agency. For role permission assignment, Read is the access mode through which roles can access objects. For role creation, Create is the access mode through which an agency coordinator Web service can create other roles. Below is the detailed discussion on the specification of role creation and permission assignment privileges.

In our model, there are two types of privileges that can be exercised by a coordinator Web service of each agency. These privileges are role permission assignment and role creation. Role permission assignment specification is a tuple (role, permission set) (rpac) where role is the role to which that permission set is assigned, permission set is the set of objects that the role can Read, and rpac is the role permission assignment constraint. Object can be a node, a set of nodes or the entire XML Schema. Role permission assignment constraints are as follows: 2) Intra-agency. In such an environment, we assumed that a coordinator Web ser- vice of each agency is responsible for authentication, information dissemination, information acquisition, role creation and enforcement of predefined access control policies. As part of this work we developed information sharing framework which is based on the encryption of XML documents according to RBAC policies defined for XML schema. In [8], B. Shafiq et al. proposed a policy integration framework for merging heterogeneous RBAC policies of multiple domains into a global access

control policy. A key challenge in the composition of their policy is the resolution of conflicts that might arise among the RBAC policies of individual domains. As part of our future work we intend to extend their approach by merging the access control policies of collaborating agencies into a global access control policy. This approach will enable us to directly distribute XML documents to the roles within agency utilizing this merged global access control policy. Our extended work will also relax the dissemination responsibility of the coordinator Web services.

Given the dynamic nature of policy specification and the related changes, the evolution of these policies is a challenging issue that forms part of our future work. Another related issue deals with the description of policies in terms of rights, obli- gations, dispensations, and prohibitions. We intend to develop a semantic interface for describing policies in semantic languages that will enhance the associated inter- operability and extensibility. The semantic description facilitates interpretation and reasoning over policies, conflict resolution and assists security and privacy gover- nance by means of policy enforcement. A major hurdle in sharing resources between organizations is heterogeneity on account of semantic differences. Semantic differ- ences occur due to differences in the organizational structure of agencies and the document generated are another major issue to be addressed. As part of our future work we are researching ontology mapping and linking techniques and we intend to explore applying to alleviate these semantic differences.

