Abstract Ad hoc wireless network consists of a set of wireless nodes communicating with each other without a pre-defined infrastructure. They communicate by forwarding packets which can reach wireless nodes that do not exist in the range of the direct radio transmission. Designing ad hoc network routing protocols is a challenging task because of its decentralized infrastructure which makes securing ad hoc networks more and more challenging. Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) pro- tocol is a popular routing protocol designed for use in wireless ad hoc networks. Mobile agent is a promising technology used in diverse fields of network applications. In this paper, we try to imple- ment DSR using mobile agents for securing this type of wireless network. Hybrid encryption tech- nique (symmetric key encryption/public key encryption) is used to improve performance; where symmetric keys are used to encrypt routing data to authenticate and authorize node sending data, while, public keys are used for the exchange of symmetric keys between nodes. We found that DSR may be secured using mobile agents with competitive performance.

Section 2 shows how DSR works. Section 3 encloses a brief description of mobile agents. Section 4 illustrates a new proto- col that combines mobile agents with DSR for securing ad hoc networks. Section 5 compares the new protocol with DSR. Conclusion and future work are given in Section 6.

DSR is composed of two parts; route discovery and route maintenance. It is based on source routing which means that the node sending a data packet lists in its header the nodes that the packet shall go through. A brief discussion for route main- tenance and route discovery is given in the following subsection.

We have designed and implemented a simulator similar to NS- 2, because, current release of NS-2 does not support mobile agents while our protocol uses mobile agents. We compared re- sults obtained from our simulator to results obtained from NS- 2 to trust the results obtained from our simulator. Also, we have added mobile agents to DSR to design and develop a new protocol to secure DSR using mobile agents.

