Broadcasting in Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks is the best way to spread emergency messages all over the network. With the dynamic nature of vehicular ad hoc networks, simple broadcast or flooding faces the problem called as Broadcast Storm Problem (BSP). The issue of the BSP will degrade the performance of a message broadcasting process like increased overhead, collision and dissemination delay. The paper is motivated to solve the problems in the existing Broadcast Strom Suppression Algorithms (BSSAs) like p-Persistence, TLO, VSPB, G-SAB and SIR. This paper proposes to suppress the Broadcast Storm Problem and to improve the Emergency Safety message dissemination rate through a new BSSA based on Selective Epidemic Broadcast Algorithm (SEB). The simulation results clearly show that the SEB outperforms the existing algorithms in terms of ESM Delivery Ratio, Message Overhead, Collision Ratio, Broadcast Storm Ratio and Redundant Rebroadcast Ratio with decreased Dissemination Delay.

The effect of Broadcast Storm Problem is discussed in several papers. But not all the proposed solutions provide better results to solve this problem. The Broadcast Storm Problem causes increased message overhead, broadcast collision, dissemination delay, etc. For emergency safety purpose the message should be passed without any interrupt within the short period of time. Emergency safety message dissemination is a time critical event, so it is important to investigate the time parameter while dissem- inating the emergency message.

DOT is one of the delay based BSSA used to control the high vehicle density by dividing the vehicles into different slots [14]. This algorithm uses large size beacon message and the vehicle density in each slot is not mentioned clearly. DRIVE [15] uses the sweet spot to disseminate the message, but still suffers from increased message overhead and dissemination delay when no vehicles exist in the sweet spot. ADM [16] dynamically adapts the broadcasting based on the priority level of the message sent. This algorithm reduces the latency and does not improve the redundancy rate.

Virtual Slotted p-Persistence Broadcasting (VSPB) [22] is the Timer based broadcasting technique which forms the virtual slot based on the position information and moving direction of the neighboring vehicles. VSPB is better than the slotted p- persistence to avoid empty slots due to low density and also vehi- cle collisions at high density scenarios. So VSPB controls the slot size by assigning a fixed number of vehicles per slot. The vehicles in the farthest slot are assigned the shortest waiting time to rebroadcast. But when the vehicle density increases the collision ratio, broadcast overhead and dissemination delay also increase simultaneously.

Grid based Speed Adaptive Broadcast (G-SAB) [23] is a latest probabilistic broadcasting technique based on the speed parame- ter. The vehicle density is identified by using the vehicles moving speed. In low density networks the vehicles moving speed are high, but in the high density networks the vehicles moving speed are low. Similar to VSPB, this algorithm also suffered from the simulta-

This section describes the proposed Selective Epidemic Broad- cast Algorithm. Broadcasting is the simplest form to send an Emer- gency Safety Message within the vehicular ad hoc network. The proposed SEB algorithm follows our Epidemic Spreading Model named as Susceptible Infected and Removed (SIR) algorithm that was discussed in [24] to spread the Emergency Safety Message (ESM) in a directed manner. Compared to SIR algorithm this paper is motivated to further suppress the broadcast storm by spreading the message only to selective vehicles which later rebroadcast the messages, resulting in lesser messages being sent. The vehicles are selected based on the Passive Acknowledgment (P_ACK) from the neighbors, which are reply messages from the neighbor list named as Emergency Broadcast Neighbors (EBN) located within the trans- mission range of the source vehicle. In SIR algorithm the Emer- gency Safety Message is sent to all the vehicles considering the bidirectional and multidirectional dissemination. The SIR algorithm reduces the scalability issues in simple scenarios and improves message reliability compared to the existing algorithms, but still suffers from transmission overhead in complex scenarios. Hence, in SEB scalability is further improved compared to SIR and the availability of the receivers are also checked to improve the link reliability to find the exact forwarding vehicle to rebroadcast the message to the next transmission range. Hence, BSP and Redundant Rebroadcast Ratio are minimized by selective forward- ing in a dynamic topology through P_ACK.

when the source vehicle starts to broadcast the message. After receiving P_ACK, the source vehicle broadcasts the message to all vehicles in the EBN of broadcast vehicle (Vb). Among the EBN, it finds the farthest vehicle (FV) to forward the message to the next transmission range. The proposed SEB algorithm reduces the BSP in complex scenarios, by checking the neighbors availability before broadcasting. Hence, SEB algorithm is applicable for multiple sce- narios by finding the neighbors availability, to improve the mes- sage dissemination and to reduce BSP.

This section describes the performance evaluation of the pro- posed Selective Epidemic Broadcast Algorithm. The results of the proposed SEB algorithm are analyzed through simulations using NS-2 Simulator version 2.34. SEB algorithm is compared with well known existing algorithms such as p-Persistence, TLO, VSPB, G-SAB and SIR. The results are obtained under different vehicle density and different vehicle moving speed.

This section shows the results obtained from the simulation based on the performance metrics considered in this paper. The algorithms are analyzed for two different traffic scenarios like dif- ferent vehicle density and vehicle moving speed. When the vehicle density increases, the BSP also increases and when the vehicles are moving at high speed, there is no assurance for reliable message communication.

vehicular networks using V2V communications and not for discon- nected networks. In disconnected networks, the receipt of passive acknowledgment may become a problem in the functioning of SEB. Hence, in future, this algorithm needs to be altered slightly for dis- connected networks with the help of RSUs because when the vehi- cles are not present in the transmission range of source vehicle, the RSUs can help for communication.

Dr. S. Siva Sathya is an Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science, Pondicherry University. Her areas of interests include evolutionary algorithms, bioinformatics, intrusion detection, etc. She has to her credit a number of research papers in international journals and conferences.

