[14] for microwave imaging purposes. In this fabrication process, the authors used polyvinyl chloride, agar, sodium azide, agar, and gelatin as the main ingredients, but they fabricated only three tissues and used a commercial skull for measurement. In [13], the authors have presented a heterogenous head phantom for microwave tomography imaging. The authors have used a plastic container as a skull and fabricated only brain tissue by using commercial ingredients. The gelatin, water, oil, carbon powder polyurethane, and graphite isopropanol are used for fabricating the brain tissues. However, the imaging result may be ambiguous due to the lack of dielectric characteristics in other tissues of the head phantom as well as the low measured dielectric properties are relative to the real

methodology has been illustrated in [17] for susceptibility artifacts of the head phantom. In this phantom fabrication, the authors used a plastic-based commercial skull for testing purposes as well as MnCl2 solution, NaCl, WAX, and rubber bung as the main ingredients to fabricate brain tissues. However, the authors did not measure the dielectric features of the formulated tissues. Thus, the fabricated phan- tom is not appropriate for microwave imaging due to the lack of proper dielectric properties of the tissues. A 3D-printed structure-based anthropomorphic head phantom has been fabricated and presented in

for microwave imaging purposes. In this approach, the authors have made the brain, blood, and CSF tissues with the TX-100, salted water, graphite, carbon black, and silicon rubber and filled them into the skull. In [18], the authors have been presented the fabrication procedure of a realistic 3D anthropomorphic heterogeneous head phantom that has been tested for magnetic resonance imaging purposes. They used sodium chloride, distilled water, and ethanol solutions as the main ingredients to fabricate the head tissues, such as the brain, CSF, fat, and muscle, and filled them into the skull. However, they measured the dielectric

analysis of the simulated model using an antenna sensor is described in Section 2. Section 3 illustrates the brain phantom fabrication process. Phantom measurement processes and performance analysis are dis- cussed in Section 4. Section 5 discusses the measurement outcomes of the fabricated phantom components. The imaging experiment and result analysis are illustrated in Section 6. In the end, the paper concludes in Section 7.

However, the used algorithm (i.e., IC-CF-DMAS) supports the toler- ance of the deviation between CSF and malignant tumor since the delay parameter in the original DMAS calculated the travel time between source and detector (i.e., tumor object). While scattering signals pene- trate through the proposed phantom of the system, they incorporate the background medium air and all phantom dielectric layers like CSF and

This article describes how a set of human head phantoms were pre- pared and measured for use with a SMBIS to find tumors. The head phantom was created using 3D structures filled with various chemical combinations that mimic the six types of brain tissue. For validating the performance of the phantom, the benign and malignant tumor(s) are also created and positioned in various locations for imaging explana- tions. Using a dielectric probe kit attached to a VNA, the dielectric properties are assessed after fabrication. The measured dielectric char- acteristics are contrasted with those of actual human skull tissue. After that, a 3D stacked wideband antenna-based microwave brain imaging system is used to validate the human phantom model with malignancies. The experimental dielectric properties of the brain tissues show good agreement with the standard reference dielectric properties of the real brain tissues of the head. The experimental imaging results depicted the validity of our proposed six-layered tissue-mimicking phantoms to be used in examination as a supplement to the real human brain tissue with two tumors and a comparatively high-resolution image.

