We develop a discrete model for processes that is useful in the concurrent setting. It is based on the traditional model given by graphs. In this model, vertices of the graph represent states and edges represent transitions. The edges may be directed or undirected.

models two processes a and b where the boundary models two executions, either a followed by b, or a and b concurrently. The interior of the triangle models inter- mediate executions. Adding another triangle we obtain a simplicial complex that models all possible executions of a and b.

1 The author would like to thank David Spivak for many useful conversations pertaining to this article. He would also like to thank the NSF for funding some of this research through the Midwest Topology Network (NSF grant DMS-0844249). In addition he would like to thank Martin Raussen and Lisbeth Fajstrup for organizing the GETCO 2010 conference that motivated this work.

We consider a related but more sophisticated construction in which the objects are vertices of the simplicial set, but the executions from one state to another are described by a simplicial set. That is, our model is a simplicial category (i.e., a category enriched over simplicial sets). This construction can detect higher order structure that is invisible to the path category. To calculate it, we consider necklaces of simplices in our simplicial set models. In a related paper [14], Raussen constructs simplicial models of execution spaces for continuous models.

Simplicial sets and their morphisms form a category. Geometric realization is a functor from this category to the category of topological spaces. A more elegant but more sophisticated way of defining simplicial sets is as contravariant functors from the category of finite ordinals and order preserving maps to the category of sets.

For this purpose, we consider the following construction of a category enriched over simplicial sets. In such a category, between two objects, instead of set of morphisms, we have a simplicial set of morphisms. For brevity, this is also called a simplicially enriched category, or a simplicial category. For a thorough exposition of the simplicial category of a simplicial set see [5].

The simplicial set models in this paper are in fact triangulations of cubical set models. When constructing models of the execution spaces from one state to another, we used (simplicial) necklaces on the simplicial models. Instead, one could use cubical necklaces on the cubical models, if one understood such things from a homotopy-theoretic point of view. These models would be more economical. For example, we should be able to redo Example 3.13 using cubical sets and cubical necklaces to obtain the following cubical set for MapX (a, l).

The author would like to thank David Spivak for many useful conversations per- taining to this article. He would also like to thank the NSF for funding some of this research through the Midwest Topology Network (NSF grant DMS-0844249). In ad- dition he would like to thank Martin Raussen and Lisbeth Fajstrup for organizing the GETCO 2010 conference that motivated this work.

