We report on a technique for modelling biological systems based on the ntcc calculus, a model of concurrency where systems are specified by means of constraints (i.e., formulae in logic). We show that the ability of ntcc to express partial information, concurrency, non-determinism and timed behaviour makes it well- suited model and simulate biochemical reactions networks. Based on this technique, we introduce BioWayS (BIOchemical pathWAY Simulator), a software tool for the quantitative modelling and analysis of biological systems. We show the applicability of BioWayS in the context of two well-studied biological systems: the glycogen breakdown pathway and the life cycle of the human immunodeficiency virus.

As we shall show, ntcc offers several advantages in the modelling of biochemical reaction systems: (1) the timed nature of the calculus allow us to faithfully model temporal information about interactions, information about the temporal occurrence of an event (e.g., when a binding occurs), and information about the relative ve- locities of reactions (e.g., the duration of an interaction) thus allowing to take into

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: In Section 2 we describe the ntcc calculus. In Section 3 we present our software tool (BioWayS) on two examples (the glycogen breakdown pathway and the HIV life cycle). Section 4 concludes the paper.

Agents in CCP interact with each other by telling and asking information rep- resented as constraints to a global store. Constraints (e.g., x > 42) can be thought of as formulae in a first-order language and they represent (partial) information about the variables of the system. Partial must be understood here as the fact that constraints do not necessarily determine completely the values of the variables.

The basic constructs in CCP are the tell agent tell(c) that adds the constraint c (via logical conjunction) to the store, thus making it available to the other pro- cesses; and the ask process when c do P that queries if the current store d can entail (deduce) the guard c, written d |= c; if so, it behaves like P . Otherwise it remains blocked until more information is added. Hence, ask processes define a synchronisation mechanism based on entailment of constraints. CCP features also constructs for declaring local variables as in (local x) P and for executing processes in parallel as in P  Q.

The ntcc calculus [28] extends CCP with the notion of discrete time-units to model timed and reactive systems. Roughly speaking, a CCP-like process is exe- cuted in a time-unit. When the resting point is reached, i.e., no further evolution is possible, the store is output and a new time-unit is created to later execute the continuation of the process. In order to specify this kind of behaviour, ntcc extends CCP with operators such as next P that delays the execution of P one time-unit; the replication ! P that executes P in all the time-units; and unless c next P that executes P in the next time-unit if c cannot be deduced from the store. Further- where one Pi is chosen for execution if the guard ci can be entailed from the store. When this happens, the other alternatives are precluded from execution. Asyn- chronous behaviour is introduced by adding to the syntax a finite delay operator: the process P represents a finite but unbounded delay for the activation of P .

Constraints provide also an elegant mechanism to represent partial information. For instance, x > 42 gives some information regarding the concentration of x but it does not give a specific value for it. This can be helpful when some compo- nents of the system are not well known or we do not have enough quantitative information about them.

Summing up, in BioWayS it is possible to express two important features of biochemical reactions: the propensity (i.e. the probability of occurring) and the duration, i.e. the time steps needed for the products to appear in the system. This is an abstraction to represent the speed of a chemical reaction (i.e. the reaction rate constant).

In order to make the tool available on Internet, we embedded the ntcc interpreter into BioWayS, a PHP based application freely available at http://avispa.puj. edu.co. Users can build models of biological systems in BioWayS through a wizard that comprises the following steps: from reaction rates: the highest the reaction rate, the shortest t. We used c to set the experimental conditions. Indeed we simulated different scenarios (called modes in the Appendix) in which c can be low, medium or high. For the simulations performed here, we assumed that all reactions have the same propensity to occur. Thanks to the timed nature of our modelling language, we are able to emphasise the interactions between different species during time.

receptor, several G-proteins can be activated. The activated proteins migrate along the inner side of the plasma membrane and may enhance, in turn, the catalytic capabilities of many adenylyl cyclases. Moreover, during the life-time of the G- protein-adenylyl cyclase complex, several ATP molecules are converted into cAMP , thus leading to further amplification.

Since the discovery of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the etiologic agent of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), scientists have studied the dynamics and details of the HIV life cycle in order to develop efficient antiviral therapies. In the context of computational biology the dynamics of cell-virus in- teractions have traditionally been investigated through both ODEs and EMs. In the latter case the proposed modelling approaches mainly focus on membrane in- teractions (see e.g. in [11]). We shall use here BioWayS for building a model of the

HIV infection cycle shifting the focus on quantitative issues. Our aim is to track the time course of a set of molecules during the various steps of the infection cycle. Our investigation is driven by the available observations describing the progression throughout the infection cycle as conditioned by the presence of certain molecules in each phase. In other words, each stage of the infection cycle is characterised by a precise set of molecules which are necessary for bootstrapping the following step. Our interest in modelling the timing of this process reflects one research strategy in drug discovery, aiming at blocking the infection cycle by interfering with the bootstrapping molecules. Our framework promises to be particularly suited for this purpose since time rates can be taken into account and ntcc processes can be pro- gressively composed in order to build a model integrating information coming from different sources.

BioWayS then allowed us to correctly identify a set of molecules whose presence is a necessary condition for proceeding throughout each step of the infection cycle. Consistently with available data, for instance, we found that in our model the presence of the complex gp120/gp41 is necessary for both the Binding and Fusion and the Budding phases. Without this complex, the virus is unable to infect the host cell. Interestingly, drugs called Fusion Inhibitors, such as Maraviroc, block the fusion phase interfering with the binding of the host-cell co-receptor ccr5 and the complex gp120/gp41 : cd4 thus avoiding the HIV life cycle to continue.

We have defined a technique based on a temporal extension of Concurrent Con- straint Programming (CCP) for modelling biological systems that allows us to rep- resent straightforwardly transition times and partial information. In this paper we have presented also a software tool (BioWayS) for modelling and analysing bio- chemical interaction networks. Through two working examples we have illustrated how our method can be used for gaining insights on the dynamics of biological phenomena.

Reacting species, their initial amount, and a model of biochemical reaction rules for the signaling pathway of glycogen breakdown. For each mode of simulation, we use the lower, medium and upper limit of the molar concentration of the variables: InfLim, MedLim, MaxLim, respectively. Adapted from [5,22,23,27,34].

