Two-phase greedy forwarding (TPGF) has been presented in [26,30]. The first step in this protocol explores the path by sending the packets to the next-hop node that has a shorter distance to the destination. In case the forwarder-node has no next-hop node, it sends data back to the sender node and blocks the forwarder- node. The forwarding-node searches for another forwarder node and selects it to reach the destination. In the second phase pf opti- mization, the destination will send back to the source through the same routing path packets labeled with the node number and path number to optimize the routing path and reduce the number of hops. TPGF solves greedy perimeter stateless routing for wireless network routing protocol (GPSR) problems to avoid failure if it can- not find the next-hop node in the forwarding mode. The drawbacks of TPGF are that if node in the same path have a blocked status, for- warding data in closed circle will take place and there will be a high possibility of losing the routing path.

As has been described earlier, SGFTEM forwards packets to the neighbor nodes that have higher throughput and that are closer to the destination than the forwarding node; even though the nodes have information about their respective neighbors and store the geographic position of the destinations, they do not have any glo- bal information about the network status. The nodes with high throughput (higher available bandwidth) incur smaller E2ED, packet loss and reduced energy consumption by reducing the packet queuing and collisions. SGFTEM shows lower E2ED than TPGF and AGEM because TPGF and AGEM follows the shortest path, where the shortest-path routing may comprise of nodes with low throughput, which implies high packet queuing, resulting in high end-to-end delay and increased packet losses. Meanwhile, an increased number of sensor nodes on AGEM results in increased end-to-end delay and packet loss owing to the absence of global

AGEM is slightly more reliable than GPSR, because AGEM searches for routing paths and performs load balancing of multiple-paths. Finally, in SGFTEM, the routing path creation searches for paths with low traffic load, which minimizes packet loss. All greedy rout- ing protocols examined here suffer high packet loss at high net- work densities and only work best up to a certain network size, whereas AODV performs better under high network density net- work scenarios. This is because all greedy routing protocols studied here have neighbor node information only (local information) whereas AODV has global information. Dealing with local informa- tion only gives the advantage of low delay and reduces energy con- sumption in the nodes. In fact, AODV and SGFTEM belong to different categories of routing protocols, and they are compared here to examine the overall performance of the SGFTEM, as the best protocol among the greedy protocols studied here. .

To enhance the performance of SGFTEM in term of energy man- agement and load balancing, further simulations on a homoge- neous network have been performed. The sensor nodes are deployed based on radio transmitter coverage and the extent of the sensor lifetime method, throughout the sensing field. The sens- ing field is a rectangular area, and the size varies depending on the number of sensor nodes and their locations. In this simulation, the sensing areas chosen were 750 m		600 m for 35 nodes, 1000 m 600 m for 55 nodes and 1500 m	600 m for 75 nodes. The sink and source nodes are situated at fixed points at the edges of the sensing field. This scenario represents a monitoring use-case, in which the source node sends the data packet to the sink node, to be for- warded to the outside world.

where R is the maximum radio range and r is the adjacent possible hop. To construct the network, the sensing area is divided into grids with rib lengths of 89.5 m to make sure that the radio range covers the whole area of the network, so if there are nodes that shut down during operation, routing shall continue. Besides, energy saving in

