Smart cities have been developed over the past decade, and reducing traffic congestion has been the top concern in smart city development. Short delays in communication between vehicles and Roadside Units (RSUs), smooth traffic flow, and road safety are the key challenges of Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSs). The rapid upsurge in the number of road vehicles has increased traffic congestion and the number of road accidents. To fix this issue, Vehicular Networks (VNs) have developed many new ideas, including vehicular communications, navigation, and traffic control. Machine Learning (ML) is an efficient approach to finding hidden insights into ITS without being programmed explicitly by learning from data. This research proposed a fusion-based intelligent traffic congestion control system for VNs (FITCCS-VN) using ML techniques that collect traffic data and route traffic on available routes to alleviate traffic congestion in smart cities. The proposed system provides innovative services to the drivers that enable a view of traf- fic flow and the volume of vehicles available on the road remotely, intending to avoid traffic jams. The proposed model improves traffic flow and decreases congestion. The proposed system provides an accu- racy of 95% and a miss rate of 5%, which is better than previous approaches.

during rush hours is an important issue [3]. Transportation net- works are becoming an integral part of human life due to the short- age of land resources and saturated transportation infrastructure in metropolitan areas. As a result of this overcrowding, numerous traffic-related drawbacks have arisen in urban zones where people must move quickly from one location to another [4].

ML is an application of artificial intelligence that permits sys- tems to automatically learn from data and make decisions without human assistance. ML enables systems to learn from experience and recover without being explicitly programmed. ML can mecha- nize and increase the efficiency of intelligent traffic congestion control systems (TCCSs) while reducing travelling costs more effi- ciently and accurately in a reliable way [19]. Data fusion is a pro- cess of combining data from one and multiple sources with insufficient raw data to gather precise, comprehensive, and unified entity information. At the decision level, fusion is used to produce a single decision after combining decisions from multiple sources to create a more intelligent decision on action. By taking the data pat- terns of various algorithms, the fusion of decision-making data and ML can help make better choices [20].

In [22], researchers suggested a real-time TMS composed of a small system of roadside units, junction units, and mobile units that determine the time of traffic lights to avoid gridlock develop- ment. This system also includes a web-based application for dri- vers of vehicles that uses data from real-time traffic monitoring to show the current traffic flow so that approaching vehicles take alternate routes to help reduce the gridlock. The limitations of this technique are a lack of performance and a secure mechanism for communication between nodes.

were utilized to monitor traffic status in lanes. The controller col- lects this information from sensors and processes it. The processed data are then sent to the server via a Wi-Fi module. The traffic sig- nal control system, which is based on perceiving traffic status in lanes, controls traffic. If a road has a significant amount of traffic, then it receives the highest priority, which means it takes a long time for vehicles to travel, and it will be given a long green- signal time. This proposed system is reliable, easy, and inexpen- sive. This presented system has limited calculation capacity and needs the proper execution of instructions by highly skilled programmers.

In [24], researchers developed a platform focused on Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) to acquire, fuse, and store city traffic data. The extended city intelligent transportation system is more versa- tile and efficient than other current city transportation systems. It is impossible to use WSNs for high-speed communication because they are designed for low-speed applications and are too expensive to build. In [25], the authors developed a vehicle traffic control mechanism via Usage-based Insurance (UBI) and smartphone- based measurement methods. This architecture is designed to model, perceive, and monitor traffic flow. This system has seven layers, starting with physical smartphones and servers and ending with the overall business strategy at the top.

In [28], the authors developed an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV)-based traffic monitoring system using a Convolutional Neu- ral Network (CNN). The camera on the UAV captured traffic images, and the system had a 91.67% accuracy based on the traffic situa- tion. In [29], the authors developed a data-fusion-based TCCS based on a CNN and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) frameworks. The CNN was used to classify spatial data. LSTM for historical data had a 92.3% and 7.7% accuracy and miss rate, respectively, whereas ML approaches may achieve better results. Different machine learning techniques such as computational intelligence approaches, fuzzy systems [30,31,32,33,34,35,36], swarm intelli- gence [37], evolutionary computing [38], soft computing [39], genetic algorithms [40], neural networks [41], and deep extreme learning machines [42] have proven to be credible solutions for smart cities [43,44,45], smart health [46,47,48], and wireless com- munication [49,50] by different researchers in different research domains.

This paper presents a fusion-based intelligent traffic congestion control system for vehicular networks using machine learning techniques. Traffic congestion and the number of traffic accidents have increased rapidly. Proposed model solved the problem of short delays in communication between vehicles and roadside units, smooth traffic flow, and road safety by intelligent trans- portation systems. The aim of this study is to provide innovative services to drivers that enable a view of traffic flow and the volume of vehicles available on the road remotely, intending to avoid traf- fic jams. This study develops a fusion-based intelligent traffic con- gestion control system for vehicular networks using machine learning technology to alleviate traffic congestion. This contribu- tion offers pathways to improve traffic flow and decrease congestion.

attributes are independent and one, the output class, is dependent. The next layer is preprocessing, which mitigates the noisy data using moving averages and normalization. Then, the preprocessed data are divided into 70% training and 30% testing datasets. After this process, the training data are sent to the training layer, whereas the testing dataset is stored in edge computing. A classifi- cation process is performed in the training layer to predict the traf- fic congestion using both ML techniques [ANN and support Vector Machine (SVM)]. Each neuron has a function of activation, such as

