The biologist R. Thomas has enounced a rule relating multistationarity in a system of genes interacting in a single cell to the existence of a positive circuit in the regulatory graph of the system. In this paper, we address the question of a similar rule for spatial differentiation. We consider the interactions of genes in several biological cells located on a 1-dimensional infinite grid, and we assume that the expression levels of genes are Boolean. We show that the existence of a positive circuit is a necessary condition for a specific form of multistationarity, which naturally corresponds to spatial differentiation.

In this paper, we consider as a starting point the case of fixed cells located on a 1-dimensional infinite grid, which we assume to be the set Z of integers. This is a simplification which has the advantage of emphasising the basic formalism. The more biologically realistic situation of hexagonal 2-dimensional grids has been later studied in [1], with an application to the formation of sense organs in Drosophila as modelled in [3].

the existence of a positive circuit is necessary for the presence of several periodic fixed points having at least one cell with the same expression levels (Theorem 4.1). We then apply this result to show that a single non-constant periodic fixed point actually suffices to imply the existence of a positive circuit, as long as its smallest period has two cells with the same expression levels (Corollary 4.3).

It may be important to note here that the approach we develop in this paper consists in deriving regulatory graphs from a given dynamics as in [12,8,9]. This is however not the most usual presentation of the correspondance between graphs and dynamics: indeed, biologists often use regulatory graphs as a basis to generate dynamical models, using either a differential framework or a discrete framework; see, e.g., [5,11]. However, the two approaches are clearly compatible, as it has been observed in [9] for instance.

In the previous example, f has two fixed points a = (0, 1, 0) and b = (1, 0, 0), thus b = a{1,2}. In accordance with Theorem 2.1, the regulatory graph G(f )(0, 0, 1) contains a positive circuit between gene 1 and gene 2.

We now turn to the case of several interacting cells. In this paper, we shall consider cells with a fixed location on an infinite 1-dimensional grid. We shall be interested in the evolution of the system consisting in the same collection of n genes 1,... ,n in each cell.

For any s, x and i = 1,... , n, Fi(s)(x) denotes the value to which the expression level of gene i in cell number x tends when the system is in state s. The definition of F from f corresponds to the assumption that cells interact locally, i.e., a cell can only interact with itself or its immediate neighbours. A fixed point for F is a state s hand, and on the other hand the regulation due to diffusion, which occurs in general via transmembrane signaling. Despite of these limitations, it is worth observing that the main dynamical property we shall be investigating is the presence of fixed points, which is independent from any reasonable assumption on the dynamics: syn- chronous, asynchronous, with delays, parallel evolution of the cells as in Lindenmayer systems [6], etc. (Of course however, the synchronous dynamics has more periodic behaviours than the asynchronous one.)

Proof. Let a and b be two fixed points of periods k and k' respectively. Since a and b have a common cell and the action of Z clearly preserves the fact of being a fixed point, we may assume that a(1) = b(1).

