The results in this paper are stated for tiles that are convex polytopes. (A convex polytope is a set that is the convex hull of a finite set of points.) It is easy to deduce that our results are also valid for any set of compact (i.e., closed and bounded) tiles for which there is a homeomorphism (i.e., a topology-preserving map) of Rn to itself that maps each tile onto a convex polytope.

In the rest of this paper a tile is a convex polytope in Rn. Let P be any set of tiles. 5 The union of all the elements of P will be denoted by U (P). Note that the tiles may overlap, and they may not cover Rn. However, any tessellation of Rn by convex polytopes provides an example of a set P of tiles.

(b) (two edges of the cube in each case), but NP (P ) in (a) is contractible while NP (P ) in (b) has a tunnel. In (a), deletion of P breaks one object into two; in (b), it eliminates a tunnel. (a) is SN but (b) is not.

A set is said to be contractible if it has the same homotopy type as a one- point set. Thus a contractible set is nonempty and connected. A contractible set in the plane also has no holes. A contractible set in 3-space has no holes or tunnels, and no cavities. For a polyhedron in the plane or 3-space, these necessary conditions are also sufficient for the polyhedron to be contractible: It can be shown that a polyhedron in the plane or in 3-space is contractible if and only if it is nonempty and connected, has no holes or tunnels, and, in the 3D case, also has no cavities. However, the only facts about contractible sets that we will need in this paper are stated below. The first of these facts is:

Note that since every subcollection of an SN collection of tiles is itself SN, Theorem 4.1 implies the converse of Theorem 4.2: If P' is any subcollection of the SN collection P, then NP' (P ) is contractible for each P in P'.

Extensions of the basic results of [2,8,9,10,12] to SN sets of tiles in n dimen- sions have been presented. We have not attempted to extend the results of [11] to n dimensions, because the complexity of computing the topological changes when a non-simple tile is deleted grows rapidly with n even in the standard hy- percubic tessellations. However, it may be worth investigating computational aspects of the problem of determining whether a tile is simple, and the more general problem of determining the local topological changes that occur when a tile is deleted, in low-dimensional (e.g., 4D or 5D) hypercubic tessellations. Images based on such tessellations are used in temporal image analysis. We are currently working on this problem in 4D.

