A previously introduced combination of the bialgebraic approach to structural operational semantics with coalgebraic modal logic is re-examined and improved in some aspects. Firstly, a more abstract, conceptual proof of the main compositionality theorem is given, based on an understanding of modal logic as a study of coalgebras in slice categories of adjunctions. Secondly, a more concrete understanding of the assumptions of the theorem is provided, where proving compositionality amounts to finding a syntactic distributive law between two collections of predicate liftings.

The process of inducing well-behaved transition systems from SOS specifications has been explained at the abstraction level of coalgebras, in the bialgebraic frame- work of [28]. There, a well-known SOS format called GSOS was understood as a type of distributive laws between behaviour and syntax endofunctors. The fact that LTS bisimilarity on GSOS-induced specifications is compositional, was explained at that level of generality.

Looking from some perspective, neither mathematical economy nor practical usability of [15,17] was entirely satisfactory. Firstly, the proof of the main composi- tionality result, albeit elementary, involved plenty of diagram chasing and inductive proofs, and in general was not very illuminating. Second, perhaps more painful deficiency, was that no intuitive general understanding of coalgebraic behaviour for logical formulas was provided. Although logical distributive laws for some specific kinds of logical behaviour were presented in an appealing, SOS-like manner, no concrete understanding of such laws for other types of behaviour was found. Also, no guidelines to finding behaviour functors for logical formulas were given, other than wild guessing. Checking that a candidate logical distributive law was correct involved heavy calculations of complex natural transformations, far removed from common understanding of formulas and processes.

This paper is an attempt to remove these two deficiencies to some degree. First, a more abstract, conceptual proof of the main compositionality theorem of [15] is provided (and the theorem is mildly generalized in the process). To this end, the interpretation of modal logic in coalgebras is understood as a functor from the category of coalgebras to a slice category of an adjunction. The compositionality theorem then follows from lifting that functor to structures that involve process syntax, via an adjoint lifting theorem.

The paper is structured as follows. In Sections 2 and 3, the bialgebraic approach to SOS and coalgebraic modal logic are briefly recalled. Section 4 studies endofunc- tors, algebras and coalgebras in slice categories of adjunctions, and culminates in a proof of the main compositionality theorem. Section 5 provides a concrete interpre- tation of the theorem in terms of predicate liftings. Finally, Sections 6 explains how both deficiencies mentioned above persist to some degree in the present formulation. Some proofs, not essential for the main line of reasoning, are relegated to Appendix. Parts of the paper might be of interest also to those readers who do not care much about compositionality or SOS. For an explanation of coalgebraic modal logic in terms of (co)algebras in slice categories of adjunctions, without any involvement corresponds almost entirely to the interpretation of coalgebraic modal logic in B- coalgebras, as constructed in (5). Indeed, the only step missing in this functorial presentation is the transposition of the semantic map s from the initial L-algebra. For this final step, obviously, it is crucial that the functor T has a left adjoint; we shall now proceed to develop our theory further with this additional assumption.

