Vision is an important sense organ. Similar to other land vertebrates, fishes have oval lens and retina with charac- teristics rod and/or cone photoreceptors (ectopic or photopic vision) [1e3]. Fish vision is markedly adapted to their aquatic environment especially at deep sea where eyes suited to its dark level [4]. Aquatic marine environment absorb light which is gradually decrease with increasing depth become blue at 50 m [5]. Marine teleost fishes inhabiting different depths of marine environment displayed varying optometric

The distribution of lens protein and the refractive indices of fishes attracted the attention of many authors. Pierscionek and Augusteyn [14] mentioned that a high content of gamma- crystallins is found in lenses which have refractive index gradients. SDS-PAGE profiles of soluble lens nuclear proteins of Clarias batrachus (Linn.) revealed the presence of eight distinct polymorphs along the western region of Uttar Pra- desh, India. b- and g-crystallins were identified according to their molecular weights and isoelectric points [15].

Retinal thickness and their layers were measured in investi- gated fishes by linear ocular micrometers. The ratio relation- ship between outer and inner nuclear layer were investigated according to Wang et al. [21] to determine the nocturnal or diurnal pattern of the fish. Also, the relationship between ganglion layer and inner nuclear layer was also investigated according to Gu et al. [22] to illustrate the visual acuity.

Lenses of the examined fishes were separated and immedi- ately fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer at (pH 7.4) and dehydrated in ascending grades of ethyl alcohol. The specimens were dried in a carbon dioxide critical point drying apparatus, mounted in stubs and coated with a thin layer of gold by low voltage DC sputtering and investigated under scanning electron microscope JOEL5300 JSM (musa- shino 3-chome akishima Tokyo 196-8558, Japan).

Lens and retina samples were collected, cleaned and homog- enized using 0.1 M TriseHCl (pH 7.5) containing 20% sucrose. Protein content was determined according to Lowry et al. [23] and electrophoresis by the method of Laemmli [24]. For visu- alization of the tested enzymes, the tissue samples were incubated in medium containing the selected substrate of the tested enzyme and visualized materials as follows:

Isoenzyme patterns were recorded on the basis of number and the rate of flow (Rf) values of the isoenzyme bands. The Rf value is the mobility of each isoenzyme band that traveled from the origin divided by the distance traveled by the front tracking dye. The presence or absence of a certain isoenzy- matic band was considered as a differentiating feature. Zy- mograms were drawn to scale and relative mobility values were calculated for each band.

The retinae of the selected marine fishes, were composed of ten layers namely, pigment epithelial layer (PE), photoreceptor layer (PL), outer limiting membrane (OLM), outer nuclear layer (ONL), outer plexiform layer (OPL), inner nuclear layer (INL), inner plexiform layer (IPL), ganglion cell layer (GCL), nerve fiber layer (NFL), inner limiting membrane (ILM). There is a considerable variation between the whole retinal thickness as well as their retinal layers. Comparing with H. hippocampus, S. pilchardus showed non-significant increase of whole retinal in S. solea and G. niger comparing with the other examined fishes. The pigmented epithelium showed characteristic dig- itiform processes between photoreceptor cells. Following as- sessments of the ONL/INL ration, S. pilchardus and G. niger showed the least average ratio manifesting diurnal mean- while the average increased in H. hippocampus, M. barbatus and

S. solea and S. pilchardus, less dens in G. niger and M. barbatus as well as finely distributed in H. hippocampus and most of them aligned at the peripheral margin of photoreceptors. There is a marked-related changes in the retinae of the studied teleost species. The ganglion and nerve fibers showed regular

S. solea showed the least thickness of inner plexiform and inner nuclear layer. The mentioned species as well as M. barbatus showed photoreceptor layer composed mainly of single, double and triple rods. The average ratio of ONL/INL increased in H. hippocampus, M. barbatus and S. solea suggested nocturnal habits which reflected the structural pattern of photoreceptors. At the same time their visual acuity calcu- lated by GL/INL revealed apparently decreased as a result of their dim vision.

Unlike S. solea and M. barbatus which are teleost fishes fa- voring the living at more deeping levels of sea water, H. hip- pocampus is detected in either coastal lagoons with strong oceanic influences [31], or found on soft bottoms amongst rocks and algae [32]. Besides, many authors reported that Hippocampus species feed actively at night (nocturnal) [33].

Furthermore, S. pilchard exhibited the presence of single and double cone photoreceptors comparing with mixing structure of both rods and cones in G. niger. According to Munz and McFarland [34] S. pilchardus and G. niger showed the least average of ONL/INL as well as apparently higher visual acuity in S. pilchardus.

The retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and photoreceptors of fishes were found to exhibit retinomotor movements in response to diurnal changes in lighting conditions. In dark- ness, the pigment granules of the RPE migrate to the scleral base and cone photoreceptors elongate. In the light these movements are reversed; pigment granules disperse into the long apical projections of the RPE cell and cones contract [35].

Investigating 15 species of cardinal fish (Apogonidae), including both nocturnal and diurnal forms, revealed that the nocturnal forms possessed larger eye and retina compared with the other diurnal forms. The diurnal fishes have cones which form a mosaic structure of four double with central single one. The curvature of the retina reflects flattening of the images and neural mechanisms can correct for image distor- tions without loss of information [45].

Furthermore our findings revealed that the studied fishes showed marked variations of SDS-PAGE protein analysis in their lenses and retinae. This diversity reflects structural variations in the arrangement of lens fibers which categorized the studied teleost fishes in three categories according to their lens fibers distribution. Also, the fishes possessed structural variations of retinal structures and supported these findings. In addition, the observed increased intensities of acid phos- phatase isoenzymes in S. solea, S. pilchardus and H. hippocam- pus is correlated with increased intensities of melanosomes in

The apparent increase thickened RPE of S. solea as well as presence of their densely grouping melanosomes widespread in between lysosomes. Abundance distribution of melano- somes facilitated digestion the apical tips of outer segment photoreceptors. Increased retinal pigmented epithelium was also reported in some deep fishes [36] and Moray eels [21]. Hyperpigmentation was also served to absorb stray light, minimizing light scattering and scavenging free radicals and toxins [37]. Melanosomes are also known to be lysosome- related organelles [38]. In fish and amphibians, the melano- somes of the PE exhibited a redistribution from the cell body into the apical processes upon the onset of light, which is reversed in the dark. Melanosomes in the PE of mammals are generally thought not to move with the light cycle [39]. Me- lanosomes was found to contain high incorporation of acid phosphatase [40].

eye tissues were reported by Kigasawa et al. [46]. Couet and Blest [47] reported acid phosphatase levels in retinae of crabs allowed to experience lights-off at the normal time and in those of crabs held in continuous light over the same period follow identical courses. Melanosomes were found to show a positive in acid phosphatase reaction, indicating that mela- nosomes are commonly incorporated into the lysosomal system of the RPE. The observation of acid phosphatase ac- tivity within melanosomes indicates that they may continue to be synthesized at a low rate in retina of adult eyes [48]. The detecting lysosomes within PE which may contain an impressive array of nearly 40 hydrolytic enzymes that have been identified by a variety of biochemical and histochemical techniques [49].

