Abstract E-government implementations in developing countries still face difficulties, leading to a large failure ratio. This is too high a cost for developing countries. Analysis of the reasons behind success and failure of e-government projects is still an interesting domain of investigation. Several approaches were advanced and success and failure factors have been stipulated, but factors perti- nent to Public Administration have yet to be investigated and analyzed. This work builds on the results of earlier research, analyzing the factors behind the change in performance of the different sites of a specific project, reasons of their original success, and the relapse of one site. It reviews in detail the factors advanced by previous works and integrates for the first time the results obtained by 3 different research methodologies. It clarifies the causality between different factors presumed to individually affect the e-government implementations, thus enabling the disambiguation between the main and secondary less effective causes of failure. The success and failure factors significance and relative importance are identified, revealing the recommended track of action for the set-back remedy.

A multichannel environment for public service delivery is increasingly being viewed as a logical paradigm [9]. A citizen may first use the website for general information needed, may use the phone for clarification, and finally mail in the form or take it directly to the government office. Therefore, e-government may be one step, among many steps, in public service delivery.

Egyptian e-government program started as early as 2001 and implemented several pilot projects. Some of these pilots succeeded and were rolled out all over the country, while others were less successful, and were either discontinued or re-modeled and re-implemented. Some roll-out projects succeeded and others were less successful than their pilots. For the same type of project, some implementation sites were more successful than others, some started successfully and then relapsed while similar ones continued successfully. Identifying the reasons for success and failure of these projects is of utmost importance for future implementations.

The author of this work was closely engaged in the design and implementation of the Egyptian e-government project from its early beginnings in 2001; as the e-government services project manager, then the director of the Government Services Modernization Program as of 2006. The author managed tens of projects, of which some won regional and international awards while others faced problems. He recently returned to the academia with a vision to join his field-acquired experience with the scientific research techniques, to definitely identify the critical failure factors and help the community avoid them.

Several research works tried to identify reasons of success and failure for e-government projects. Different views have been advanced and different factors have been identified as success or failure factors [13]. Luckily, one of the Egyptian e-government projects was reviewed at different phases of its existence, using different research approaches. This represents a wealth of information that can be exploited beyond the limits of each individual research.

Originally, a research team reviewed the system implemen- tation and operation at one of the governorates of Egypt (Matrouh), just a few months after its implementation [17]. The team confirmed the success of the system as it reduced the process number of steps and the step duration. The project was accordingly declared successful.

A few years later, the Matrouh site was revisited together with a new implementation at a different governorate (site named Al-Tor) [18]. It was then realized that the project had relapsed in Matrouh, while it was performing well at Al-Tor. The different success and failure factors for each site were thus identified, which mostly indicted the human resources for the collapse of the Matrouh site.

This paper is an effort trying to identify in a more definitive way the reasons of e-government projects failure, and what are the most important pitfalls to avoid, in order to ensure success. In the following, the author will review and scrutinize the findings of the papers mentioned above. Then, he will uncover the intricate relationship between the different factors adopted by different methodologies, their interdependence, and their relative importance. By doing so, he will finally identify the main factors that lead to success or failure of the project and

The main objective of the project is to assist the local author- ities managing investment projects within the governorate, through an information system that covers all the service re- lated procedure, bypassing the cumbersome paper-based activ- ities. The information system integrates MIS, GIS, and workflow functionalities and connects the relevant depart- ments through a Local Area Network. The GIS maintains spa- tial information of the available and used lands, and ongoing projects, while the workflow and database maintain all related administrative information. Administrative and spatial data are consolidated in one system to be jointly analyzed and sup- port the decision making within the governorate.

The first implementation of the project was in Matrouh in 2006. The system was then successful and remained functional for several months, which led to planning for its roll-out in sev- eral other sites [17]. By the end of 2007, the information system in Matrouh faced some problems that led to its abolition by 2008, as reported in [18]. The system continued functioning in the other two sites of South Sinai (Al-Tor) and Port Said, while Matrouh site went out of operation until revived with its new management late 2010 [19].

Port Said is rather an urban governorate, limited in area and population, with the port-city of Port Said at its center. The city of Port Said is a Free Zone Port, at the entrance of the Suez Canal on the Mediterranean. Its economic activities are basically trade, commerce, maritime service and industries as well as national tourism. The city had several institutes that were part of the Suez Canal University, out of which emerged the University of Port Said.

According to [26], three types of failure have been identified in literature: System failure, Project failure, and User Failure. The Matrouh case actually achieved a system and project suc- cesses before its relapse and can be considered successful dur- ing the project span and until several months after its initial implementation. This led us, in this work, to engage into a re- view of the analysis of the project advanced by [18].

In the following section (Section 4), analysis of the find- ings of each paper and the used methodology will be pre- sented and compared with each other. In Section 4.1, we will analyze and review the methodology and findings pre- sented in [18]. In Section 4.2, we will review the findings of [19] and relate them to the success and failure factors ana- lyzed in Section 4.1; hence, we will identify the factors that we accuse of being the critical failure factors if the project. In Section 4.3, we will review the findings of [27] and uncover the relation between administrative discretion and its affect- ing factors from one side and the failure factors identified in both Sections 4.1 and 4.2.

Three years later, a comparison was conducted between the Matrouh site and a recent implementation at the site of Al-Tor [18]. The Matrouh project had then relapsed, while Al-Tor was performing well. It is needless to mention that the two project were thus in different phases of their lifetime: Al-Tor was still under close supervision of the implementing body (Ministry of State for Administrative Development MSAD) while Matrouh was self-running for over 2 years.

and interests which affects the steadiness of the operation of existing initiatives. It is worth noting that Al-Tor implementa- tion was successful as long as no change in management oc- curred, particularly the immediate management (that is the IT or the service department manger) which was the project champion. The case in Matrouh was different since the cham- pion was the Governor, and with the change of governors, the direct management and staff lost interest (willingly or unwill- ingly), and when came a new department manager, any trace of the system was already hidden.

This work is built around previously conducted surveys and analysis. It actually revises the conclusions made in the previ- ous works and integrates the results from the different surveys. A dedicated survey would be in order for the verification of these findings.

