Cancer is a group of diseases in which cells in the body grow, change, and multiply out of control [1]. Usually, cancer is named after the body part in which it originated; thus, breast cancer refers to the erratic growth of cells that originate in the breast tissue. A group of rapidly dividing cells may form a lump or mass of extra tissue. These masses are called cancer [2].

In decomposition approaches, the data (and correspond- ingly the parameters) are split into a number of fixed-size sets, each called a working set. Optimization occurs on each work- ing set while holding the other parameters fixed. This effec- tively performs coordinate descent on subsets of the parameters. The popular software implementation SVMLight

Gradient descent can be applied to the primal SVM optimiza- tion problem resulting in an iterative algorithm. The main advantage of iterative methods is that they result in algorithms with few steps and so are simple to implement. The disadvan- tage is that in general they exhibit linear convergence and so are slower than standard QP solvers.

cles can be expressed by wave function instead of denoting method of the velocity and position for the particles. At the same time, based on the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, the velocity and position of particles cannot be accurately measured simultaneously. The probability of occurrence for the particle in a case of position and time can be denoted by probability den- sity function of the corresponding wave function w.

where mbest is the middle position of the particle swarm (pbest); PPid is the random point between Pid and Pgd, h is the only parameter of the QPSO algorithm. Commonly let h  1.0  0.5   MAXITER  T /MAXITER  0.5, where

of each classifier created with the classifier is evaluated using the sensitivity and specificity of the SVM classifier in distin- guishing cancer patients from non-cancer controls. SVM clas- sifiers are built for various combinations of features until the classification accuracy of the SVM classifier reaches its maxi- mum value. Estimates of classification accuracy are calculated by using the cross validation method where a validation data- set is used to evaluate the generalization error.

Particle swarm optimization: A MATLAB code was writ- ten to train SVM by PSO. The KKT conditions needed to be satisfied within an error threshold of 0.005 in order to find an optimal solution quickly. The upper bound C was kept at 100.0.

