the increasing size and complexity of control systems, fault diagnosis in power systems and measures to be taken against possible faults are particularly important [5]. Various faults can occur in an HVDC system, such as AC faults, internal converter faults, and DC faults. Faults can often occur due to insulation failures caused by short circuits, switching operations, and lightning strikes [6,7]. Atmospheric lightning affects the system by generating overvoltages due to direct lightning strikes to the system or back flashover voltages after lightning strikes outside the system. If an HVDC system consists of AC and DC parts, system side, precautions must be taken against overvoltages on both sides [8,9].

The main contribution of this study is to develop the most appro- priate and analytical approach to determine the critical points where surge arresters can be placed against lightning impulse currents due to atmospheric effects in a VSC based HVDC system. In this context, instead of placing surge arresters at all connection points of the system, the most critical points of a real VSC-HVDC system are determined according to the simulation results, and the number of surge arresters at these points is optimized. The results of the simulation studies on the prototype model and the results used to determine the number and location of surge arresters are given. The determination of the characteristics of the protection devices to be preferred is explained step by step. Then, an optimal protection scheme is developed by evaluating the results of dozens of scenarios applied in this study. In this way, a significant economic advantage is obtained in terms of expenditures on protective devices. Finally, after the simulation and protection device optimization studies, the lightning impulse test results on the VSC-HVDC prototype are presented to verify the insulation.

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the prototype VSC based HVDC system, followed by details of the modeling studies. The arrester selection procedure is described in Section 3, whereas simulation results are presented in Section 4. Lightning impulse test results are presented in Section 5, followed by discussion and conclu- sions in Section 6 and 7, respectively.

common input parameter. Each path is multiplied by a factor and expressed as an exponential function. The waveform obtained from the difference of these exponential values is fed to the current source and injected into the system as a current impulse [39].

Ground flash density (Ng) is the number of lightning strikes per square kilometer per year and is often considered the primary descriptor of lightning occurrence in lightning protection studies. Detailed infor- mation on this subject can be found in [46]. If the Ng value of the facility to be protected is known, information can be obtained about the peak lightning currents to which surge arresters can be exposed. Ng also contains probability information for lightning peak currents of different magnitudes. According to [46], the ground flash density at the location where VSC-HVDC is installed is 6. Therefore, the probability of a 10 kA amplitude lightning strike is 0.17 per year, or once every 5.8 years.

divided into three groups: heavy, medium, and light [44]. Light arresters have the lowest energy capacity among these three distribution classes. Medium arresters are also known as 5 kA arresters, and heavy distri- bution class arresters are known as 10 kA surge arresters.

Since the voltage level of the prototype system is 5.5 kV, the voltage level of the real system is 36 kV, and the amplitude of the selected lightning impulse current is at least 10 kA, heavy distribution class ar- resters were preferred in this study. Detailed information on the classi- fication of surge arresters especially for HVDC systems, can be found in [47].

arrester with a better protection rate [48]. Surge arresters with a better protection rate consist of larger diameter metal-oxide resistors and therefore have a higher energy transfer potential. Therefore, Upl/Uc, protection ratio, rated discharge current, and energy transfer capacity should also be taken into consideration when selecting a surge arrester or comparing products of different brands.

It is recommended to use a protection factor (Ks) between the LIWV of the devices used in the system and the maximum value of the light- ning surge. This protection factor takes into account the aging of the insulation of the devices and the statistical uncertainties in the definition of the LIWV. It is recommended to set Ks to 1.15 for outdoor insulation [49].

selection method was explained in Section 3.3, is 1.1 C. In this case, despite having a surge arrester at the point where the lightning strikes, the system was clearly unprotected in the event of a lightning strike with an amplitude of 30 kA. If this situation had happened in reality, the surge arrester would not have been able to fulfill its duty and would have become unusable again. Therefore, it was aimed at reducing the thermal charge value generated by the lightning strike below 1.1 Coulomb.

LIPLm is the lightning impulse protective level determined by insu- lation co-ordination, taking into account the arresters connected be- tween the valves high voltage terminal and earth. k8 is the test safety factor and it is recommended to take 1.1, and kt is the atmospheric correction factor.

