Vincristine is used to treat different type of cancers. But unwanted side effects limit their applications in medicine. To overcome these side effects by targeted drug delivery approach, we synthesized vincristine loaded folic acid-chitosan conjugated nanoparticles by ionic gelation method. The nanoparticles were characterized using Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS), Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Transmission Electron Microscopy. DLS confirmed small sized nanoparticles (<200 nm) while FTIR confirmed different functional groups associated with synthesized nanoparticles. SEM showed spherical shaped nanoparticles with smooth surface, whereas, TEM con- firmed loading of vincristine in folic acid-chitosan conjugated nanoparticles. Anticancer activity of vin- cristine loaded folic acid-chitosan conjugated nanoparticles was checked by MTT assay on NCI-H460 cells followed by reactive oxygen species level, mitochondrial transmembrane potential and apoptotic morphological changes, which confirmed the cytotoxicity of nanoparticles. Erythrocyte aggregation assay confirmed non-toxicity of nanoparticles. Hence, these nanoparticles can be used to treat NCI-H460 cells.

ium bromide (EtBr) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Phosphate buffered saline (Dulbecco A), Acetate buffer (pH 5.6) and RPMI- 1640 medium were purchased from HiMedia Laboratories, India. All the chemicals were of analytical grade. Non-small cell lung can- cer cell line (NCI-H460) was purchased from National Centre for Cell Science (NCCS), Pune, India.

An amount of 45 mg of chitosan was dissolved in 15 ml of acetate buffer (pH 5.6) in a flask with magnetic stirring for a few minutes. Took 200 mg of N-hydroxysuccinimide-ester of folic acid and dissolved in 15 ml of DMSO. Added solution of N-hydroxysuccinimide-ester of folic acid in chitosan solution drop stir for 30 minutes on a magnetic stirrer at room temperature. The synthesized vincristine loaded folic acid-chitosan conjugated nanoparticles were labeled as 1:25, 2:25, 3:25 and 4:25 formula- tions, respectively. Nanoparticles suspension of blank and vin- cristine loaded folic acid-chitosan conjugated nanoparticles was centrifuged at 16,000 rpm for 30 minutes to separate nanoparticles from solution for further characterization.

Cell culture. The research work on non-small cell lung can- cer cell line (NCI-H460) was carried out at Department of Animal Biotechnology, Lala Lajpat Rai University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Hisar. NCI-H460 cells were purchased from National Cen- tre for Cell Science (NCCS), Pune, India. Cells were cultured as a monolayer on RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 2 mM L-Glutamine, 4.5 g glucose per litre and incubator. Cells were treated with blank (50 ml, 10 mg/ml in PBS) and vincristine loaded folic acid-chitosan conjugated nanoparticles (50 ml, 5 mg/ml in PBS). Cells with RPMI-1640 medium and PBS (pH 7.4 + cells + RPMI-1640 medium) were used as negative control

Erythrocyte aggregation assay. Aggregation assay was per- formed to check the toxic effect of nanoparticles on erythrocytes [17]. Since encapsulation efficiency (%) and loading capacity (%) of 4:25 formulation was maximum, hence selected for assay. Human blood was collected in a sterile tube containing ethylenedi- aminetetraacetic acid (EDTA). About 500 ml blood was centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 30 minutes to separate erythrocytes. Cells were washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4) twice and stored in the same buffer. To check the toxic effect of vincristine

formation of dark pale yellow colored dicyclohexylurea, confirm- ing the synthesis of N-hydroxysuccinimide-ester of folic acid. Ear- lier, Salar and Kumar [14] observed yellow colored dicyclohexylurea while synthesizing vincristine loaded folic acid- chitosan conjugated nanoparticles at pH 2.5. Similarly, Ji et al.

[18] also observed N-hydroxysuccinimide ester of folic acid during preparation of methotrexate loaded folic acid conjugated O-carboxymethyl chitosan nanoparticles. Further, folic acid- chitosan conjugate, dissolved in acetate buffer (pH 5.6) reacted with N-hydroxysuccinimide-ester of folic acid to form folic acid- chitosan conjugate. Similarly, Wang et al. [19] synthesized folic acid-chitosan conjugate, while loading mitoxantrone into folic acid-chitosan conjugated nanoparticles. Naghibi Beidokhti et al.

The folic acid-chitosan conjugated nanoparticles were formed due to the ionic interaction between positively charged amino group (-NH+) of the folic acid-chitosan conjugate and negatively charged sodium tripolyphosphate [18]. Folic acid-chitosan dis- solved in acetic acid on reaction with sodium tripolyphosphate and different concentrations of vincristine, resulted in the forma- tion of vincristine loaded folic acid-chitosan conjugated nanoparti- cles in different formulations. In earlier reports, Methotrexate loaded chitosan nanoparticles have been prepared by the ionic gelation method and tested against LNCaP prostate cancer cell line in vitro [21].

niques used for preparation of nanoparticles for analysis. The nanoparticles in 4:25 formulation looked more rough in appear- ance, which might be due to maximum loading of vincristine in these. In contrast, Panwar et al. [28] observed smooth and spheri- cal shaped ferulic acid-loaded chitosan nanoparticles and checked anticancer activity against ME-180 human cervical cancer cell lines. They observed significant inhibition in ME-180 cells and con-

cluded that these nanoparticles can be used to treat cervical can- cer. Anitha et al. [29] also observed spherical morphology of curcumin-loaded N,O-carboxymethyl chitosan nanoparticles and checked anticancer activity against normal (L929) and breast can- cer cell line (MCF-7). The authors reported non-toxicity of nanoparticles against L929 cells, whereas enhanced toxicity was found against MCF-7 cells. In another report, Mehrotra et al. [30]

tion showed 5.51% release of vincristine within 2 h and subse- quent release was 5.47, 5.57, 11.11% after 4, 6, 8 h, respectively from folic acid-chitosan conjugated nanoparticles. It can be con- cluded that, except 1:25, all formulations showed slow and sus- tained release of vincristine. Similarly, Wang et al. [19] observed slow release of mitoxantrone loaded in folic acid-chitosan conju- gated nanoparticles in artificial gastric liquid (pH 1.2) and intesti- nal fluid (pH 6.8).

dye used to stain DNA of cells, the fluorescence was observed due to uptake of nanoparticles by cells and their action on DNA. Similarly, Karthikeyan et al. [17] also observed brighter blue fluo- rescence in NCI-H460 non-small cell lung cancer cells treated with resveratrol loaded gelatin nanoparticles than free resveratrol using Hoechst 33258 dye during 30 minutes incubation time.

[31] determined the cytotoxicity of free 5-fluorouracil and 5- fluorouracil loaded hyaluronic acid coated chitosan nanoparticles of different concentrations against A549 cells and HepG2 cells. The results showed that the naked hyaluronic acid-coated chitosan nanoparticles at a concentration (ranging from 0.1 to 1.0 mg/mL) did not inhibit the proliferation of A549 and HepG2 cells, and viability ratios were over 85%. Compared with 5- fluorouracil and 5-fluorouracil-loaded uncoated chitosan nanopar- ticles, 5-fluorouracil-loaded hyaluronic acid-coated chitosan nanoparticles showed higher cytotoxicity in A549 and HepG2 cells, which was 50% maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) at

A549 cells in comparison with 130.4% in 24 h and 136.7% after 48 h in HeLa cells. In the same way, doxorubicin-loaded triphenyl phosphine-functionalized chitosan nanoparticles also triggered ROS levels at 168.4% in 24 h and 180.4% after 48 h in A549 cells, and 150.1% in 24 h and 166.5% after 48 h in HeLa cells.

acid chitosan conjugated nanoparticles were more effective than blank nanoparticles. Finally, vincristine loaded folic acid-chitosan conjugated nanoparticles showed 75% of apoptotic cells, whereas for blank 31% cells were observed with apoptosis. Karthikeyan et al. [17] observed apoptotic features with condensed or frag-

mented chromatin, indicative of apoptosis in resveratrol and resveratrol-loaded gelatin nanoparticles treated NCI-H460 cells. Resveratrol-loaded gelatin nanoparticles treated NCI-H460 cells showed 98% apoptosis, whereas free resveratrol treatment showed only 42% apoptotic cells. Similarly, Panwar et al. [28] determined apoptotic morphological changes of ferulic acid-loaded chitosan nanoparticles against human cervical cancer cell line (ME-180) with acridine orange (AO) and ethidiumbromide (EtBr) staining. Cells treated with ferulic acid chitosan-tripolyphosphate penta- sodium nanoparticles (40 mM) for 24 h displayed morphological

