Following a wide literature exploration, it was observed that, different coupling of sulfonamide and amide compounds shows different activities like carbonic anhydrase inhibitors [22], Anti- mycobacterial [23], some sulfonamides act as sphingosine-1- phosphate (S1P1) receptor [24]. 11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydro- genase type 1 (11b-HSD1) inhibitors for the treatment of metabolic disorders [25], sulfonamide-1,2,4-triazoles, 1,3,4-thiadiazoles and 1,3,4-oxadiazoles, as potential antibacterial and antifungal agents [26]. The structurally related compounds having sulfonamide and amide linkage in combinations derivatives show selectively SIRT- 2 inhibiting activity [27].

From above references it is clear that sulfonamide and amide coupled with different group compounds show considerable varied activities. All above references indicate that the probability of potent anticancer activity of the derivatives containing benzene sulfonamide and phenyl amide coupled compound increases con- siderably. So we have synthesized compounds having benzene sul- fonamide and phenyl amide compounds which coupled at meta positions of benzene to each other. We have also developed simpli- fied reaction conditions for all the steps so we can avoid costly reagents, tedious purifications, and all the synthesized compounds also have good purity. We here report the synthesis of new substi- tuted sulfonamide derivatives (Scheme 1) with the aim of investi- gating their anticancer activity. The synthetic methods adopted for the preparation of the title compounds (4a-4u) [28] are depicted in the scheme presented below.

work up by treating the reaction mass with cold 2N aq. HCl and stirred reaction mass for 30 min., the solid precipitates out in all the intermediates which is filtered and washed it with cold diethyl ether and cold pentane, all the intermediates obtained are white solids. Most of examples the yield of solid is 70% to 80% further we have extracted the remaining aqueous layer with DCM and evaporated it to obtained the remaining solids ultimately yield increases up to 80% to 90% in all the intermediates.

