The new analogs of benzimidazole fused heterocyclic compounds such as triazinane and oxadiazinanes were synthesised by classical amino methylation with different aryl-N,N0 unsymmetrical thioureas. The antibacterial activity of triazinane and oxadiazinane compounds have been assessed with zone of inhibi- tion by well diffusion method using a panel of selected gram positive and gram negative bacterial strains and which have showed good activity. The synthesised molecules were subjected to molecular docking studies with two proteins, namely topoisomerase II (PDB ID: 1JIJ) and DNA gyrase subunit b (PDB ID: 1KZN). The molecular docking studies are supporting the antibacterial activity exhibiting high inhibition constant and binding energy.

The organic compounds specifically with N-heterocyclic ring systems exhibit a wide range of biological activities through effec- tive binding to enzyme receptor site. As per the present global sce- nario, thousands of new heterocyclic compounds either isolated from natural sources or synthesized in the laboratories are added to the literature every year. Many of these compounds have drawn the attention of researchers based on their biological, therapeutic and industrial potential.

trations of H2S and it is inexpensive to use. The products of the scavenging reactions are believed to be biodegradable and water soluble [14]. Little work has been published in the area of 1,3,5- triazinane-4-thiones and 1,3,5-triazinane-2-ones showing antimi- crobial activity [15]. These are also promising intermediates in the synthesis of tyrosine derivatives, which are well-known com- pounds used as Biocidal [16] and enantio-differentiating coupling reagents [17]. Heterocyclic structural unit has a significant place among pharmaceutically important synthetic and natural materi- als [18], showing powerful antiproliferative action [19]. For these reasons, 1,3,5-triazinane derivatives incorporating thiourea unit may be important in many fields [20].

Melting points of the synthesized compounds were determined in open capillary tubes and were uncorrected. Reaction Progress was observed by TLC plates, Bruker 300 MHz instrument was used to record 1H NMR spectra in DMSO/CDCl3 using TMS as internal standard. Chemical shifts (d) are expressed in ppm. Perkin Elmer BX series FT-IR was to record IR spectra, Elemental analysis were performed on a PerkinElmer 240 CHN analyzer (Scheme 1).

