MoR-Trust is a purely decentralized peer-to-peer trust management system, targeted towards networks and applications supporting transactions or collaborations of a quantitative nature. MoR-Trust is based on the notion of expressing trust in terms of monetary units, thus directly coupling the trust estimates circulated in the network with the values of the transactions taking place and their outcomes. We have validated our design decisions and algorithms through simulation. The results indicate that our system converges towards a small error in the trust estimates distributed throughout the network.

Centralized trust or reputation management systems [21,14,13], such as the one behind the popular eBay site, are successful to a large extent because people trust the reputation information presented by them. In a completely decentralized envi- ronment, such as a peer-to-peer network, however, there is no single, recognizable organization or entity to maintain and distribute trust. As a result, trust infor- mation must be itself securely distributed throughout the network, and hosted on many different nodes. Distributed trust management systems offer mechanisms for achieving this, by extending the architecture and functionality of the transacting nodes.

MoR-Trust (stands for monetary-ratcheted trust) is is based on purely decen- tralized peer-to-peer architectures and algorithms, and is targeted towards systems focusing on collaborative tasks or transactions, and is based on the notion of mod- elling and expressing trust in terms of a quantitative monetary units, thus coupling trust estimates with transaction values. This is the main characteristic of MoR- Trust as compared to other systems (see Section 2). This approach allows the design of algorithms for the estimation, usage and propagation of trust estimates throughout the network, reflecting the way in which trust and reputation are uti- lized in real life communities. Central to our approach is the notion of ratcheting trust estimates, i.e. allowing the build-up of trust as a result or repeated successful transactions, potentially beyond the actual transaction value.

The EigenTrust system [18] performs a distributed computation of a single network-wide reputation value for each peer, based the outcomes of past inter- actions. Local trust values that result from interactions with other peers are ag- gregated in such a way that the global trust values correspond to an eigenvector of a matrix containing local (normalized) trust values. Security is provided by the local trust values not being kept by the interested peers, but by other peers that are selected in the network based on the properties of a structured underlying routing mechanism. An extension of this approach to provide protection against collusion is presented in [30].

In [8], a distributed reputation system is designed based on a Bayesian approach. Nodes maintain first-hand reputation information which they regularly publish to other peers. More global reputation values are thus built by the peers receiving the local reputation scores. This work describes the mathematical model, however does not elaborate particularly on the data management approach or the security considerations.

of P-grid and the associations it creates between groups of peers. Each transaction is monitored and the result registered. At the data modelling level, the trust reported by a monitoring peer is weighted by the trust placed on the monitoring peer itself. Trust and mistrust are represented in a rather limiting, binary fashion.

One of the main characteristics of the TrustMe system [22] is that it provides anonymity. It uses a random assignment of Trust-holding Agent Peers and uses public key mechanisms to prevent any loss of anonymity. The assignment is carried out by a bootstrap server (note: an element of centralization). This work focuses on the data management aspect of the problem, and does not elaborate much on the trust model. Essentially any peer interacting with another one can file a report with its Trust-holding agent regarding the interaction. The trust value for any peer is a result of the cumulative value of all these reports.

The transaction outcome itself, for a transaction with monetary value V , can be a number between 0 and V , denoting the degree to which the transaction was successful in the view of the transacting nodes. Typically 0 and V will be the val- ues most often encountered, corresponding to either failed or completely successful transactions; however intermediate values are also possible, in cases of partially suc- cessful transactions (e.g. goods delivered but with delay, specifications not entirely met etc. etc.)

In our design we adopted the hybrid approach. The network is scanned based on the local trust stores in a way that ensures that the paths created are indepen- dent and non-intersecting. We experimented with different approaches in the path creation, including biased random walks in which the direction selected is biased by the trust estimate placed for each intermediate node.

Assuming the nodes in a path P of length l are labelled n1, n2, ..., nl (where n1 is the initiating node and nl is the target node), an overall path trust estimate TP (n1, nl) for the target node is produced through the path, based on the following recursive definition, where i < j and Tl(ni, nj) is the trust estimate locally maintained in the trust store of node ni for node nj:

Damiani, E., S. De Capitani di Vimercati, S. Paraboschi, P. Samarati and F. Violante, A reputation- based approach for choosing reliable resources in peer-to-peer networks, in: Proceedings of the In 9th ACM Conf. on Computer and Communications Security, Washington DC, 2002.

