This new model opens important research perspectives that re- cently started receiving a strong interest (e.g., Lai et al. (2016), Letchford et al. (2014), Huang et al. (2017), Ben Ticha et al. (2017)). Among others, it opens the question of the tractability of computing the multigraph. Clearly, the arc multiset and their weights cannot be ob- tained by solving simple shortest path problems. The aim of the Steiner Multi-objective Shortest Path Problem is to deliver this information. It

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present an overview of the related literature. Section 3 formally introduces the Steiner BSPP and useful notation. It also reports some basic properties that will be helpful for the remainder of the paper. In Section 4, we describe our solution method. In Section 5, we propose some enhance- ments when the problem is addressed in the context of the VRPTW. Finally, numerical results are reported in Section 6.

Regarding the one-to-all BSPP, two main label selection heuris- tics are employed in the literature. In a node-selection strategy e.g., (Brumbaugh-Smith and Shier, 1989), all labels representing paths end- ing at a same node are selected and extended to all successors of this

As already explained, this work is motivated by the computation of multigraph data in the context of vehicle routing problems. When two attributes (e.g., time and distance) are present, it generally implies addi- tional constraints on routes. For example, in the VRPTW, time windows limit customer visit times. These constraints can be exploited in the com- putation, as we now show for the VRPTW.

Due to the first enhancement, label keys increase more quickly dur- ing the labeling procedure. The second enhancement tightens the stop- ping condition. Combined with the first enhancement, it limits the num- ber of labels generated during the search. The third enhancement is per- formed in preprocessing and permits reducing the size of the graph.

Four road networks (DC, DE, RI and AK) were extracted by Schultes (2005) from US Census3 and correspond to Washington D.C., Delaware, Rhode Island and Alaska, in the United States, respec- tively. In these networks, each road segment is given with a distance and a travel time. Note that, the road networks in the original data are undirected and we converted them into directed networks by duplicating all arcs.

Centered: all terminals but one are randomly selected in the center of the network (a fourth of the area covered by the network, centered). The remaining terminal is randomly selected near the south-west corner of the network. It represents the standard situation of urban deliveries from a distant depot.

