This paper introduces a new algorithm dedicated to the rigorous reachability analysis of nonlinear dynamical systems. The algorithm is initially presented in the context of discrete time dynamical systems, and then extended to continuous time dynamical systems driven by ODEs. In continuous time, this algorithm is called the Reach and Evolve algorithm. The Reach and Evolve algorithm is based on interval analysis and a rigorous discretization of space and time. Promising numerical experiments are presented.

In this paper, we present a high-level algorithm for rigorously computing an enclosure of the reachable set (1) for dynamical systems (2,3) defined by arbitrary nonlinear continuous functions. In continuous time, we call our algorithm the Reach- and-Evolve algorithm (R&E ) since it involves computing reachability steps and evolution steps for the system. The algorithms are based on interval analysis which is introduced in Section 2. Section 3 presents the R&E algorithm, and some of its properties. Promising experiments are finally presented in Section 4.

Remark 2.4 When one represents numbers using a finite precision [5], the previous operations cannot be computed in general. The outer rounding is then used so as to keep valid the interpretations. For example, [1, 2]/[3, 7] would result of [0.142, 0.667] if rounded with a three decimal accuracy. Such an outer rounding is implemented in most interval libraries, e.g. [9,20,21].

For completeness, a simple interval integrator is presented in Appendix A. It is based on a first order Taylor expansion with rigorous bound of the remainder. Higher order expansions are much more efficient, but the method presented in Ap- pendix A is simple to present and gives rise to interesting results.

We also consider a finite set of boxes B whose union 4  B will play the role of the universe. These boxes represent the discretization of space, and hence need to be taken sufficiently small. On the other hand, the smaller the more expensive will be the computation on this discretization. The reachability algorithm is given in Algorithm 1.

holds during the whole execution of the algorithm. Entering the first time in the while-loop, P is empty and hence (15) trivially holds. Now suppose that (15) holds when entering the while-loop. Then leaving the while-loop, P has been added the box [x]. But in the same time, R has been added Cover(f , [x], B), and therefore

We now consider the R&E algorithm for systems in discrete time. The main problem with the basic reachability algorithm is that at each step, we perform an over- approximation of the enclosure set on a grid. This operation introduces zero-order errors, and hence causes a greater loss of accuracy than the higher-order enclosure computation. To reduce the errors, we can modify the algorithm so that we only perform an over-approximation on a grid every M steps. We call the new algorithm the discrete-time reach-evolve algorithm.

However, the algorithm will essentially evolve many times over the same part of state space, which is computationally more expensive. We expect the complexity of the algorithm to be roughly proportional to M . However, decreasing the size of the state-space grid can be even more expensive, typically exponential in the dimension d.

In all cases, the universe is a box. This box is covered by a set of boxes B, which is used in the algorithm. The initial conditions are disks. In order to be used in the algorithm, these disks are covered using boxes of B, resulting in a list of box I whose union contains the initial condition. The enclosure of the bounded reachable set computed by the reachability algorithm is a subset R of B. However, the number of boxes in R is too big to obtain nice graphical representations. Therefore a post- processing that reduces the number of boxes is performed .

HSolver [18,19] is dedicated to the safety analysis for nonlinear hybrid systems. This include ODE driven dynamical systems. In this case, HSolver also tackles bounded reachable sets. It is based on interval analysis and constraint propagation. Although HSolver tackles a larger class of problem than the R&E algorithm presented in this paper, the following example shows that it lacks efficiency for the reachability analysis of ODE driven dynamical systems.

Dealing with an infinite time horizon within a purely numerical algorithm is difficult, but necessary for enclosing rigorously reachable sets of nonlinear dynamical systems. In this paper, we introduced the bounded reachable set, which forces the space variables to be bounded. Once space is bounded, the infinite time horizon can be handled rigorously through the Reach and Evolve algorithm proposed in this paper. The inclusion of the reachable set inside the bounded reachable set in several situations allows tackling a large variety of reachability problems.

Future works include using higher order Taylor expansions. Although we of course expect drastic improvements, this also raises several issues, like tuning the step size, the space discretization size and the order of the Taylor expansion. Fur- thermore, the R&E algorithm will be extended to hybrid systems. A simple version of the algorithm has been implemented in the software package Ariadne [2].

When the crude enclosure process fails, the normal action is to reduce h and try again. However, this step size reduction is not implemented in the presented experiments. The initial step size was chosen small enough to obtain the success of the crude enclosure process everywhere in the universe.

