Situational stress is a short-term acute form of stress that occurs due to temporary situations (Kent et al., 2020). A PST can develop teaching-based situational anxieties or stress which reduce their effec- tiveness in the classroom, leading to burnout due to increased psycho- logical allostatic load (Lamb, 2014; Lamb, Hoston, & Firestone, 2022). One means to reduce situational stress and excessive cognitive demand (CD) during teaching is to promote skills which act as protective factors such as creativity and mental flexibility (MF). A protective factor is a characteristic or behavior which is associate with a reduction in the possibility of a negative psychological or physiological outcome shown to be protective factors against stress and excessive cognitive demand particularly when a person engages in activities within high stress, high demand environments such as a classroom (Bottiani, Duran, Pas, & Bradshaw, 2019). Research illustrates that PSTs identify teaching their peers and their initial opportunities to teach in an actual K-12 classroom as highly stressful and excessively cognitively demanding (Weis et al, 2020). A potential means to address some of the difficulties of microteaching is through the incorporation of virtual reality (VR) based simulated teaching experiences using artificially intelligent avatars. VR addresses some of the difficulties of microteaching by removing audience effects allowing for greater use of mental flexibility and creativity which may protect against and reduce stress responses and cognitive demand. This is thought to occur because the PST works with computerized ava- tars as opposed to their peers in the VR environment (Kapoor & Khan, 2019). In this light, VR can provide consistent, high-quality small-scale experiences for PSTs to explore and try to innovative ideas increasing the availability of protective factors such as MF and creativity. Importantly due to the low stakes environment the PST may experience reduced stress and CD, increasing opportunities for reception of learning.

influence outcomes in VR and the potential of protective factors to in- crease learning reception the authors chose to examine the relationship between VR, stress, creativity, cognitive demand, and mental flexibility. The intent of this study is to identify how VR and microteaching expe- riences differ for PSTs on factors such as creativity, mental flexibility, acute stress, and CD. A secondary purpose is to understand if and how, creativity and MF moderate or mediate stress and CD. The research questions are: Research Question 1: do students using VR illustrate statistically significant differences in moment-to-moment fluctuation in physiological and neurological response when compared to students engaging in microteaching? Research Question 2: how do levels of creativity and mental flexibility relate to levels of acute stress and CD during teaching in VR and microteaching conditions?

Postareff, 2017), (b) trauma mitigation (Bush et al., 2015; Lamb & Eto- pio, 2019), (c) medical education (Pottle, 2019) (d) counseling education (Boeldt, McMahon, McFaul, & Greenleaf, 2019; Lamb, Hoston, & Fire- stone, 2022), and (e) social studies (Patterson & Han, 2019). Many of these studies explore the use of VR as a trainer for skill development and not for the development of cognition, behavior, and affect.

The measures used in this study include real-time neurocognitive measures of CD via hemodynamic response, ANS measures of stress in real time (e.g., HRV, GSR, and ST), and psychological/behavioral mea- sures of creativity and MF measured through the Torrance Test of Cre- ative Thinking (TTCT). Neurocognitive measures are quantifications of hemodynamics i.e., the ratio of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood in neurologically active portions of the brain as task completion occurs. Hemodynamic response is tightly tied to the CDs arising within a task or series of tasks (Cohen, 2018). The use of neurocognitive measures and psychophysiological measures allows the research team to capture physiological responses from the participants in real-time as opposed to retrospectively or through self-reports allowing for a fine grain exami- nation of participant physiological and cognitive characteristics

PSTs taking part in microteaching were asked to teach a 30-min lesson to their peers on a content topic of their choice so long as it was consistent with their content area and aligned as discussed above. The PSTs within the classroom condition also submitted lessons which aligned with the state curriculum and were assess using the STAR rubric. Interrater reliability was established using Fleiss's Kappa.

Analysis for each of the data sources were analyzed using repeated measures ANOVA (rANOVA) and a Tukey-HSD post-hoc test. Analysis was on the mean and attribute maximums for each measurement. rANOVA is specifically indicated for analyses of within group data in which the individual participant's data various over time such as in a baseline 1 (A), stimulus (B), and baseline 2 (A) research design. This analysis, rANOVA, allows researchers to examine within and between subject comparisons collectively. rANOVA also decreases error variance while increasing statistical power for multi-measure data. Power analysis shows a 0.95 probability of identifying a small effect with a sample size of 36. This study's sample size is 48 suggesting this sample size is sufficient to detect small changes and allows for potential attrition of participants. The authors also used a path model analysis to understand how the variables of interest are interconnected through mediation or modera- tion. Using path analysis allows the researchers to understand the system of variables and their effects on each other using a multiple regression approach (Klem, 1995). The path analysis was conducted using Mplus v.8.6.

While real experiences over time in classrooms with teachers and students are needed, VR illustrates great potential for PST development with reduce stress and demand. Based upon the results of this study, incorporation of VR as a regular tool for use in-class and practice out-of- class seems warranted. VR simulations enable realistic environments for those engaged in the development of their teaching (Nelson & Annetta, 2016). The realism of the VR environment for the PSTs helps them to learn from modeled and curated situations that promote greater learning than microteaching. VR also provides a more uniform approach for learning purposes than microteaching, allowing for commonality of experience by the PSTs. It is the tension between uniformity/consistency and development of creativity and individual experiences which computerized simulations such as VR address. Using VR, the PSTs, through practice, will improve their skills and understanding with ava- tars which simulate the populations they will work with as opposed to their peers. Importantly, avatars can be adjusted to reflect populations that the PSTs may not be familiar with, allowing them to experience persons who may have differences from them. As VR scenarios are uni- form across participant, PSTs may have a commonality of experience on which to reflect as a class. This can help to promote group discussion and group problem solving of scenario questions and interactions. VR com- bines vignette base approaches with interactivity and AI based adaptive individual practice allow significant differentiation.

While microteaching does have some of these positive aspects, there are also negative aspects such as promoting higher levels of stress and CD through audience effects and unrealistic peer responses. This may indi- cate that students during a microteaching session are experiencing an affective priming event which has far less controlled outcomes and is tied to reduced learning (Klauer, 1997; Lamb, Akmal, & Petrie, 2015). The reduced CD associated with VR allows PSTs to dedicate more cognitive resources to the acquisition and practice of skills and development of understanding through a cognitive priming event mechanism (Lamb, Hand, & Yoon, 2017). Using a tiered approach, PST educators may slowly add complexity to the VR scenarios increasing (dis)stress tolerance and CD tolerance over time. The increase in stress tolerance may allow the PSTs to understand the added complexity and develop levels of MF and creativity increasing levels of these protective factors (Lamb, Hoston, & Firestone, 2022).

information and make use of the information for novel application (Magnussen & Svendsen, 2018). Overtime, with practice effects, the level of CD reduces novel applications of knowledge and these applications become automatized, converting to heuristic type approaches. Heuristic thinking has been shown to manifest as low levels of hemodynamic response, whereas active engagement in lateral thinking illustrate elevated levels of hemodynamic response.

These results support previous studies which illustrate that simulated and VR experiences may allow novices the opportunity to practice with less anxiety (a stress response) of doing serious harm and allow the more effective integration of new information. Reduced/appropriate levels of CD may facilitate the learning process (Lamb et al., 2021; Yee & Braver, 2018). Levels of CD which are either too high or too low, create frus- tration and boredom, respectively resulting in affective priming. Modu- lation of CD may occur through application of slowly increasing complexity of practices and through thorough preparation of activities and planning prior to engagement in the practice of teaching. Based upon the results of this work a tiered approach would start with microteaching, move to VR, and then into an actual classroom allowing for a gradual release of responsibility/control (Eutsler, 2022). The elevated levels of stress associated with microteaching may indicate that the PSTs are experiencing nervousness and lack of surety around their actions creating hesitancy and continuous internal assessment of their action while trying to understand which actions to take. Creating safe conditions and op- portunities for more practice prior to work in microteaching environ- ments may assist in effective stress reduction and promote reflection and assessment. One potential area of future research with VR for PST development would be in using neuroimaging data to modify activities in the VR environment to generate levels of CD to suit the PST as they develop as a teacher (Lamb et al., 2021).

There are a number of limitations associated with this study. One limiting aspect of this study is the gender balance of the participants taking part in this study. Current statistics for elementary school teachers, according to the National Center for Educational Statistics (2022), show that 80.5% of all elementary school teachers are female. This current study has a female gender representativeness of 75%, thus males are overrepresented by 15%. This limits the potential generalizability of the study. A second area of limitation is that there was not an identification of potential underlying stress and anxiety-based disorders within the sample. Preexisting conditions of this nature may make a person more likely to illustrate behaviors, cognition, and affect related to stress when they are placed into a stressful environment, confounding levels of stress they may experience solely from the environment.

Tracking teacher development beyond the semester was difficult due to time constraints and as a result the research team was unable to gather data showing additional growth because of the experience or mainte- nance of the protective factors associated with creativity and MF. One additional concern is the absence of baseline data from the PSTs entrance into the preparation program. Lacking this data, it is difficult to assess growth and to determine if levels of stress and CD had changed as the PST developed during the program using VR. The tracking of changes in stress levels and CD over the course of a PST program is an additional area of research which may provide greater resolution related to the results seen in the study. One of the fundamental purposes of clinical experiences in PST programs is to give PSTs the opportunity to experience the complexity and unpredictability of the classroom. Yet, it is the complexity and unpredictably of the classroom which reduces the quality of experiences for PSTs. In many ways, learning is shown to occur most successfully with gradual increases in responsibility, complexity, unpre- dictability, and by allowing a person to address novel problems in meaningful ways. VR allows this to occur in a controlled and appropriate way.

