among genetic, environmental, microbial and immune factors [3]. Worsen and inappropriate mucosal immune response mediated by mucosal T cells triggers the release of several pro- inflammatory mediators, including reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, neutrophil infiltration and overproduction of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines [3]. All these factors can cause tissue damage and are thought to be critical events in the pathogenesis of ulcerative colitis.

inflammatory bowel disease [4]. Indeed, most of these drugs bring serious side effects with low results and many patients do not respond to these treatment [5]. Based on the dissatisfaction with the current pharmacology treatments, focus has been increased on complementary medicine approaches, including medicinal plant extract or natural active compound extract from the plants [6]. There is a great need to identify effective chemopreventive agents that might improve colitis with fewer or no side effects.

The Ocimum gratissimum leaves were collected, washed, air dried under shade and grounded into fine powder using a blender. The aqueous extract was prepared by extracting the powdered leaves (520 g) with 5.2 L of distilled water in an electric shaker for 48 h. The extract was filtered through Whatmann No. 1 (What- with 200 and 400 mg/kg/day (p.o) of AEOGL respectively for 20 days. Twenty-four hours after the end of the experiment, the ani- mals were sacrificed under ketamine hydrochloride anesthetic (10 mg/kg/b.w via intramuscular route). The Blood samples from all the rats were drawn via cardiac puncture and collected into EDTA tubes for hematological analysis. The rectum and the descending colon of the rats were removed for antioxidant status, neutrophil infiltration status and histological study using hema- toxylin and eosin stain.

at 420 nm for 3 min by spectrophotometer. One unit of enzyme activity is 50% inhibition of the rate of autooxidation of pyrogallol as determined by change in absorbance/min at 420 nm. The activ- ity of SOD was expressed as mg/mg protein.

deprotein the sample. 100 lL was of each sample was separated in labeled eppendorf tubes and 0.1 ml of 1% sulphanilamide in 5% phosphoric acid was added and incubated at RT for 10 min, followed by addition of 0.1 ml of 0.1% NED (N-1- napthylethylenediamine dihydrochloride) and incubate for 10 min at 60%. The absorbance of the chromophore formed was mea-

H2O2) into the cuvette, 70 lL of PMF was added. The increase in absorbance was monitored every 30 s for 1 min. The absorbance was read at 350 nm. One unit of MPO activity can be defined as the quantity of enzyme able to convert/degrade 1 lmol of H2O2

The group 2 (AA) had a significantly lower (p < 0.05) body weight change when compared the Group 1 (control). There was a significantly lower (p < 0.05) body weight change in Group 2 when compared with Groups 3 and 4 respectively. However, Groups 3 and 4 showed no significant different in body weight change when compared with the control.

addition, the diarrhea scoring of rats treated with AA was signifi- cantly higher when compared with the control group. Compared with the AA group, rats treated with AEOGL at 200 and 400 mg/ kg showed an accelerated weight gain toward control group. In this study, AEOGL increase body weight by preventing the fistulae in the gastrointestinal tract e.g. diarrhea. It reduced the inflammation of the large intestine and excessive nutrient losses through diar- rhea. Study has shown that administration of AEOGL in rats caused significant histological changes in the intestines, revealing the presence of increased villi and larger goblets cells [30]. The increase in the numbers of villi in the intestine facilitates increase nutrient absorption due to increase in the surface area of the intes- tine [31]. Furthermore, AEOGL enhances anti-diarrhea effect by inhibiting intestinal motility, partly via muscarinic receptor inhibi- tion [32], thereby facilitating nutrient absorption in the intestine. The significant increase in body weight and decrease in diarrhea scores that were observed in AEOGL groups, may be as a result of AEOGL inhibited the intestinal motility, by increasing number of villi and larger goblets cells of the intestine, which favor rapid absorption of nutrient from the gastro-intestinal tract and subse- quently prevented diarrhea.

poor absorption of iron in the intestine. The results of this study showed that, the aqueous extract of Ocimum gratissimum leaves administered at the dosages used and for the duration of the exper- iment appeared to improve the red blood cells and HB counts in rats toward control. However, there was a significant decrease in RBC count and HB concentrations in rats treated with AEOGL when compared with the control. The reduction in the RBCs and HB count in the experimental groups, as compared with the control is an indication that AEOGL failed to completely inhibit the effect of acetic acid on colonic blood loss.

In this study, the rats induced with colitis showed a significant increase in white blood cell counts (WBC), neutrophil (NEU), monocyte (MON) and granulocyte (GRAN) counts when compared with the control group, but the lymphocyte counts significantly decrease when compared with the control group. The observed decrease in lymphocyte counts may be as a result of the immuno- suppressive effects of colitis on the bone marrow through the inhi- bition of T cell activity. The administration of 200 and 400 mg/kg doses of the AEOGL significantly normalized the white blood cells, lymphocyte, monocyte and granulocyte counts. It is possible that the extract contained agents that stimulated the bone marrow to produce leucocyte and release them into the blood. Leucocyte are activated when the body is invaded by bacteria and they provide the first line of defense against invading microorganisms [35]. The granules of the granulocytes, particularly neutrophil contain many enzymes, which makes it a powerful and effective defensive agent and hence, deficiency of neutrophils in the body leads to myriad defects, including conditions such as colitis [35]. However, administration of AEOGL significantly ameliorated the hematolog- ical parameters of the colitis rats toward control.

In this study, acute exposure to acetic acid significantly increased the colonic tissue nitric oxide (NO) concentration in the rats when compared with the control. Under normal physiolog- ical conditions, NO produces an anti-inflammatory effect. How- ever, it is considered as a proinflammatory mediator that induces inflammation due to overproduction by inducible nitric oxide syn- thase (iNOS) in abnormal situations [36]. The elevated concentra-

Reduced glutathione (GSH) is an important intracellular antiox- idant agent in mammalian gut and involved in the repair mecha- nism of mucosal damage by free radicals. It plays an important role in protecting the intestinal cells and act as a defense mecha- nism against inflammation [44]. During inflammation, GSH level decreases resulting in severe colon mucosal injury. In this study, acetic acid treatment resulted to reduction of colonic tissue GSH level. However, treatment with AEOGL significantly normalized the colonic tissue GSH level. The improvement of GSH showed that AEOGL might have depleted ROS level, relieved the inhibition of the antioxidant enzymes and/or might have triggered their synthe- sis which in turn attenuated the oxidative damage in AA-treated rats.

