Differential linear logic and the corresponding categorical structure, differential categories, introduced the idea of differential structure associated to a (co)monad. Typically in settings such as algebraic geometry, one expresses differential structure for an algebra by having a module with a derivation, i.e. a map satisfying the Leibniz rule. In the monadic approach, we are able to continue to work with algebras and derivations, but the additional structure allows us to define other rules of the differential calculus for such modules; in particular one can define a monadic version of the chain rule as well as other basic identities.

The fundamental example of a codifferential category is the category of (discrete) vector spaces and linear maps. The monad is given by the symmetric algebra construction and the deriving transform is the usual differentiation of polynomials. We refer to [1] for further details. A topological example is given by the category of convenient vector spaces and continuous linear maps, which forms a differential category [3].

We describe a quasimonad structure which will be fundamental in our definition and examples. We were led to consider this operation by the fundamental work of Guo and Keigher [15,16]. We work in the category of vector spaces over an arbitrary field k. So let

This has a well-known monad structure as it is the free tensor algebra. But it also has a quasimonad structure which we describe now. We will work with homogeneous elements. See [24], Chapter 16.7. Denote the length of a homogeneous element w by |w|.

We note that every Rota-Baxter algebra is a module with integration over itself with its evident right-module structure.The shuffle quasimonad will give us a much broader class of examples. Indeed it is expected that when a complete theory of integral linear logic is established, we will have an even greater source of examples.

This work originated with the goal of developing a theory of integral linear logic and integral categories to parallel the corresponding differential theories. This work is ongoing but we believe the shuffle structure provides a key towards understanding the integral theory. But furthermore it is of interest even in its own right. The idea of weakening the notion of monad to quasimonad is new for linear logic and deserves further exploration. (We do note that a different version of weaker structure was introduced in [20,21].) Also, we find the combinatorics of shuffling and its variants fascinating and wonder what other structure is to be found there and what it would have to say about linear logic.

Two further ideas for future work are as follows. First it is important to develop the above theories in the noncommutative case. This work for the differential setting was begun in the preprint [6]. Free Rota-Baxter algebras in the noncommutative case are constructed by Ebrahimi-Fard and Guo using operations on rooted trees in [7]. It is this construction that arises in renormalization of perturbative quantum field theory [8].

