As an intangible cultural heritage, traditional handicrafts are significant in artistic education. Due to limited approaches to communicating traditional handicrafts and appreciating content, it cannot be easy to carry out effective skill inheritance in an art education situation in a modern teaching environment. This study uses mixed reality technology to develop a serious game for learning traditional handicrafts. The objective is to improve

Cultural heritage education has a range of positive impacts on the protection and dissemination of cultural heritage. In recent years, many countries have begun to realize the importance of strengthening cultural heritage education for teenagers. China has also adopted corresponding educational policies to promote the study of cultural heritage among college students (Underhill & Salazar, 2016). Mortise and tenon joints are the core of traditional Chinese timber buildings (Chun, Meng, & Han, 2017), containing significant historical and cultural information as well as educational dissemination significance that cannot be ignored. This study explores the mortise and tenon joints in traditional Chinese furniture, which come in various types and even within the same type, there are different structural forms. This complexity adds to the diffi- culty of learning and identifying mortise and tenon structures. Furthermore, some of these joints have extremely intricate structures, making it challenging for students to visually comprehend the internal structure of the joints through traditional learning methods, resulting in a lack of interest in learning among students.

However, it is still worth further exploring how to apply MR in the teaching of cultural heritage and what learning effects this teaching method will produce. Therefore, this study investigates the use of MR technology to learn mortise and tenon through serious games, and compares it with conventional teaching methods. The study examines the effects of MR-based serious games on knowledge retention, learning motivation, and situational interest in the learning of mortise and tenon. By analyzing academic performance and learning motivation data, this study aims to provide a comprehensive understanding of the impact of architecture and furniture in China, these joints are close to the inter- locking approaches utilised in foreign countries. Mortise and tenon joints contain historical information and have an educational signifi- cance which should not be ignored. However, due to its complex structure and the numerous types of mortise and tenon joints, it can be problematic to disseminate information effectively and for the varied approaches to be embraced appropriately by learners.

Modern theories of effective learning suggest that it is most effective when active, experiential, situational and problem-based, with imme- diate feedback (Connolly et al., 2012). Serious games have the necessary conditions to be an effective learning medium (Erhel & Jamet, 2013). Serious games are widely used in teaching, and the learning environ- (Johnson and Wen-hai, 2008; Pannese & Carlesi, 2007). Serious games make the learning process enjoyable and relaxing (Gee, 2003; Prensky, 2003). A feature of serious games is the feedback mechanism, which allows learners to immediately understand their learning performance (Gao, Gonzalez, & Yiu, 2019), thus helping students achieve their learning goals.

adopted depending on the cultural heritage category (Mortara et al., 2014). For example, many architectural heritages use adventure games to recognize buildings and understand their artistic values (Bellotti et al., 2003; De Paolis et al., 2011). Historical heritage mainly uses role-playing games to understand the causes and development of his- torical events by reconstructing the historical environment (Christo- poulos et al., 2011; Gaitatzes et al., 2005). These research results show that people can learn relevant cultural heritage knowledge through serious games, which proves that serious games have a certain potential in cultural heritage education.

journals. And identifies potential areas for future improvement in this field. The study by Bekele et al. (2021) confirmed that the integration of collaborative and multi-modal interaction methods with mixed reality technology effectively enhances cultural learning in virtual heritage, as demonstrated in the evaluation at the Western Australian Shipwrecks Museum. Bekele (2021) explores the design and implementation of a cloud-based collaborative and multi-modal mixed reality application in the virtual heritage domain, aiming to enhance cultural learning.

However, there is still a need for further exploration on the appli- cation of Mixed Reality (MR) in the learning of cultural heritage and the potential learning outcomes it can produce. Therefore, this study aims to investigate the efficacy of using MR technology in the learning of cul- tural heritage, specifically focusing on the teaching method of serious games. By comparing this method with conventional teaching methods, the study seeks to determine whether learning through mixed reality games can yield better outcomes for college students.

In this study, the experimental group learned mortise and tenon knowledge through the MR game, and researchers taught the control group. The two groups of students learnt the same content, such as mortise and tenon structures and related concepts, in different teaching methods. The researchers compiled the study materials for both groups to ensure that the two teaching methods covered the same content to minimize differences in outcomes due to different learning content. Research materials are compiled with the advice of experts to ensure the accuracy of the knowledge contained in the materials. Finally, the test was used to evaluate the knowledge learning and retention of the two groups of participants. The situational interest and motivation scale were also used to measure and evaluate the state of the experimental participants after learning.

structures and look for matching parts, they unconsciously learn about each mortise and tenon and its components. In this game, because the components of mortise and tenon are not the same, the number is different, and the structure is similar overall, the subtleties are different, increasing the difficulty of the game. Therefore, players in the game need to understand the structural characteristics of each mortise and tenon joint, and carefully observe, to complete the correct match. In the game process, MR can realize the interaction between people and ob- jects in the environment and has certain operation functions. In the MR environment, players can rotate, zoom in and out of each model at will, and observe the subtleties of each structure through a 360-degree rotation. Zooming in and out also allows players to repeatedly

The knowledge acquisition part consists of questions 1 to 5, which investigate basic knowledge. Corresponding knowledge points exam- ined are directly presented in the teaching content. Questions 6 and 7 relate to the knowledge transfer part of the test, which tests whether the participants can flexibly use the knowledge of mortise and tenon joint knowledge. Questions 8 to 10 link with the knowledge application part, which examines the application of the three mortise and tenon joints included in the teaching content in furniture. The questionnaire consists of 10 questions, each of which is 1 point. The achievement test had exactly the same questions as the memory test.

In educational research, interests are conceptualized as personal and situational interests (Krapp et al., 1992). Contextual claims refer to in- terests activated by the environment (Hidi, 2006; Schraw & Lehman, 2001; Sun & Rueda, 2012). Numerous studies have shown that situa- tional interest can significantly improve student engagement, perfor- mance, and effort (Alexander et al., 1995; Harp & Mayer, 1997; Rotgans & Schmidt, 2014). The content of the situational interest scale in this the students, we learned that none of the participants had experience with MR and Hololens2. The questionnaire of knowledge pre-test investigated the basic understanding of mortise and tenon, and the re- sults showed that most students had no knowledge of mortise and tenon. However, three students had higher scores on the prior test and had a certain understanding of mortise and tenon. These three students were

21.1 years (SD = 1.4). For all students involved in this research, new knowledge needs to be learnt in the experiment. Each participant was in a closed office with no distractions during the experiment. At the same time, to avoid the John Henry effect of the control group and the Hawthorne effect of the experimental group, the students in both groups were not informed of the purpose of the experiment and kept students in a natural learning state.

The results showed that the scores of the MR group in the basic part were higher than those of the TRD group (p < 0.01). The structures examined in the basics section are displayed in the game. Participants repeatedly observed and compared several mortises and tenon joint = 0.76) was still higher than that of the TRD group (M = 0.50). In the transfer part, the performance difference was not significant (p > 0.05), which further proved that the two teaching methods did not produce significant differences in the two-dimensional picture-style content as analyzed in the achievement test. Different from the previous one, the score of the MR group (M = 0.78) was lower than that of the TRD group (M = 0.85) in this part, probably because the stereoscopic model in MR attracted more attention from the participants while ignoring the pic- tures. The content in the picture caused the students in the MR group to be less impressed by the content in the picture.

Manero et al., 2015; Srisawasdi & Panjaburee, 2019). Through the game, the knowledge of mortise and tenon is refined and integrated so that players can master the knowledge more easily in the game. This research effectively expands the serious game design method with cul- tural heritage education. Furthermore, it explores the effectiveness of the serious game teaching method based on mixed reality technology. With a traditional teaching method, it is not easy to show three-dimensional structures through words and pictures, but this is the advantage of MR technology. The modes of pair matching puzzle game enable players to recognize the structure during the game and differ- entiate between structures of the same mortise and tenon joints. Through interaction, players are guided to interact with the content of cultural relics to improve their attitude toward learn about cultural heritage and make them more actively participate in cultural relic learning activities. (Gil-Fuentetaja & Economou, 2019).

Mortise and tenon joints and their production techniques are important material cultural heritage in China. Using MR serious games to spread mortise and tenon knowledge can attract more people to pay attention to understanding mortise, and realizing the inheriting of mortise and tenon culture. On the other hand, learning the mortise and tenon structure through games can give students great flexibility in the following mortise and tenon model or traditional Chinese furniture making.

This study also has certain limitations. First of all, there are few mortises and tenon joints involved in the experiment, and only one mortise and tenon joint case is selected for each type of mortise and tenon joint. In future research, we will conduct more comprehensive developments and integrate more content and elements. Second, the data shows that the information in the picture part of the MR game is not well conveyed, which also needs to be further analyzed in the following research. Finally, this paper fails to determine which aspects of MR

In this study, the participants in the experiment were voluntary and their personal information was strictly protected. The data can be ob- tained by sending emails to the corresponding author. The authors declare that the data in this paper has not been plagiarized, is original, and meets academic standards.

Dalim, C. S. C., Dey, A., Piumsomboon, T., Billinghurst, M., & Sunar, S. (2016). TeachAR: An interactive augmented reality tool for teaching basic English to non-native children. In Adjunct proceedings of the 2016 IEEE international symposium on mixed and augmented reality (ISMAR-ADJUNCT).

