Most of the research efforts and applications of Ant rout- ing algorithms are directed towards finding best routes over data communication networks. However, its application for dynamic routing on road networks is still considerably lim- ited. Dynamic routing algorithms play an important role in road traffic routing to avoid congestion and to direct cars to better routes. An Ant Based Control (ABC) algorithm has been applied in [11], for routing of road traffic through a city. In [12] a city based parking routing system (CBPRS) that used Ant based routing has been proposed. In [13] a modification to the Ant Based Control (ABC) and AntNet has been presented for routing vehicle drivers using histori- cally-based traffic information. In [14], a version of the Ant- Net algorithm has been applied to improve traveling time over a road traffic network with the ability to divert traffic from congested routes.

among different nodes is exploited to increase the performance of the algorithm by reducing much of the computations. This enforces the agility in exploring more routes in a given net- work, therefore, guaranties fast coverage of the changes in the road states. The proposed algorithm, not only accelerates the discovery of good routes, but it, also, conserves it. A soft- ware agent (called check ants) were employed to monitor the conserved good routes, in such a way to discover and reject the derogated ones.

For the purpose of this paper, the standard Antnet algo- rithm is introduced in Section 2. While, the proposed modi- fied version of the algorithm is presented in Section 3. Section 4 presents the simulation experiment. Section 5 con- cludes the paper.

where tkd is the trip time observed by the current forward ant (launches from node k to destination d). g (0, 1], weighs the number of recent samples that will affect ld and r2. Wd The moving observation window of size Wmax which is used to save the trip time of the last Wmax ants that launched from node k to node d. Wd is used to find the best trip time tbestd. g is related to Wmax as follows:

A threshold values for travelling times between the nodes of a given road network, could be estimated or obtained, see Sec- tion 3.3. Those threshold values are the seeds for the typical good travel time among the network node. Thus, the rules:

Utilizing this set of rules in the AntNet algorithm reduces much of the computations involved in route discovery, leading to better utilization of the computation power. Therefore, per- mits for discovering and monitoring more routes in the net- work, counterbalancing better with dynamic road states. This was the policy that inspired the enhancement in the Threshold-Based AntNet algorithm.

O(n). However, the argument here is that the newly proposed algorithm is still better than standard AntNet even in case of a parallel processing environment. This is due to its ability to converge fast to good route solutions and to conserve on the good discovered ones. More discussions about our modified AntNet algorithms are given in [15].

In theory, the performance of the threshold algorithm for a given network of n nodes was computed to be at worse case O(n2). Yet, the processing time for a discovered route de- creases significantly to become a constant that depends, only, on the number of nodes in the given route (as it is monitored, only, by the check ant). This performance last until the route became derogated. This behavior of the algorithm permits for a rapid coverage of the network changes (more forward ants will traverse and discover good routes for the remaining destinations), therefore, counterbalancing better with dynamic road states.

