Ontology-based semantical validation of models is an automatically executed V&V activity. In this case metamodels and domain specific models are trans- formed to the ontology domain: the consistency and completeness of metamodels are checked and models are validated according to different correctness criteria (i.e. metamodel-conformance, satisfaction of additional constraints).

Quantitative evaluation of availability and safety : According to the standards, the quantified evaluation of random failure integrity shall be carried out by means of probabilistic calculations. To do this, a so-called dependability model is con- structed. It is a mathematically precise model (in the form of a Stochastic Ac- tivity Network) representing the failure behaviour of system components, error propagation among them according to the given architecture, and the developed error detection and recovery mechanisms. Accordingly, the dependability model is composed of smaller sub-models belonging to system components, interactions, and the additional mechanisms. Although the definition of these sub-models is a task of dependability experts, their assembly can be performed by our auto- mated tool on the basis of the UML architecture (class and object diagrams) of the DMI. The solution of the dependability model provides (i) the system-level availability and (ii) the hazardous failure rate that must not exceed the allowed value (tolerable hazard rate, THR).

Although service-oriented systems generally do not have such strict certification re- quirements as embedded devices, some areas (e.g. banking processes) have domain- specific safety criteria. Deep semantic analysis of service orchestration can validate the fulfillment of such criteria. SENSORIA offers a set of sound model-based formal analysis features.

The DIANA Project [2] is the first step for the implementation of an enhanced avionics platform, named AIDA (Architecture for Independent Distributed Avion- ics), providing secure distribution and execution on virtual machines to avionics applications. Along with this objective, DIANA also aims at contributing to the definition and standardization of the development and certification means based on Model Driven System Development needed to support this novel platform. It is im- portant to mention that the envisaged development means for the AIDA platform inherits the ideas introduced by the DECOS tool chain introduced in Sec. 2.

