Zeno-behavior typically arises from modelling abstractions employed for the purpose of simplification of modelling hybrid systems. A simple example is the bouncing ball. A ball bounces on a surface elastically, with each bounce losing a fraction of its energy. In a simple model of such a bouncing ball, one might wish to abstract from the dynamics in case of a bounce of the ball on the surface and simply model it as a discrete event. As it turns out, in a finite amount of time, an infinite amount of bounces occur. Hence, the simple bouncing ball model employs Zeno-behavior.

We study two specific topologies in more detail, viz. the indiscrete topology and the discrete topology. It turns out that for labelled transition systems with the indiscrete topology, (bi-)simulation and topological (bi-)simulation coincide under certain conditions. Also, for the discrete topology, the notions coincide provided that the state spaces are finite. The proofs that are omitted can be found in [5].

Often, when comparing different systems, also sets of initial states I1 and I2 are given. In such a case, we say that M1 is simulated by M2 if and only if every initial state in I1 is simulated by an initial state in I2. In the remainder of this article, we do not consider initial states.

In the previous section, we have seen that the topological notions of simu- lation and bisimulation are stronger than their non-topological counterparts. An interesting question is whether there are topologies for which the notions coincide. We investigate this question for both the indiscrete and the discrete topology.

finite. Above we have shown that the assumption that the state spaces are structured by means of the discrete topology is not sufficient for concluding that the topological and non-topological notions coincide. Based on this, the reader might be tempted to believe that for labelled transition systems with a finite state space and an arbitrary topology, the non-topological and topo- logical notions coincide. Again, this is not the case. Consider the labelled

cumulation points. In [7], a reformulation of topological (bi-)simulation is presented that also deals with higher-order accumulation points. A crucial difference between that research and the research presented in this paper is that in [7] the concept of a run (over natural numbers) is replaced by the concept of a hybrid run (over ordinal numbers).

The type of labelled transition systems considered in this paper is rather limited. In the literature, labelled transition systems not only have a transition relation but also one or more predicates are defined on the state space to indi- cate, for example, initial and final states. Future research may be concerned with how to deal with predicates on labelled transition systems in general.

In [8], bisimulation is characterized using a specific (Alexandroff) topology as continuity of the transition relation. In other words, the author shows that the Alexandroff topology as a structure fits normal bisimulation. We, on the other hand, adapt the notion of bisimulation to take the topological structure of the state space into account.

