We consider the non-orthodox proof rules of hybrid logic from the viewpoint of topological semantics. Topological semantics is more general than Kripke semantics. We show that the hybrid proof rule BG is topologically not sound. Indeed, among all topological spaces the BG rule characterizes those that can be represented as a Kripke frame (i.e., the Alexandroff spaces). We also demonstrate that, when the BG rule is dropped and only the Name rule is kept, one can prove a general topological completeness result for hybrid logics axiomatized by pure formulas. Finally, we indicate some limitations of the topological expressive power of pure formulas. All results generalize to neighborhood frames.

In many completeness results for hybrid logics, an important role is played by non- orthodox rules, i.e., proof rules involving syntactic side-conditions, also known as Gabbay-style rules. For instance, such rules are necessary in order to obtain general Kripke completeness for hybrid logics axiomatized by pure formulas [3]. Various 3 Thanks are due to Eric Pacuit for his comments and to Guram Bezhanishvili, who shared some yet unpublished papers with the second author. Most of all, we would like to express our gratitude to Patrick Blackburn for agreeing to present the paper on our behalf, when it turned out that neither of us could attend the workshop. We are obliged to the organizers for agreeing to this non-standard solution (which failed in the end for reasons beyond control of any logician). Finally, we are obliged to Katsuhiko Sano for

This observation forms the starting point of this paper. First, we demonstrate that the BG rule fails to preserve validity on many topological spaces, including the real line (Theorem 3.2). In fact, we show (Theorem 3.4) that the BG rule characterizes those topological spaces that can be represented as Kripke frames (i.e., the Alexandroff spaces).

Alexandroff spaces do not form a particularly interesting class of spaces, and therefore, from a topological perspective, the BG rule is rather ad hoc. Inspired by Theorem 3.4, one could consider variations of the rule. For instance, it can be naturally weakened as follows:

Proof. One direction of the first claim is trivial. The other direction: consider the real numbers and as non-trivial open sets take all intervals (r, r') with r < 0 < r'. This space is easily seen to admit BG'. It fails to be Alexandroff though, as the element 0 has no smallest open neighborhood.

Remark 3.6 Using the techniques of [6], it can be shown that hybrid logics axiom- atized with modal Sahlqvist formulas are all Kripke complete. In case of extensions of S4H(E), this entails completeness with respect to a class of Alexandroff topolo- gies, even without the Name and BG rules. It follows by Theorem 3.1 that the Name rule is admissible, and by Theorem 3.4 that the BG rule is admissible in these logics.

Remark 5.1 In an already published paper, Kudinov [11] proves an intermediate result: that the difference logics of dense-in-itself spaces and dense-in-itself T1 spaces are axiomatizable by the difference analogues of 7(E)-formulas above. As the suit- able hybrid formulas are pure, this can be obtained as a corollary of Theorem 4.1,

While the topological semantics clearly generalizes Kripke semantics, it does so only for logics above S4. In this section, we consider another semantics for modal and hybrid logics, that coincides with the topological semantics for logics above S4, but that also applies to logics below S4. This semantics is known as normal neighborhood semantics or Scott-Montague semantics. In this section, we will show that our results can be generalized to this setting.

Remark 6.5 It is possible to generalize this completeness result to a reasonably well-behaved class of hybrid non-normal logics with the universal modality. Drop- ping or weakening K and/or Nec on the syntactic side would simply correspond to dropping or weakening non-emptiness and filter conditions on the semantic side. In the language with E, if we do not want non-normal frames to satisfy the

At the time of the workshop, it was not immediately clear to us whether our com- pleteness result could be adapted to hybrid languages that lack the global modality, such as 7(@). Recently, an elegant completeness proof for 7(@) was found by Katsuhiko Sano. It is currently being prepared for publication as a separate note [15].

