In this paper, we mainly extend the strong bisimulation topology to a family of parameterized bisimulation limit topologies. Bases on parameter- ized limit bisimulation, we construct some natural and reasonable topological structure which are useful for us to understand and analyze the infinite evo- lution. These topological structures are determined by behaviors of processes and so are completely extensional and observable. We mainly discuss the subnet closure, tail closure, natural extension and iteration structure of pa- rameterized limit bisimulation.

In this section, we will focus on the topological properties of parameterized limit bisimulation. Subnet closure, tail closure, natural extension and iteration structure are discussed. They are useful for us to understand the infinite evolution of parameterized limit bisimulation from a mathematical point.

parameterized limit bisimulation. In order to to extend Iden to parameterized limit bisimulation, we have to impose a certain determinacy on the involved processes. Because the execution of a process is dependent on his environment, it is necessary to introduce the determinism of process in its environment.

In this subsection, we will present a special structure of parameterized limit bisimulation. This construction indicates that the composition of two param- eterized limit bisimulation is also a parameterized limit bisimulation. This proposition is important in the compositive execution of some programs. First, we should introduce some useful notions. For simplicity, the definition of prod- uct directed set mainly come from [11].

As is well known, a topology can be constructed from an existing convergence structure. In this section, we mainly construct a family of parameterized bisimulation limit topologies based on parameterized bisimulation limit. One of the main results in this section is Proposition 4.2, which states that the parameterized bisimulation limit does give rise to a convergence class, fur- thermore, it yields a topology on processes.

