The topos approach to the formulation of physical theories includes a new form of quantum logic. We present this topos quantum logic, including some new results, and compare it to standard quantum logic, all with an eye to conceptual issues. In particular, we show that topos quantum logic is distributive, multi-valued, contextual and intuitionistic. It incorporates superposition without being based on linear structures, has a built-in form of coarse-graining which automatically avoids interpretational problems usually associated with the conjunction of propositions about incompatible physical quantities, and provides a material implication that is lacking from standard quantum logic. Importantly, topos quantum logic comes with a clear geometrical underpinning. The representation of pure states and truth-value assignments are discussed. It is briefly shown how mixed states fit into this approach.

For a classical system, propositions are represented by subsets of the state space. Usually, one restricts attention to Borel subsets, and we will follow this convention here. A (pure) state of a classical system is a point of the state space of the system, 2 and the truth-values of propositions are true, false. The Borel subsets of

Standard quantum logic and its many generalisations [8] have a number of con- ceptual and interpretational problems. To us, non-distributivity and the fundamen- tal dependence on instrumentalist notions seem the most severe. In the following, a proposal for a new form of quantum logic is sketched which overcomes these problems. This new form of quantum logic arose from the topos approach to the formulation of physical theories, initiated more than a decade ago by Butterfield and Isham [23,24,25,26]. Further references are given below.

One central idea in the topos approach is to take contextuality into account, as suggested by the Kochen-Specker theorem. For us, a context is an abelian subal- gebra of the non-abelian von Neumann algebra B(H). We consider only abelian von Neumann subalgebras, since we want enough projections in each algebra for the spectral theorem to hold. Moreover, we consider only those abelian subalge-

Of course, it will not be enough to consider the context category V(H) alone. In- stead, one defines structures over V(H) and relations between these structures. Concretely, one considers Set-valued functors on the context category V(H) and natural transformations between them. 4 At this point, a choice between covariant and contravariant functors must be made.

3 It is no problem that physical quantities like position and momentum are described by unbounded op- erators, while a von Neumann algebra contains only bounded operators. An unbounded operator can be affiliated to a von Neumann algebra provided all its spectral projections lie in the algebra (see e.g. [28]).

Differently from the Hilbert space situation, the linear span of linear subspaces does not play any role. The behaviour of projections under joins, which in standard quantum theory is so closely linked to superposition and the linear character of Hilbert space, is mapped by daseinisation to a lattice where joins are given by set- theoretic unions (in each component). Despite the fact that the spectral presheaf is not a linear space, daseinisation thus preserves a central aspect of standard quantum logic, namely that part which relates to superposition.

Hence, topos quantum logic comes with a material implication. This is another improvement compared to standard quantum logic, which is suffering from the lack of a proper implication. In particular, the Sasaki hook does not provide a material implication, as is well known.

The use of a form of intuitionistic logic for quantum theory has also been sug- gested by Coecke in [7]. He uses a construction discovered by Bruns and Lakser, the so-called injective hull of meet-semilattices (see also [34]) to embed a meet- semilattice of propositions into a Heyting algebra by introducing new joins to the meet-semilattice. There are no further obvious connections between this approach and the topos form of quantum logic, but it would be interesting to compare both constructions with respect to the underlying geometric structures: both approaches formulate an intuitionistic form of quantum logic using Heyting algebras, and every complete Heyting algebra is a locale and hence a generalised topological space.

We presented the main features of the topos form of quantum logic. This new form of quantum logic is distributive, intuitionistic, multi-valued and contextual. Moreover, it has a clear underlying geometric structure. The spectral presheaf serves as an analogue of the state space of a classical system, with propositions being represented as subobjects. Interestingly, topos quantum logic preserves that part of standard quantum logic that relates to superposition. The truth-value assignments given by pure states do not depend on any notion of measurement and observers, i.e., there is no need for an instrumentalist interpretation. Mixed states can be fully described as measures on the spectral presheaf. There are interesting relations between the measure-theoretical and the logical aspects of the theory that will be further investigated in future work.

