The applicability of digital imaging techniques and machine learning models to paleontological datasets is exploring the possibility of predicting microfossils extracted from the rock samples instead of the traditional identifying methodologies under the microscope in a one-by-one way via a domain expert. However, these processes, including labeling, are carried out manually and take a high time-consuming, especially for many quantities and diversity of complex morphological microfossil specimens. In this work, we propose a transfer learning framework based on a custom model CNN (Convolutional Neural Network) and diverse pre-trained deep models (ResNet50, Xception, InceptionV3, VGG6, MobileNet) trained with the millions of images for Globo- truncanita genus and Globotruncana genus in genus-level and species-level prediction. The second primary advantage of our framework is able to provide better and more robust decisions for a limited number of microfossil images captured by the low-cost light microscope imaging technology. The comparison of the diverse methods was evaluated with different performance metrics, and the observation of the framework was made to perform high prediction scores reaching up to the outcomes (>99 % accuracy and > 0.99 AUC score for genus- level/>81 % accuracy and > 0.89 AUC score for species-level). As far as we know, this research study is the first attempt to investigate a transfer learning framework to predict the Globotruncanita genus and Globotruncana

structure of planktonic foraminiferal tests, without using genetic infor- mation [7]. To investigate responses to climatic change, the exploitation of new niches, and even the emergence of new species, changes in morphology can be followed across time. Furthermore, since many planktonic foraminifera species have a relatively short life span, planktonic foraminifera fossils are used to estimate the age of sediments [7]. To indicate the time window, it is done by carefully recording the first and last appearances of common, short-lived species and using the presence of such species. It is also used for regional and global corre- lation of sedimantary rocks [8].

three Globotruncana species: i) Globotruncana ventricosa, ii) Globo- truncana linneiana, iii) Globotruncana arca. In [9], we designed a 14- layered custom CNN architecture to identify these microfossils under limited number of samples. In addition, an hybrid version, custom CNN coupled with Long Short-Time Memory (LSTM) is proposed in [10]. Experiments in both studies are carried out by using our low cost re- flected microscopic imaging system. In this paper, we extend our dataset by adding new three different species of Globotruncanita genus. Note that Globotruncanita and Globotruncana are two genera of planktonic fora- minifera, are widely distributed in marine sediments around the world and have been used as index fossils for dating and correlating sedi- mentary rocks.

The paper focuses on identification of six different microfossils, namely, Globotruncana arca, Globotruncana ventricosa, Globotruncana linneina, Globotruncanita elevata, Globotruncanita stuarti, and Globo- truncanita stuartiformis. As is seen, three of them belong to Globotruncana genus where the others are from Globotruncanita. Paleontologists find it challenging to classify these species due to their closely resembling morphological structures. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that explores these two genus with deep learning methods and transfer learning technique. The paper not only focuses on classification of each species but also concentrates on identification of genus type.

The experiments are carried out by using 5 different popular deep learning models, namely, ResNet50, Xception, InceptionV3, VGG6, MobileNet, and a custom models used in k-fold cross validation and holdout methods. The potential usage of transfer learning is revealed to provide better discrimination against the limited microfossil dataset. We have also discovered the fully-depth custom CNN deep model, covering a range of performances, from the theoretical architecture to the application for microfossil prediction. Comparison is evaluated in terms of accuracy, precision, specificity, sensitivity, F-1 score, and AUC scores not only for the discrimination of six species but also for the identifi- cation of two genus types.

the same/different family might vary depending on the number of potentials extracted from the sediments. In other words, the number of microfossil samples due to the partial sediments leads to the poor numbers of the species/genus specific. Hence,Globo- truncanitagenusand Globotruncanagenushave limited specimens for each family due to the existing potential and hard extraction/ labeling process. The main aim of this work is to reduce the ef- forts made by a paleontologist and to provide reliable and ac- curate prediction outcomes using a fast-to-train transfer learning

and histological characteristics via low-cost light microscope images captured by a CCD camera (12.5 MP /Olympus SZX16) instead of the high-sized SEM images. With access to more low- cost images with geologic noise (e.g., background rock matrix) for labeled data, training/testing can be improved, outlining a highly effective and inexpensive approach. Hence, it enables the sufficiently robust deep learning model to overcome the complications.

lows; the first problem is the limited source of information-rich datasets for generating robust deep-learning models. The sec- ond issue is hand-crafted feature extraction engineering for conventional machine learning models. The third problem is collecting and processing the high-sized datasets digitized by SEM technology. The fourth issue is a lack of deep learning model performances with/without transfer learning effect compared to species/genus level microfossil prediction tasks, especially for Globotruncanita genus and Globotruncana genus family. Overall, our research may lead to solutions for these issues regarding the literature background.

Automatic identification of microfossil species has long been a challenging task for paleontologists [11]. Although selecting the most efficient imaging technique such as SEM and light microscopy is important, it is also substantial to determine the machine learning method which will identify microfossils similar or better than the pa- leontologists. To this end, many researches have been conducted ex- periments using different methodologies for identification of various microfossil genus. The major part of these studies focused on Paleozoics [12], palynomorphs [24], diatoms [25], foraminiferas [4,26], phytolith [16], and planktonic radiolarians [20,21]. Here, machine learning methods can be categorized into three groups, namely, conventional methods, deep learning methods, and hybrid methods.

difference moment, correlation, maximum correlation coefficient and shape features such as round, solidity and circularity inside 23 different features [20]. In addition, Marmo, Amodio and Cantoni also underlined that the shape feature can describe 4 different foraminifera species well [27]. Furthermore, Diez-Pastor et. al used diverse and high number of features including perimeter, convex area, form factor, convexity, roundness and compactness called geometric and morphological attri- butes coupled with elliptic fourier descriptors to identify phytolith fos- sils. Similarly, the highest accuracies are obtained by using geometric and morphological attributes without EFDs [16]. However, the accu- racies are generally limited to 0.90 and they do not able to describe all variability of fossil types.

While the conventional method involved using hand-crafted features and traditional machine learning techniques, deep learning has emerged as the most popular artificial intelligence approach for image classifi- cation. Unlike hand-crafted features, deep learning models can learn the informative and the most diverse features automatically from the datasets. Many deep learning methods have been developed for micro- fossil identification, and transfer learning is one of the widely used techniques [12,26,28,29]. In [26], a dataset including 2673 images for 4 different foraminifera species was prepared by light microscope system, applied transfer learning benefitting from VGG16 model pre-trained on ImageNet database, and obtained the accuracy score of 98 %. In another paper, the dataset including fusulinid species such as Beedeina, Fusuli- nella and Parafusulina was generated by assembling fusulinid thin- section data from various sources. They obtained the best result by fine-tuning InceptionV3 model with the score of 0.89 among the popular architectures like VGG16, MobileNetV2 and ResNet50 [12].

There have been hybrid methods that use learned features supplied by a deep architecture in a traditional machine learning algorithms [18,30]. For example, Mitra et al. extracted learned feature from ResNet50 and VGG16 networks,and applied them to a neural network classifier to classify 6 different planktic foraminifera species. Compared to expert and novice paleontologists, the system achieves higher preci- sion, recall, and F1 score than novices and comparable precision but

Planktonic foraminifers have shown high diversity and morpholog- ical changes from the time they appeared to the present day [8]. When identifying, paleontologists carefully examine many features of the species, such as the appearance of sutures and keels, the arrangement of the chambers, the structure of the wall, exterior decorations, pores, openings, the shape of the umbilical openings. Thus, this provides continuous evidence of evolutionary changes from which phylogenetic relationships can be established [8].

The genera Globotruncana and Globotruncanita differ morphologi- cally. The test of Globotruncana Cushman (1927) is biconvex and pe- ripheral of the test is lobate-circular. Chambers vary from spherical to crescent-shaped [10]. Intercameral sutures are elevated on the spiral side, raised or depressed on the umbilical side. This form has a double keels. The primary opening is in the intraumbilical position and is covered by a tegillum. In addition, the status of the last chamber is extremely important in species distinction.

kernel, N indicates the amount of data in x, and y refers to the feature map. The pooling layer is used to reduce the dimensionality of the feature maps, effectively addressing concerns about overfitting and computational complexity. The fully connected layers are employed to ascertain class scores. Two types of activation functions are used in this context [10]:

were incorporated into the structure [10]. Next, a fully connected layer was implemented, comprising 100 neurons. The final layer had the same number of neurons as the number of classes in the dataset. During the training phase, the Adam optimizer algorithm was used, and the Soft- max function was utilized as the activation function in the fully con- nected layer. All models were trained for a total of 400 epochs using categorical cross-entropy as the loss function. During the testing phase,

into 1000 distinct categories, such as keyboards, animals, pens, and mice [45]. Its image input size is 224x224 [45]. Training of the VGG16 model took several weeks using Nvidia Titan Black GPUs [45], and it achieved a test accuracy of 92.7 % on ImageNet, a dataset containing over 14 million images spanning nearly 1000 classes [45,48].

The vanishing gradient problem in deep neural networks becomes more pronounced as the network depth increases, resulting in poor performance. To address this issue, He et al. [57] introduced a novel architecture called Residual Network (ResNet) that employs residual connections between layers. These connections enable gradients to flow more easily through the network, facilitating the training of much deeper networks. The fundamental building block of the ResNet archi- tecture, based on residual learning, is the residual block, which com- prises two or three convolutional layers followed by a shortcut connection. This shortcut connection adds the output of the preceding layer to the current layer, producing a residual that passes through a non-linear activation function [57].

The formula provided earlier applies to the testing phase [6164]. During training, the time complexity is roughly triple that amount [6164]. All models in this study underwent identical pre-processing. Also, the images were applied to all models in the same dimensions. Therefore, to evaluate the model complexities against each other, we truncanita stuart, and Globotruncanita stuartiformis) and Globotruncana genus (Globotruncana arca, Globotruncana linneiana, and Globotruncana ventricose) were recognized by diverse deep learning models. Then they were analyzed via different types of classification performance metrics. Transfer learning technique was used for implementing the strengths of a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) model. These pre-trained

validation results in the diverse performance metrics. The highest ACC value (81.19 %) here belongs to the MobileNet pre-trained model. Here, the highest SENS, SPEC, PREC, F-score, and AUC scores were provided by the same model as 83.82 %, 96.10 %, 83.35 %, 83.13 %, and 0.899, respectively. On the other hand, the lowest ACC value (70.13 %) was calculated via the ResNet50 model, which provided a significantly lower

and labeling task of planktonic foraminifera microfossils to form a robust machine learning model for genus-level and species-level pre- diction. Moreover, overfitting is an important issue for limited datasets for deep models. On the other hand, traditional methods tend to the time-consuming progress, labor-intensive work, and expert-based sub- jective decisions that rely on individual specimen identification [9,10]. Some papers estimated traditional machine learning models and hand- crafted feature extraction processes. This classic manner significantly improved the efficiency of sample analysis regarding the classification performances in a negative way. Furthermore, deep features extracted from the light microscope digital images are noted to be prone to distortion due to the unclear backgrounds caused by microscope illu- mination techniques, consisting of the source and optics. Thus these distorted patterns may lead to poor/low microscope resolution to reveal

The applicability of computational image analysis to paleontological data in real-time applications was reported in the limited works due to the hard-task identification of the fully-automation pipeline according to the existing literature [13,23]. Based on 3D images generated by Computed Tomography (CT), it makes it possible for real-time analysis [23]. The proposed pipeline begins with scanning and ends with the microfossil segmentation process. Hence, high data volumes and time- consuming are impractical for cost-effective reproducibility during

Limited works on microfossil prediction have been reported on families of the Palynomorphs, Radiolarians, and Fusulinids [18,24,29]. Some datasets for these tasks have been collected in abundance due to the nature of the microfossil existence extracted from the rocks or sed- iments. However, our employed microfossil families exist in rare-size samples in nature. Hence, AUC outcomes have been investigated in addition to the ACC values to provide robust discrimination for species and genus-level prediction.

