Our aim here is to use the theory of operator algebras to study the differences and similarities between probabilistic and quantum computations, by unveiling their domain-theoretic and topological structure. To our knowledge, the deep connection between the theory of operator algebras and domain theory was not fully exploited before. This might be due to the fact that the theory of operator algebras, mostly unknown to computer scientists, was developed way before the theory of domains. Our main contribution is a connection between two different communities: the community of theoretical computer scientists, who use domain theory to study program language semantics (and logic), and the community of mathematicians and theoretical physicists, who use a special class of algebras called W*-algebras to

We will denote by B(H) (resp. Ef(H)) the collection of all bounded operators (resp. positive bounded operators below the unit) on a Hilbert space H. There are several standard topologies that one can define on a collection B(H) (see [15] for an overview).

This theorem generalizes the fact that the effects of a W*-algebra A (i.e. the positive unital maps from C2 to A) form a directed-complete poset [15, III.3.13-16]. Moreover, it turns out that Theorem 2.2 can be slightly generalized to the following theorem, with a similar proof.

In operator theory, a C*-algebra is monotone-complete (or monotone-closed) if it is directed-complete for bounded increasing nets of positive elements. The notion of monotone-completeness goes back at least to Dixmier [4] and Kadison [5] but, to our knowledge, it is the first time that the notion of monotone-completeness is explicitly related to the notion of directed-completeness. The interested reader will find in Appendix A a more detailed correspondence between operator theory and order theory.

It is known that a C*-algebra A is a W*-algebra if and only if it is monotone- complete and admits sufficiently many normal states, i.e. the set of normal states of A separates the points of A, see [15, Theorem 3.16]. By combining this fact and Proposition A.2, one can provide an order-theoretic characterization of W*-algebras, as in the following theorem.

