Currently, scientists and researchers are heavily exploring and exploiting the development of 5G networks, which can play a basic role in providing a pervasive and reliable Internet connection to IoT devices in smart cities [5,6]. However, it is still challenging to pro- vide coverage using a high-range spectrum due to its poor propa- gation qualities and low range, especially in urban areas. As a result, the concept of micro infrastructure will become the future of 5G as it increases the capacity and improves the network cover- age at a low deployment cost [7]. Also, the potential existence of non-cellular scenarios necessitates the need to assess the ability of other supporting radio technologies to aggregate such connec- tions to the radio access segment. So, researchers have been look- ing at different ways to set up a heterogeneous network infrastructure [8].

With such regard, this article aims to utilize future intelligent vehicles to propose an efficient Vehicular-based Virtual Network Infrastructure (VVNI) for smart cities. In the proposed infrastruc- ture, smart vehicles will be the builders of the communication net- work in our future smart cities. By doing so, smart things that exist all around the city can be connected through moving vehicles. Also, moving vehicles can help in providing Internet access to smart things.

The rest of this article has the following structure: Section 2 presents the related work. The basic framework and problem state- ment of the proposed infrastructure are provided in Sections 3 and 4, respectively. Sections 5 and 6 describe the theoretical model, design, and processing of the proposed network infrastructure. Furthermore, a set of performance results delineating the efficiency of the proposed infrastructure is given in Section 7. Finally, we give the concluding remarks of this work in Section 8.

It is undisputed that the current wireless cellular networks are becoming incapable of guaranteeing efficient communication and computation infrastructure for the expected ever-increasing num- ber of IoT devices in smart cities [15,16]. This could be justified due to their limited computation and spectrum resources. To address these shortcomings, several promising and enabling technologies were recently introduced for IoT in smart cities. For example, Ultra-Dense Networking (UDN) [17] aims to deploy ultra-dense small cell base stations (BSs) to extend the network coverage and increase the network capacity to accommodate the 1000X capacity delivery of IoT traffic. Also, Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) [18] aims to provide networking capabilities, cloud computing, and resource caching near IoT devices (at the edge of the radio access network). It is a widely held view that integrating MEC-enabled UDN into IoT can provide substantial potential benefits to numer- ous smart city applications. However, there are several open chal- lenges in those technologies. For example, due to the denser and denser deployment of small cells in UDNs, and along with the scar- city of radio resources, IoT devices can suffer severe co-channel and adjacent interference. To this end, heterogeneous access meth- ods should be considered from the viewpoint of IoT devices and small cells [19].

Apart from the aforementioned technologies, a novel approach to utilize connected vehicles as the infrastructures for computation and communication is technically practical [12]. For example, the Vehicle as a Resource (VaaR) concept has been introduced in [20]. In this work, the authors discuss the potential of a smart vehi- cle to be a significant service provider in a variety of situations. As well, Car4ICT [21] has been proposed as a service discovery archi- tecture in future smart cities. In the proposed Car4ICT architecture, smart vehicles can offer a wide range of services to consumers, such as weather forecasts, data storage, and traffic information.

4) sensing-as-a-service (S2aaS) [24]. Furthermore, the concept of the VCC is not limited to the resources of moving vehicles, but it is extended to include the resources of parked vehicles as well [25]. Furthermore, the concept of Vehicular Cloud Networking (VCN) has recently been proposed to create a vehicle cloud and encourage collaboration among cloud members to produce advanced vehicu- lar services that an individual cannot do alone [26]. In this approach, a VCN offers content routing, security, privacy, monitor- ing, and virtualization services.

Overall, 4G LTE and 5G are appealing solutions to support large and heterogeneous IoT devices in future smart cities [32]. As well, the abilities of computation and communications of connected vehicles can play a significant role in developing the ICT of tomor- row [33]. In this context, it is expected that future vehicles will be intelligent enough to use or integrate various wireless technologies to be able to communicate with everything in the smart city. Therefore, vehicular communication (DSRC/WAVE), cellular com- munication (4G/5G and LTE-A), and short-range static communica- tion (Wi-Fi and Bluetooth) can be integrated to form heterogeneous networks that provide a robust and reliable design for future ICT systems [34]. Then and there, the vehicles can auton- omously exchange data with the road infrastructure (V2R), with the network infrastructure (V2I), with other vehicles (V2V), with pedestrians (V2P), with buildings (V2B), with homes (V2H), and so forth [35].

This article aims to go one step beyond providing services to vehicles, to utilize their capabilities to act as centralized communi- cation hubs in future smart cities. Accordingly, the moving vehicles can play two main roles: first, provide access to the vehicular net- work services by acting as a mobile base station. These services can be offered to sensors deployed in the smart city, a smart building/ home that the moving vehicles just pass by, or a pedestrian walk- ing along a road. Secondly, provide services that are offered by the vehicles themselves, as they could form a network with huge stor- age and processing capabilities.

The basic framework of the proposed VVNI is composed of two types of entities interacting with each other: service providers and users. The service providers are the smart vehicles that create the network. They are responsible for forming and maintaining the network, providing access to the user devices, providing multi- hop connectivity to other vehicles, and propagating messages through the network. Additionally, each vehicle can act as a gate- way for the second category of entities, the users. Such a user might be an IoT device close to a vehicle that makes use of the offered services by accessing the network. Note that a vehicle can be both entities at the same time.

Various aspects of the proposed infrastructure assume that each smart vehicle has an affordable multi-network on-board unit (OBU). An OBU for a smart vehicle should have multiple network- ing interfaces (e.g., 802.11p, 4G/5G, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, etc.). The OBU can be easily installed in private or public vehicles.

In the literature, decision-making can be defined as the process of identifying alternatives and then selecting the best one. The best alternative is the one having the highest effectiveness or probabil- ity of success as well as best fit the goals and preferences of the decision maker. Additionally, Multi-Attribute Decision Making (MADM) problem is a popular branch of decision-making, in which the selection is made among a finite number of decision alterna- tives under the presence of multi-decision criteria or attributes [39]. Thus, selecting the best vehicle, among a set of vehicles V , which maximizes the stability of the network infrastructure with minimal cost, can be modelled as a MADM problem.

A MADM problem with n alternatives and m criteria can be pre- sented according to A1...An and R1...Rm as alternatives and criteria, respectively. To solve a MADM problem, the following decision matrix should be constructed, in which each column and row pre- sents the criteria and alternatives, respectively [55]:

The score anm describes the value of an alternative An against a criterion Rm. In addition, weights W1...Wm, which are assumed to be positive, should be assigned to each criterion to present the importance of each one of them to the decision. After constructing the decision matrix, a MADM technique, which will be discussed in the following section, must be used to evaluate the alternatives, and then select the best one among them. Hence, selecting the pre- ferred vehicle, among a set of vehicles, which maximizes the effi- ciency of the network infrastructure, can be modelled as a MADM problem.

As previously stated, the main objective of the proposed VVNI is to maintain an efficient wireless network infrastructure for smart cities. Therefore, let ECn represents a utility function to assess the efficiency of the network infrastructure in any network cell Cn. So, in this work, the vehicle having the highest score will be con- sidered the best alternative and it will be selected as the VNIM.

Definition 1. A sampling location refers to a point where the location of a moving vehicle vi is recorded. Thus, each moving vehicle vi , during its existence in its current network cell will pass through a finite set of sampling locations, denoted by L.

2) vehicles having multiple and shorter paths to the GWs, and 3) vehicles that are closer to all other vehicles in their current cells. Selecting and ranking vehicles according to the different and con- flicting criteria (ST, SD, and SC) are thus necessary. Hence, the SV is proposed as a combined metric to assign a total score for each vehicle, which in turn allows the appropriate selection of the pre- ferred vehicle that would maximize the efficiency of the proposed infrastructure.

of them to Internet. These GWs can be either physical (e.g., RSUs/ APs) or virtual (vehicle/bus). So, the SD is used to represent to what extent a vehicle is predicted to be far from all its associated GWs at a time. The SD is measured using the hop count. Thus, the overall

In summary, adjusting the values of a, b, and c allows develop- ing various policies to select the VNIM that aims to a specific prior- ity, such as availability, throughput, or cost. The advantage of these policies is that they can be tailored to specific applications or sce- narios. The disadvantage is that each policy may result in a com- promise on one or more criteria, depending on the weights assigned to each criterion.

Algorithm 4 (VNIM Selection). Each vehicle votes in favour of the vehicle having the highest SV. Afterwards, each vehicle dissemi- nates its vote by broadcasting a voting message Mvote. After finish- ing the selection procedure, the selected vehicle broadcasts an Announcement message Mant contacting its ID as the VNIM. Once Mant is received, each vehicle affiliates to the new VNIM by chang- ing its network ID to the ID of the selected VNIM. Herein, the VNIM has to monitor all other CVs by exchanging Mhello messages with

Algorithm 5 (VNIM Handover). The selected vehicle remains as the VNIM till it arrives at a threshold point PTH. When the VNIM reaches the threshold point PTH, the procedure of the VNIM selec- tion must be invoked by broadcasting Mnetwork message, and a new VNIM should be selected. In the case that the current VNIM leaves its associated network cell without transferring its responsi- bility for any reason, the CVs will recognize its absence soon after- wards and proceed as though it was never there.

iff there is a communication link between them; otherwise, the messages must be transmitted via relay vehicles inside the net- work cell. Moreover, when a vehicle leaves its current network cell, it will not be able to communicate with its current VNIM; conse- quently, the VNIM removes it from the list of the network mem- bers. Finally, in case of VNIM leaving, a new selection process should be invoked by broadcasting Mnetwork message in order to select the next VNIM for that network cell.

Finally, our assumption is that all users have been verified before being given full access to the VVNI network. They can only offer or discover services once they have access. This work does not specify what needs to be verified. Public Key Infrastructure (PKI), for example, could be used [50]. The responsible authority issues a key to each user. To connect to the network, a consumer or provider must present the key to a member. Also, VVNI can adopt one of the available verification and authentication methods that were introduced specifically for vehicular networks [51].

On the other side, the results reveal that increasing the number of vehicles in the network cell has a slight impact on increasing the percentage of network uptime, especially with the Efficient- Oriented and Availability-Oriented selection policies. For example, the percentage of network uptime of the Efficient-Oriented selec- tion policy increases from 76.9% to 94.8% when the number of vehicles increases from 50 to 400 vehicles/km2. Besides, the results range of the vehicles. This improvement is justifiable because increasing the transmission range of the vehicles increases the portability of finding more and shorter routes to the existing GWs in the network cell. For instance, the percentage of network throughput of the Efficient-Oriented selection policy increases from 49.7% to 85.5% when the transmission range of the vehicles increases from 150 to 300 m.

In another respect, the results show that when the velocity of the vehicles increases, the percentage of network throughput decreases. This behaviour is due to the high rate of VNIM changes associated with increasing the maximum velocity of the vehicles. Therefore, the network throughput percentage of the Efficient- Oriented selection policy is decreased by about 40% when the max- imum velocity of the vehicles changes from 30 km/h to 75 km/h.

To further evaluate our proposed network infrastructure, the traffic-offloading fraction was measured. The traffic-offloading fraction refers to the percentage of data traffic that is redirected from a congested cellular network to the proposed VVNI. The pur- pose of traffic offloading is to relieve congestion on the cellular net- work, which can improve the quality of service for users and reduce the load on the network infrastructure. The traffic- offloading fraction is calculated by dividing the amount of data traffic that is offloaded to the VVNI (either directly thru VNIM or relayed thru CV) by the total amount of data traffic on the cellular network. A higher traffic offloading fraction indicates a more effec- tive offloading strategy and can lead to better network perfor- mance and user experience.

Finally, some proof-of-concept simulations show that the pro- posed framework can significantly improve the availability of the network infrastructure with high throughput and minimal over- head, especially in highly dense urban areas. In the future, we intend to extend this work to consider issues such as preserving the privacy of the vehicles while revealing their predicted informa- tion, and how utilizing parked vehicles can improve the overall performance of the proposed network infrastructure.Also, further investigation is needed to address the assumption that all users have been verified before being given full access to the VVNI network.

In conclusion, the proposed VVNI has the potential to signifi- cantly enhance ICT in smart cities. Eventhough relying solely on connected vehicles as information and communication hubs may not be feasible, they can still provide significant benefits when used in conjunction with other technologies and infrastructure. Hence, AI and ML can be used to analyze the vast amount of data collected by VVNI and identify patterns and trends. Also, the pro- posed VVNI can be utilized to improve autonomous driving thru developing more sophisticated algorithms, improving sensor tech- nology, and addressing legal and ethical issues related to autono- mous vehicles. By and large, the VVNI can bring several potential benefits, including improved communication, increased safety, enhanced traffic management, improved efficiency, and the devel- opment of new applications and services. To fully realize the potential of the VVNI in smart cities, continued research and devel- opment is needed to ensure that the technology is integrated into city operations in a safe, secure, and effective manner.

F. Dressler, P. Handle, C. Sommer, Towards a vehicular cloud - Using parked vehicles as a temporary network and storage infrastructure, in: WiMobCity 2014 - ProceedIngs of the 2014 ACM International Workshop on Wireless and Mobile Technologies for Smart Cities, co-located with MobiHoc, 2014, 2014, https://doi.org/10.1145/2633661.2633671.

