This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 recalls some notions about context theory and introduces some idea behind the use of context for modelling distributed systems. Section 3 presents our framework for the specification of information flow properties in a distributed system. Section 4 shows a comparison with related work. In Section 5 we report the conclusion of the paper. Finally, in Appendix we report the proves of the main theorems.

In this way we have a general framework that permits us to consider a complex and general scenario. Indeed, whether we consider a partially specified system, several scenarios can be considered in order to obtain a closed system. In the easiest case, the number of the unspecified components is one. In this case there is a unique hole that a process can fill in.  On the other hand, if we consider a system in which there are several holes, we may distinguish from two different approaches for the analysis of such systems: By considering all n holes as a unique hole of cardinality n (in this case we put a central process that performs a vector of n actions), or by considering several independent unary processes whose product closes the expression.

It is possible to note that, in this case, the first step is similar because the first action is performed by P1. There is a difference between the behavior of C(P ) and C(P1, P2) if the first action is performed by P2, or the difference appears at the second steps of transaction. As a matter of fact, in the first case, we have to follow the behavior of P' and C' , on the contrary, in the second case the first (or second) step could be performed by P2 and C2. This crucial difference will be used in the following to prove a central result of this paper.

Now we are able to give the definition of weak bisimulation by considering that, in the rest of the paper, we use it w.r.t. contexts in Cn. Hence we consider a definition that is an extension of the definition of weak bisimulation given by Milner in [19] for processes, that, as we have already said, can be seen as contexts in C1.

In this paper we want to extend the definition of NDC and BNDC properties given for processes in order to deal also with distributed systems. In particular, we con- sider a partially specified system in which several components are unspecified. We describe it as a context. Then we wonder if the context is NDC and/or BNDC.

all process algebras operators. This result is an extension of the one given in [17], in which the author proved that BNDC is not compositional w.r.t. parallel operator. Moreover, in [21], the author has defined several properties, stronger than BNDC, in order to have properties that are compositional w.r.t. process algebra operators. In this work we have proposed a different specification of the problem that takes into account the environment of the system.

We aim to extend this research by considering also the verification problem. We are working on a method to verify both centralized and distributed BNDC. Moreover we will also investigate what could happen if some unspecified components of the analyzed partially specified system can perform low actions. In particular we could consider that the unspecified components of the system are not only possible malicious agents but could also be generic processes that can perform high actions as well as low ones.

