Fish suffer bioaccumulation of heavy metals through the absorption and retention of such materials along the food chain. This is facilitated in the aquatic environment by water filtration and retention of particles in suspension by filtrating organisms like the phytoplankton and shellfish. Fish accumulate metals by feed- ing and also through the gills [5,7,8].

change. In the acclimatization period the fish were supplied with a daily diet of commercial feed Sera Vipan flakesTM and Alcon BasicTM with composition for omnivorous fish. During the acute toxicity tests the fish were not fed. The acclimation procedures and experimentation with the fish followed ABNT NBR 15088 [17] determinations.

zinc sulfate (30; 45; 60; 75 and 90 mg/L). The concentration range was defined from literature data such as used by Singh and Manjeet (2015) [18] and determined by preliminary tests. For the tests, the fish were placed in containers of 4 liters of water, with water qual- ity parameters according to Georgetti (2010)[19], water hardness being of 40 mg/L CaCO3, dissolved oxygen ranging from 7.0 to

165.5 and 181.2 lS/cm, for 24 h. Under these conditions of pH and hardness there was no formation of precipitates in the solu- tions. After this period, the containers were contaminated and the fish remained under test for 96 h. Dead individuals were collected, quantified and parameters were measured and registered.

The analytical curves were performed with solutions diluted at concentrations of 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 5.0 and 10.0 mg/L (with standard ICP for multi-element 100 mg/L (Merck), obtaining linear and angular correlation coefficients. The standard of 1.0 mg/L was analyzed 11 times to evaluate accuracy. To assess the recovery method, a

Yilmaz et al. (2004) [11], of 30.4 mg/L for the Poecilia crosslinked, another similarly sized poecilid, which has been used as a bioindi- cator body for toxicity testing. This sensitivity similarity may be related to the similar size of the bodies. According to Yi and Zhang (2012) [29], the size of the bodies relates to the retention and accu- mulation of metals such as cadmium, zinc and lead, in most fish species. It can also be related to the similarities between poecilids in terms of ecological need and metabolic activity, since these characteristics can affect metal concentrations in fish [29].

Compared to Bertoletti (2009) [12], who researched the toxicity of certain substances, including zinc sulfate in zebrafish Daniorerio (average weight 0.15 g and LC50 (96 h) 22.0 mg/L), Poecilia reticu- lata (average weight 0.20 g and LC50 (96 h) 28.0 mg/L) and Hemi- grammu smarginatus (average weight 0.40 g and LC50 (96 h)

After three months of exposure, the bioconcentration occurred in the order Zn > Pb > Cd > Cr, and BCF values obtained were: 1793.1 for Zn; 1192.3 for Pb; 982.14 for Cd and 92.35 for Cr. The BCF numbers for these four elements were high, but the bioaccu- mulation of cadmium and lead should be highlighted due to its high relative concentration found in the fish.

Relating the sensitivity of P. caudimaculatus to the tested metals, as measured by the acute toxicity test (Pb > Cd > Zn > Cr) and bio- concentration (Zn > Pb > Cd > Cr), by the chronic toxicity test, lead and cadmium proved to be more toxic to the species. Zinc obtained higher bioconcentration and lower toxicity than these metals. On the other hand, the chromium, bioconcentrated less and was more tolerated by the species than the other metals tested. However, according to McGeer et al. (2003) [30], for a correct prediction of how hazardous are these metals, it should be based on the intrinsic characteristics of each metal, regardless of concentration of expo- sure. Since it cannot be assumed that the hazard will be reduced as the concentration increases.

Cadmium, has no defined essentiality, and lead does not act on the functioning of biological metabolism, both are considered non- essential and, therefore, highly harmful to organisms [11]. In this work, the exposure concentration of Cadmium was 0.028 mg/L and BCF 982.14, compared to the BCF of 2.623 obtained by McGeer et al. (2003) [30] at a lower exposure concentration of 0.003 mg/L. Despite the limited evidence of regulation of internal Cadmium concentrations, this author speculates that control over Cadmuim accumulation can be achieved, with accumulated Cadmium detox- ification being a common process with Cadmium binding to low molecular weight molecules, such as metallothionein that occurs in many animals. Although some species have physiological mech- anisms to mitigate the damages. This does not guarantee the pro- tection of the species.

Fish affected by Lead are killed by axficia. According to the FAO (2017) [32], the maximum permissible concentration of lead in water is 0.004 to 0.008 mg/L for salmonids and 0.07 mg/L for cypri- nids. According to McGeer et al. (2003) [30], the concentration of

The toxicity of lead to aquatic organisms depends on the solu- bility of the lead compounds and the calcium concentration. As a result, it is influenced by water quality, with increasing hardness, alkalinity and pH, increasing the precipitation of these compounds, reducing their toxicity in the water column (FAO, 2017) [32]. What did not happen in this work, because the pH was in neutrality. Fur- thermore, according to Singh and Manjeet, 2015 [18], the toxicity of Lead Nitrate is proportional to concentration and time of expo- sure, increasing mortality.

The monitoring of these metals in the environment is extremely important. The use of P. caudimaculatus as bioindicator of these contaminants has proven to be very efficient through the tests per- formed. Since these fish are related to all the lower chain in their habitat of origin, they may indicate responses of chronic, accumu- lative and persistent effects at chain level, in addition to direct effects at individual level, as observed by Lins et al. (2010) [5], which reinforces the importance of its use for such purpose.

The P. caudimaculatus lives in healthy natural environment, and survives in environments subject to contamination, such as urban streams, which implies resistance to contaminants, as demon- strated in this work. It is abundant, cosmopolitan and easily obtainable species. Also, it has a short breeding period, easily breed in captivity, and may easily adapt to the laboratory environment. All these characteristics according to Akanksha et al. (2010) [6], makes it an ideal bioindicator organism.

Many exotic species are efficiently used in toxicity tests [12]. However, the use of non-commercial and easy to breed in captivity native species as bioindicators is important to environmental pro- tection, mostly because the introduction of non-native in the natural environment is unwanted, since they damage the local aquatic com- munity due to multiplication and competition for resources. There- fore, it is important to know the biota of the site to be protected, not only in ecological terms, but in their susceptibility to contaminants.

Considering that the contamination of the aquatic environment by metals such as cadmium, lead, chromium and zinc affect both the aquatic biota, and those who depend on it along the food chain [8]. The attesting of P. Caudimaculatus as a bioindicator of heavy met- als confers environmental protection against them. Whereas, it makes it possible indicate the contaminated sites to resolve the problem.

Based on the experiment conducted in this study, the lead nitrate II was the most toxic salt for the Phalloceros caudimaculatus species, followed by cadmium nitrate, zinc sulfate and potassium dichromate respectively. Despite the bioconcentration P. caudimac- ulatus is an efficient bio-indicator of Cd, Cr, Pb and Zn.

