This paper presents a generalization of chaotic systems using two-dimensional affine transformations with six introduced parameters to achieve scaling, reflection, rotation, translation and/or shearing. Hence, the location of the strange attractor in space can be controlled without changing its chaotic dynamics. In addition, the embedded parameters enhance the randomness and sensitivity of the system and control its response. This approach overpasses performing the transformations as post-processing stages by applying them on the resulting time series. Trajectory control through dynamic parameters is demonstrated. Simulation results validate the proposed analysis for both the simplest and Lorenz chao- tic systems. An image encryption scheme is implemented using transformed Lorenz system resulting in a more secure encryption scheme in comparison to Lorenz and other recent related works. The scheme exhibits good performance when assessed using the PRNG properties, encrypted image histogram and its uniformity through chi square test, pixel correlation, Mean Squared Error (MSE), entropy, Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), the National Institute of Standards & Technology (NIST) test, key space, key sensitivity, resistance to differential, ciphertext-only, known plaintext, and chosen plaintext attacks, robustness against noise and computation time.

This paper uses embedded affine transformations to control chaotic systems and enhance their sensitivity. This method enables simultaneous control of the size of the strange attractor through scaling parameters, its location through rotation and/or transla- tion, its shape through shearing and the number of scrolls through dynamic parameters. Section 2 briefly reviews the basic mathe- matics of affine transformations. Sections 3 and 4 apply the trans- formation to the simplest and Lorenz chaotic systems demonstrating the effects on the time series, attractor diagrams and Maximum Lyapunov Exponent (MLE). Section 5 utilizes scaling and translation parameters to dynamically control the trajectory of the strange attractor. Section 6 highlights the main advantages of transformed Lorenz system in an image encryption application. Section 7 discusses the results in comparison to other recent related works. Section 8 summarizes the main contributions of the paper and suggests future work directions.

The effect of the transformation on the eigen vectors of the Jaco- bian matrix can also be studied. The Eigen Vectors Inclination (EVI) is plotted against the rotation angle h. EVI is the angle between the vector at h = 0 and that at a given value of h, i.e., Dh = h. In a real time units in a total simulation time of 500 time units. The resulting time series of (9) are compared to the scaled time series of the con- ventional Lorenz system. The resulting attractor diagrams follow the prescribed trajectories, which are red colored. The intensity of the strange attractor color varies with time, where the darker points are plotted first and becomes brighter as time advances.

This section studies the performance of transformed Lorenz sys- tem, compared to Lorenz system, as a PRNG in an image encryption application. Three standard 1024 1024 color images: Lena, man- dril and peppers [42] are used for testing the encryption scheme. While Lena image is firstly used in comparing the Lorenz and transformed Lorenz systems performance in the scheme with detailed results, performance metrics are averaged for the three color channels of the two other images.

the MUX is removed. The correlation coefficients between the noiseless decrypted image and the noisy one are also given. The robustness against noise can be identified by the capability of per- ceptually identifying the image content and the correlation coeffi- cient values approaching one.

