Nowadays, the needs of the human being are highly relying on using robots in many life applications. Accordingly, the need to produce intelligent robots is drastically increasing. Robot learning is considered to be a combination between the robotics and the machine learning fields. The transition from a current state of the robot to another to execute new action (i.e. policy) is the core of robotics applications. The machine learning techniques are tradi- tionally used to develop new polices [1].

Among the learning from demonstration techniques, the com- monly used approach is developed such that a robot learns how to do a task using its own sensors instead of interpreting the body of a demonstrator or even another robot. The demonstrator teaches the robot in an iterative manner using multiple demonstrations, thus the robot is enabled to produce a generalized demonstration. If any error found during performing the task, the demonstrator will just provide other demonstrations. The objective is to expand the ability of the robot to handle new conditions and to be adjusted to those conditions.

Calinon and Billard [10] presented an approach for gesture recognition and reproduction. Their approach is based on two main stages: (1) Using Principal component analysis (PCA) or Indepen- dent component analysis (ICA) for the decomposition of the data as a preprocessing stage, (2) Applying hidden Markov models (HMMs) for the encoding of the gestures. Another approach used for the dimensionality reduction is the factor analyzers [11]. The authors proposed an approach for trajectory learning from demon- stration based on using probabilistic motion primitives for repre- senting the demonstrated trajectories. In this approach, the motion was recorded by the body of the human then correspon- dence map between the human and the robot was achieved. This approach can be used in many applications such as surgical appli- cations [4]. Another approach for learning from demonstration, which avoids interpreting the body of the human to the kinematics of the robot, is called Kinesthetic teaching, in which the motion is

It is seen from the literature that the learning from demonstra- tion depends mainly on discrete data which may cause distortion in the learning outcome. Thus, a preprocessing phase for the data is necessarily to handle this kind of distortion. In this paper, a new scheme for robot trajectory learning is developed by employ- ing the posterior HMM state distribution [13] as a preprocessing step. Posterior HMM state distribution is used in reconstructing the trajectory data using set of hidden states. The reconstructed data is used instead of the raw data to identify the positions of the initial key. And hence, this would lead to enhancement in iden- tifying the positions of the initial key points. After identifying the initial key points, HMM is used to model the set of key points. Afterwards, DTW is used for the temporal aligning of the key points. Weighting coefficients are assigned such that the low vari- ance parts can have higher weights than the high variance parts. Finally, the last step deals with interpolating the set of aligned key points and its weights using cubic spline interpolation to find a generalized trajectory.

The probability of the transition from state i at time t to state j at time t + 1 is denoted by aij = P[st+1 = j|st = i], form the state tran- sition matrix A = {aij} where i, j = {1, 2, ... , Ns}, and Ns is the num- ber of states in the model. The state transition diagram is shown in

After identifying the initial key points for each demonstration, the reconstructed data are mapped into set of discrete observation symbols. Discrete HMM is used for modeling the demonstrated tra- jectories. The parameters needed for applying HMM (a,b,p) are ini- tialized using the minimum distortion trajectory and calculated according to Bakis left-right topology [15]. The minimum distor- tion trajectory Xr is selected using the criteria mentioned in [16] and [17].

The missed fields consisting of NaNs were interpolated from the rest of the data. The posterior HMM state distribution was applied to interpolate each trajectory from a set of hidden states. As men- tioned in Section 2.3, to employ the posterior HMM state distribu- tion, the normalized positions and velocities of the raw data are clustered using K-means algorithm twice: first with 256 observa- tion symbols and second with 64 clusters as the number of the and velocity of the raw data to identify the initial key points as done in [9], Posterior HMM state distribution was first used to reconstruct the data to avoid the local distortion in the demon- strated data in the proposed scheme. The new dataset were recon- structed using set of clusters and probability of each cluster at each point. The set of clusters consider the most significant changes in the demonstrated data which would lead to significant identifica- tion of the initial key points. This reconstruction helped in finding an optimum index for the initial key points, and hence, the gener- alized trajectory of the proposed scheme is more accurate.

In this paper, we have presented a new scheme for robots tra- jectory learning from demonstration. A preprocessing stage has been proposed to avoid any distortion that may happen due to using the raw discrete data directly. The preprocessed data consid- ers for the most significant points in each demonstration and so it is better than the raw data in identifying the initial key points. First, the preprocessed data has been used instead of the raw data. Then, a set of key points were identified for each demonstration and HMM was used to encode the key points. The key points were warped in time domain then interpolated using cubic spline inter- polation. RMSE has been used as a metric to compare the general- ized trajectory using our approach to the others in the related work. The results showed that our approach has the capability to achieve the minimum error in comparison with the previous work. The reason for having minimum error is that the preprocessed data has been used instead of the raw data. In addition, it has been shown also that the overall computational cost is almost similar to the state-of-the-art approaches. Currently, we are working on further enhancement of the proposed scheme by employing other clustering techniques instead of the K-means in identifying the key points.

Calinon S, Billard A. Learning of gestures by imitation in a humanoid robot. In: Dautenhahn K, Nehaniv CL, editors. Imitation and social learning in robots, humans and animals: social and communicative dimension. Cambridge, U. K.: Cambridge Univ. Press; 2007. ch. 8.

