The low profiling efficiency is the key barrier to the industrial application of laser dressing technology for profile grinding wheels. In this paper, the trajectory planning method of deep-cutting laser profiling was proposed for the first time, the theoretical model of the energy distribution of the Gaussian laser beam on the surface of the profile grinding wheel was established, and the effect of this method on improving the profiling efficiency of superabrasive profile grinding wheel was systematically studied. Through comparative experiments, it was confirmed that the trajectory planning method could effectively improve the profiling efficiency of the V-shaped grinding wheel, and it was found that the smaller the tip angle, the greater the efficiency improvement. The change of grain size will lead to the change of grain removal method, which will affect the profiling efficiency of V-shaped grinding wheel, but it has little influence on the profiling accuracy. The V-tip arc radius of the diamond which was difficult to achieve by mechanical or electrical dressing method. The trajectory planning method could also significantly improve the profiling efficiency of convex/concave arc-shaped grinding wheels, and the greater the arc radius or chord-to-diameter ratio of the grinding wheel, the greater the efficiency improvement. Even though convex/concave arc-shaped grinding wheels were the same size, their profiling efficiency and material removal efficiency were quite different. For grinding wheels with different arc radii or chord-to- diameter ratios, different process strategies should be selected during laser profiling to ensure a comprehen- sive balance between efficiency, accuracy and quality.

In order to solve this problem, many scholars have developed mul- tiple methods that can be used to dress superabrasive profile grinding wheels. Among them, the most widely used methods are mechanical method and electrical dressing methods (including electrical discharge dressing and electrolytic in-process dressing), but they still have many disadvantages and limitations. For example, the traditional mechanical method has defects such as fast tool wear and difficult compensation, high dust concentration, and great harm. Even more tricky, the me- chanical method is difficult to dress the concave surface grinding wheels because the dressing tools tend to interfere with the surface of the profile grinding wheel [9]. Non-metallic bond and all kinds of grains are non- conductive, which prevents in the top of the excessively protruding gradually increases due to the decreasing of the cutting depth cp, so that the laser spot area Sp irradiated on the surface of the grinding wheel increases continuously, and the laser power density deposited in the irradiated area continues to decrease, which eventually leads to a gradual decrease in material removal efficiency and laser profiling ef- ficiency. When the laser power density is lower than the material removal threshold (let B be the intersection point between the center line of the laser beam and the trajectory line at this time), the laser beam will not be able to remove the material and lose the profiling ability, that is, the laser beam will be in the idling state when scanning from point B to point C. Therefore, planning the scanning trajectory scientifically is essential to improve the efficiency of deep-cutting laser profiling of superabrasive profile grinding wheels.

How to determine the grinding wheel material removal threshold is another key point in trajectory planning. It is a common method to determine the removal threshold of grain or bond by carrying out laser ablation experiments of grinding wheel material, but this method is time-consuming and material-consuming, and its accuracy is not high [27]. During the laser dressing process, the plasma emission spectrum consisting of the weaker continuous background spectrum and the line spectrum superimposed on the background spectrum will be produced on the processing area of the grinding wheel surface. The line spectrum is emitted by the stimulated radiation produced by neutral atoms or ions in the plasma when they transition from a high-energy excited state to a lower energy level, that is, each line spectrum corresponds to a specific element in grinding wheel material. The intensity of the line spectrum is positively correlated with the corresponding element content, laser power density, and material removal rate. Therefore, the removal threshold of grain or bond can be determined by observing the charac- teristic spectral line and its intensity of the plasma during the dressing process with a spectrometer.

database of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). It can be found that the wavelength of the spectral line of the grain was mainly concentrated between 350 and 600 nm, while the wavelength of the spectral line of the bond was concentrated between 200 and 450 nm. In order to avoid the interference of the bond spectral line, Ni I 515.576 with the wavelength between 450 and 600 nm and the highest peak spectral line intensity was selected as the characteristic spectral line in the grain spectral lines.

was carried out in this section. The laser power used in the experiment was Pavg = 70 W, and the laser scanning speed v2 = 0.322 mm/s. In order to ensure that the initial conditions were as consistent as possible, two sets of experiments were carried out on the surface of the same parallel

19.4 s for the laser beam to scan along the entire trajectory each time. However, at the initial stage of profiling, the laser beam is in a state of idling for about 10.5 s each time, and the material cannot be removed. As the profiling process progresses, the idle time is gradually shortened, the profiling efficiency of the right area is gradually improved, and finally the profiling efficiency of the left and right areas will tend to be consistent.

While when the entire trajectory scanning method was used to complete the profiling of the right area, the volume of material to be removed was about 2824 mm3, which took 4.13 h, and the material removal efficiency was 11.39 mm3/min. This showed that the trajectory planning method can shorten the profiling time by 0.85 h and improve the profiling ef- ficiency by more than 20%. It should be noted that under the premise that the size of the parallel grinding wheel remains unchanged, the in- crease in efficiency will also be affected by the geometric size and grain size of the V-shaped grinding wheel. See Section 3.2.2 for details.

found that for convex/concave arc-shaped grinding wheels of the same size, although the variation range of the laser power density is basically the same, the variation rate is quite different (the time from the peak value to the critical value was 3.3 s and 9.5 s, respectively), which will result in a different number of planned profiling trajectories (the number of concave arc-shaped grinding wheels is less than that of convex arc grinding wheels).

The trajectory planning method could also significantly improve the profiling efficiency of the convex/concave arc-shaped grinding wheel, and the larger the arc radius or chord-to- diameter ratio, the greater the improvement of the profiling ef- ficiency by this method. When profiling convex/concave wheels of the same size, the latter had a higher material removal rate, but its profiling time was longer because the volume of material to be removed was also greater. When the arc radius or chord-to- diameter ratio of the grinding wheel was different, it was rec- ommended to choose different profiling process strategies. When they were small, a high-power laser beam could be used throughout, while when they were large, a strategy of gradually increasing the laser power from low to high could be used.

Financial support for this research was provided by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51975209, No. 52375425), the Science and Technology Innovation Program of Hunan Province (No. 2022RC1136), the Special Projects of the Central Government in Guid- ance of Local Science and Technology Development (No. 2023ZYC006), and the Scientific Research Fund of Hunan Provincial Education Department (No. 21B0458).

