In this study, we used state-of-the-art CRISPR/dCas9-based molecular tools [8,30] to investigate whether the glyco-genes encoding for the main glycosyltransferases and corresponding glycans are regulated by the HNF1A, HNF4A, and FOXA2 transcription factors in HepG2 cells, a model for the human liver. The approach of downregulating the HNF1A, HNF4A, and FOXA2 genes using the CRISPR/dCas9-KRAB molecular tool was chosen because HNF1A, HNF4A, and FOXA2 are the key transcription factors at the intersection of several key cellular pathways in the human liver [14,26]. Therefore, the total knock-down of these transcription factors was expected to be lethal or to reduce cell viability significantly, up to the point of interfering with the experimental goal of assessing the magnitude and direction of change in the N-glycosylation profile of HepG2 cells after changing the expression of the main glyco-genes, presumably regulated by these three transcription factors. We also focused on fine adjustments of the protein glycosylation process under physiological conditions. Therefore, the HNF1A, HNF4A, or FOXA2 genes were downregulated individually or simultaneously in pairs (HNF1A/HNF4A, HNF1A/FOXA2, and HNF4A/FOXA2) using the KRAB-dCas9 fusion construct targeting their native promoters.

transcriptional activity of several glycosyltransferases responsible for glycan branching was found. Thus, the relationship between the expression of glycosyltransferases and the composition of the HepG2 N-glycome is not straightforward. This type of discrepancy between the transcript level of a specific glyco-gene and its corresponding glycan structure has been reported previously [2,3]. For example, during the maturation of murine embrionic stem cells to embryonic endodermal (ExE) cells, the increase in the expression of B3GNT1, B3GNT4, and B4GALT1 had no effect on the corresponding polylactosamine extension of the glycan structures. Moreover, the proportion of core fucosylated and bisected glycans in ExE cells increased even though the levels of FUT8 and MGAT3 were not elevated [2]. Recently, Nguyen and collaborators [39] reported that the overexpression of only 10 out of 42 analyzed glyco-genes had an impact on immunoglobulin G (IgG) glycosylation in Chinese hamster ovary cells.

