forward and backward rates of QE reactions, ie the step 3 of Algorithm 1 does not identify reversible reactions. Alternatively, one can realize that slaved species can have relatively large concentrations, in which case they are not QSS species. However, it is difficult to say which concentration value separates QSS from non QSS species among slaved species, hence the former, dominance criterion is better.

Starting with the system (2) we first reduce it to a simpler model. The analysis of the model is performed for the values of parameters from [26], namely k1 = 0.015, k3 = 200, k4 = 180, kj = 0.018, k6 = 1, k7 = 0.6, k8 = 1000000, k9 = 1000;

The tropicalization represents an abstraction of the ODE model. This abstrac- tion may be not sound for some dynamic properties, but may conserve others. If the trajectories of the ODE model are either very far or very close to the tropical vari- eties, they tend to remain close to the trajectories of the tropicalization for a while. However, the quality of the approximation is not guaranteed at finite distance from the tropical variety. For instance, the exit of tropicalized trajectories from a sliding mode tends to be delayed, and smooth trajectories leave earlier neighborhoods of tropical varieties. The example studied in this paper also illustrates some properties of bifurcations of the tropicalization, that we have tested numerically. The tropi- calization qualitatively preserves the type and stability of attractors, but can also introduce delays of a Hopf bifurcation. Thus, the tropicalization can only roughly indicate the position of the bifurcation of the ODE model. Furthermore, close to the bifurcation, the amplitude of the limit cycle oscillations behaves differently for the ODE model and for the tropicalization. The two detected Hopf bifurcations are continuous (the oscillation amplitude vanishes at bifurcation) for the ODE model and discontinuous (the oscillation amplitude does not vanish at bifurcation) for the tropicalization.

VN was supported by University of Rennes 1. SV was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (Grant Nos. 10-01-00627 s and 10-01-00814 a) and the CDRF NIH (Grant No. RR07801) and by a visiting professorship grant from the University of Montpellier 2.

