The multiscaleness property of biochemical network is by definition closely linked to the mathematical notion of dominance, captured in the framework of tropical analysis[1,21]. Recently, a class of semi-formal methods for reducing and hybridizing models of biochemical networks has been developed, based on ideas from tropical analysis [26,27,28,29]. These methods exploit the multiscaleness of biochemical networks, in order to deduce dominance relations among parameters and/or reaction rates, which can then be used to obtain a system of truncated ODEs (by eliminating the dominated terms). One of the advantages of using dominance relations in multi- scale networks is that it helps cope with parameter uncertainty: parameter values are replaced with their orders of magnitude, which are easier to determine. However, providing guarantees as to how the solution of the reduced model relates to the original one remains a challenge. Such is also the case in [2], where we proposed a reduction framework for rule-based models, based on time-scale separation. While this time-scale separation technique is justified by asymptotic convergence results, for any concrete parameter values, there is no information on the accuracy of the trajectories obtained by executing the reduced model.

The Michaelis-Menten system represents a particular, simple case study: the choice of reaction rate constants fixes the dominance region in which the system evolves. In general, the state of a biochemical network can traverse multiple such regions, as the dominant monomials can change from one concentration domain to another. Thus, we next introduce a case study in which the dominant monomials are concentration-dependent, which in turn means that the dominance region is no longer fixed. Our method is designed with this more general situation in mind: having computed the most accurate bounds for each region of the state space parti- tioning, and having no information regarding the region in which the original system evolves at a given time t, our approach chooses the least accurate local bound, in order to ensure global soundness.

occurence of a variable xj in Fk,l(xi) with one of its expressions Eb(xj) (or with its appropriate bound derived from Eb(xj) 9 ) results in another safe upper bound for F(xi). By choosing the minimum such candidate bound, one obtains the most accurate, locally safe upper bound. The same reasoning applies to the computation of lower bounds, but the min operation is replaced with max.

Finally, the interpretation of the variables is lifted over the hyper-faces. Any occurence of xi is replaced with its analogue corresponding to the hyperface we want to bound, while the others are replaced to their analogue given by the polarity of their occurence, as explained in Note 2.5.

and has the conservation law y1(t)+y2(t)+y3(t)+y4(t) = 1, where the value1 de- noting the total initial concentration of kinase cdc2 (i.e. y1(0)+y2(0)+y3(0)+y4(0)) was chosen by convenience. The values of the reaction rates constants are fixed as to have the model display the oscillatory behavior: k1 = 0.015, k3 = 200, k4 = 180, kj = 0.018, k6 = 1, k8 = 103, k9 = 106.

