Subjective Logic [10, 11] and we instantiate it in an intelligent coffee corner scenario we have set up in our research institute. Presently, a user approaching the coffee corner can see, on a wall-screen, the position of his colleagues. Which colleagues will appear on the screen depends upon the level of authentication the user obtains by the number and the quality of identity tokens provided when authenticating.

The outline of the paper is as follows: Section 2 discusses the idea of strength- ening authentication by the use of contextual information and context-aware trust. Section 3 reminds the basics of Subjective Logic, whilst section 4 explains how to calculate trust given a set of location sources. Section 5 describes how to instantiate our framework into a realistic model of sensors. Section 6 comments the results of the simulation we did to validate our location-based trust algorithm. The related work is presented in Section 7 and Section 8 draws the conclusion and points out the future work.

The problem of distributed authentication has been widely studied for long time (cf. [2]). To survey the efforts and the contributions in this area would be too ambitious. Our work addresses the authentication procedures and methods only in suggesting the use of context and context-based trust as a subsidiary information to improve the result from traditional authentication process.

position within a building [6]. The fusion algorithm runs over a map of the build- ing, which constitutes the grid over which probabilities are combined and updated along time. This work describes a complementary approach to ours. We think that an approach based on belief theory is more appropriate than one based probability theory for developing a general-purpose sensor fusion algorithm. In fact, our pro- posal is easily scalable with the number of sensors and, although our approach is instantiated with location based information, it can easily be be extended towards other context types.

Because our simulations confirm the theoretical expectation on the trend of trust, we are currently implementing our algorithm in a office application that allows the user to view, on a wall screen, the location of his buddy colleagues depending on his authentication level. The authentication procedure we have now is based on the recognition of personal devices assumed to belong to the user (i.e., PDA, badge, laptop, Bluetooth devices, RFID). Here, we want to avoid unauthorised use of the service, for example by someone else using a badge of that user, or sitting at his desk, while the user is temporarily away.

