We introduce two-dimensional linear algebra, by which we do not mean two-dimensional vector spaces but rather the systematic replacement in linear algebra of sets by cat- egories. This entails the study of categories that are simultaneously categories of algebras for a monad and categories of coalgebras for comonad on a category such as SymMons, the category of small symmetric monoidal categories. We outline rele- vant notions such as that of pseudo-closed 2-category, symmetric monoidal Lawvere theory, and commutativity of a symmetric monoidal Lawvere theory, and we ex- plain the role of coalgebra, explaining its precedence over algebra in this setting.

structure and with the action of R on [R, A] induced by precomposition. These adjoints can be expressed as left and right Kan extensions respectively, if one enriches in the symmetric monoidal closed category of abelian groups, because a commutative ring is exactly a commutative monoid in the category Ab. The two adjoints exhibit R-Mod as both the category of algebras for a monad on Ab and also as the category of coalgebras for a comonad on Ab.

The above suggests that linear algebra is a potential area of application of the study of coalgebras. But it does not, a priori, imply that linear algebra is relevant to computer science. However, now suppose we drop the assumption of inverses in the definition of a group. Then, abelian groups above would be replaced by commutative monoids, rings would be replaced by semirings, and R-modules remain the same except that the underlying object need only be a commutative monoid rather than an abelian group.

The paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we outline our concep- tion of two-dimensional linear algebra and how we hope to develop it. We sketch the basic definitions and results, and we explain why coalgebra plays a stronger role here than in the ordinary one-dimensional linear algebra. In Sec- tion 3, we introduce the notion of a symmetric monoidal Lawvere theory. In Section 4, we define what it means for a symmetric monoidal Lawvere theory to be commutative, and we prove that this induces a comonad on SymMons. And in Section 5, we show how, by means of a more complex construction that may ultimately prove to be less natural, one can obtain a comonad to account for those examples of symmetric monoidal Lawvere theories that are not commutative.

There seem to be two ways to negotiate this difficulty. The first, more elegant, approach is to define a notion of pseudo-symmetric pseudo-monoidal pseudo-closed 2-category and attempt to prove that the 2-category SymMon of small symmetric monoidal categories and strong symmetric monoidal func- tors has that structure. That should be possible within the coming few years, as we are making good progress in that direction in [13] based upon a notion of pseudo-commutative monad.

We do not give detailed definitions here, as our account is not complete yet and the details might distract from the flow of the paper. So we refer the reader to [13] for detail. But the central idea is as follows. One first defines a notion of pseudo-commutative monad. For the 2-category theoretic terminology used here, we refer the reader to [15].

Examples of pseudo-commutative monads include our leading example of the 2-monad for small symmetric monoidal categories, the 2-monad for small categories with finite products, and that for small categories with finite co- products. Another example is the 2-monad for which an algebra is a small symmetric monoidal category together with a strong endofunctor, as lies at the heart of [9]. A non-example is the 2-monad for which an algebra is a small category together with a monad on it. This can all be verified by routine calculation.

In this section, we introduce the notion of a symmetric monoidal Lawvere theory. This is a symmetric monoidal version of the usual notion of Lawvere theory, and indeed it extends the usual definition. Both definitions may be seen as instances of the same general phenomenon, which may be described for any monad T on Cat: for ordinary Lawvere theories, consider the monad T for small categories with finite products; for symmetric monoidal Lawvere theories, consider the monad T for small symmetric monoidal categories. To make the comparison precise, we recall the definition of Lawvere theory. Let N denote the category whose objects are natural numbers and whose morphisms are all functions between natural numbers.

The first of these directions involves the generalisation from consideration of the 2-category SymMon to that of the 2-category T -Algp for a pseudo- commutative 2-monad T on Cat. We do not explore that here, but see [13]. The other direction involves removing the commutativity condition that we have just introduced, yet still obtaining a comonad, necessarily a somewhat different one from that we have described: we would hardly have introduced the notion of commutativity if we did not need it to obtain the comonad structure we have defined. We give details of that in the next section.

More specifically, all of the specific examples of symmetric monoidal Law- vere theories we have described so far have been commutative. And so are all of the examples implicit in [12]. But for an example of a symmetric monoidal Lawvere theory that is not commutative, consider the following.

