This paper presents a type system for the calculus of Mobile Resources (MR) proposed by Godskesen et al. The type system is able to prevent undesirable border-crossing behaviour such as Trojan horses. This is achieved by combining the notion of group with a notion of security policy. Well-typed processes satisfy a safety property which is preserved under reduction. An algorithm is presented which computes the minimal security policy making a process well typed.

Mobility of software across computer networks is now a widespread phenomenon. Examples range from Java applets moving from servers to clients to the physical movement of a computer between wireless networks. As a result, ensuring the security of such migration has become an important issues.

Like [1] and [5], our type system is based on the notion of group. Moreover, we introduce a notion of security policy. Because migration may occur between any two locations, the type system needs to keep track of the nesting structure of a process. Still, the resulting type system is in our opinion less complex type than those of [1] and [5].

Example 1 Consider a slot n with security policy Sec[tr[CIA, FBI] ts[Capitol] tg[Politicians] , tm[Politicians D Politicians]]. Here, moves from n to CIA and FBI are allowed (trusted receivers). Also moves from the Capitol to n are allowed (trusted senders). Politicians are welcome to guest n, and moves from any politician to another politician are allowed.

The process Camp is well-typed as fire starting is an allowed activity at the firesite. This activity cannot be moved to the library, since the library does not permit matches and acetone as guests. Thus the move FireSite D Library is not well- typed by the side conditions of T-Move.

In this paper we have described a type system for the Calculus of Mobile Resources [3]. The type system allows us to reason about border-crossing phenomena, some- thing that is less straightforward in the setting of the MR calculus. Our type system preserves a safety property. To our knowledge, this is the first such type system proposed for the calculus. With our notion of security policy it becomes straight- forward to describe not just border-crossing properties but also properties such as immobility (contrast this with e.g. [5]).

