Until now, such a priority scheduling of the actions was not studied extensively in the different formal modelling frameworks dedicated to systems biology. Never- theless, such an attempt has been carried out for Petri nets by F. Bause [1], and the concept of priority relations among the transitions of a network has also more recently been introduced by A. K. Wagler et al. [15,14] in order to allow modelling deterministic systems for biological applications. The concept of priority is much straightforward in the approach of process algebras as it was shown by R. Cleaveland

In this paper, we introduce a new extension to the semantics of Process Hitting by partitioning actions into classes of priorities. One of the objectives is to reach an accurate representation of cooperating components in the model, that was not fulfilled with the initial semantics. We then develop an efficient under-approximation of the reachability of the state of components on a subclass of this new framework, thus allowing to compute efficient static analysis. This local reachability under- approximation can be also easily extended to study the reachability of a global state. Finally, as the subclass of models studied proves to be bisimilar to Asynchronous Discrete Networks, we state to have developed an efficient method to compute the reachability of a state and thus study the behaviour of such models.

The construction of cooperation in PH allows to encode any Boolean function between cooperating processes [10]. Due to the introduction of priorities into the PH framework, it is possible to build cooperations with no temporal shift by defining actions updating the cooperative sorts with the highest class of priority. This allows to gain the same expressivity in PH than in Boolean networks, as stated in Sub- sect. 2.2. The aim of this paper is to allow the static analysis of the dynamics to be

In order to support the scalability and applicability of our under-approximation of reachability, we apply our new approach for the analysis of large-scale model of the T-cell receptor (TCR) signalling pathway [12]. This model gathers 94 interact- ing components and is specified as a Boolean network. The under-approximation presented in this paper has been implemented in the existing Pint software 2 .

The Boolean model has been automatically encoded into a Process Hitting with 2 classes of priority 3 . Then, we verified the reachability for the independent ac- tivation of 4 outputs of the signalling cascade (SRE, AP1, NFkB, NFAT) from all possible input combinations (CD45, CD28, TCRlib) using our new reachability under-approximation (answering either yes or inconclusive) and a previously defined reachability over-approximation [11] (answering either no or inconclusive). All re- sult in conclusive decisions, and the under-approximation has been satisfied in 12 cases (over 32) proving the satisfiability of the concerned reachability property in the encoded Boolean network (and non-satisfiability in the other cases).

Computations times are in the order of a few hundredths of a second on a 2.4GHz processor with 2GB of RAM. To give a comparison, we did the same experiments with a standard symbolic model-checker, libDDD [9], known for its good perfor- mances, the input model being the Boolean network expressed as a Petri net. How- ever, due to the large scale of the model, the program runs out of memory for all the experiments.

