In systems biology, models of cellular regulatory processes such as gene regulatory networks or signalling pathways are crucial to understanding the behaviour of living cells. Available biological data are however often insufficient for full model specification. In this paper, we focus on partially specified models where the missing information is abstracted in the form of parameters. We introduce a novel approach to analysis of parametric logical regulatory networks addressing both sources of combinatoric explosion native to the model. First, we introduce a new compact representation of admissible parameters using Boolean lattices. Then, we define the unfolding of parametric Boolean networks. The resulting structure provides a partial- order reduction of concurrent transitions, and factorises the common transitions among the concrete models. A comparison is performed against state-of-the-art approaches to parametric model analysis.

Although both of the described processes are quantitative in their nature, it is often the case that precise kinetic parameters of the reactions are unknown in biological context. As such, it is common to model genetic regulatory networks and signalling pathways by discrete models (logical regulatory networks) [1,6,15,18,19]. In the context of gene regulatory networks and signalling pathways it is often the case that one-to-one influences between species are known from in vitro experiments. The results of combinations of those influences are, however, largely unknown. In other words, it may be known that two species have both positive influence on the activity/population of a third species. However, it is rarely known if both of the activators must be present to activate the target or if just one is sufficient. In general, an arbitrary logical function may govern the joint influences. To cope with the problem technically, the individual target values of a species in possible

The analysis of parametric regulatory networks (PRNs) is hindered by dual com- binatorial explosion. Not only is the state space exponential in size of the networks, but the number of parametrisations is in the worst case doubly exponential in num- ber of species. Combination of those factors often leads to the fact that analysis techniques of PRNs do not scale to larger networks.

Our Contribution. We introduce a new analysis framework for parametric lo- gical regulatory networks addressing combinatorial explosion on two levels. First, we propose a novel encoding of parametrisations using the inner structure of pa- rametrisations. The encoding is applied to mitigate the combinatorial explosion induced by parametrisations. Accompanying methods are provided allowing for ef- ficient use of the encoding. Second, we extend Petri net unfoldings to accommodate for the parametric setting. The unfoldings are coupled with the encoding method for parametrisations to allow for compact representation of state space of the PRNs thanks to their ability to exploit concurrency. Finally, a prototype implementa- tion is provided to compute the introduced unfoldings. Experiments are conducted comparing the results of our methods against state-of-the-art methods in parametric regulatory network analysis.

Related Work. The analysis of logical regulatory networks under parameter un- certainty is a field not yet largely explored. Recently, it is gaining popularity thanks to the importance and great promise to the field of systems biology. Computational Tree Logic (CTL) [2] has been used to enumerate all possible temporal properties (parametrisations) of Thomas networks, by Bernot et al. [4]. Methods based on LTL model checking [2] have also been introduced for Thomas networks [14,10]. In [14] the method called coloured model checking first introduced in [3] is used to capitalise on many parametrisations sharing some parts of their behaviour. The parametrisations are represented by colours (bits) in a binary vector and the model checking is extended to binary vector operations to keep track of the satisfying behaviours.

Work was also done using constraint logic programming for parameter identific- ation [5,9], again using Thomas networks. The approach in [5] encodes all available biological knowledge into logical constraints on the behaviour of the network while in [9] the constraint logic programming is used to pre-process the initial set of be- haviours to filter out those in conflict with the constraints. Model checking is used on the smaller (filtered) set afterwards.

Ostrowski et al. [17] also introduce a method for restricting the initial set of possible behaviours for Boolean networks. Logical constraints are derived from time series data and answer set programming (ASP) is applied to compute a set of transient dynamics (parametrisations) best fitted to the measurements.

The nature of the interactions depends on the activity levels of the components in a given state. However, it is often the case in biology that exact effects of regulators on their targets are unknown. We therefore abstract these values by means of parameters.

A parameter represents a value of the target assigned to a given combination of active and inactive regulators as determined in the particular state. Naturally, there exists a parameter for any such combination of regulators. We denote such a combination as regulatory context (RC). Formal definition follows.

In the previous section, we introduced PBNs and mentioned that the cause of para- meter uncertainty comes from the lack of information on biological interaction. The information is, however, often partially available. Part of the biological knowledge can be compiled into two types of conditions on the edges of the influence graph: monotonicity and observability.

The method recognises two causes of restriction. First, the extension itself re- quires the transition (Xk,X) to be allowed. Second, the edge labels introduce dependencies between target values of individual RCs. The method detects these dependencies and restricts the PC accordingly. For a more detailed explanation of the method see Appendix A.1.

Previously, we introduced an encoding of parametrisations to alleviate the com- binatorial explosion induced by all possible combinations of RCs. In this section we address the combinatorial explosion of the state space of PBNs and standard Boolean networks accordingly. Biological networks are often considerably sparse in nature and contain a high amount of concurrent interactions. Partial order reduc- tion approaches are therefore meaningful for dealing with the state space explosion in case of standard networks. Petri net unfoldings are a prime example of a struc- ture exploiting the concurrency of transitions. This section is therefore dedicated to application of unfoldings to PBNs and parametric setting in general.

We offer a new platform for parameter identification of logical regulatory networks based on Petri net unfoldings. Our contribution addresses several issues. First, we introduce a novel approach to encoding parametrisations allowing for efficient analysis of parametric Boolean networks. We employ the encoding in practice for computing feasible parametrisations for all possible behaviours of the system. Ac- companying methods are also presented for efficiently computing the feasible para- metrisations of extensions of behaviours within the encoding. This set of parame- trisations can be efficiently constrained by monotonous and observability criteria. Future work may also consider taking into account other constraints, such as the existence of particular fixed points. Although only an over-approximation of the set of feasible parametrisations is given in the general case, reachability preservation is guaranteed by our method. The refinement of the over-approximation is considered for future work.

