may mark written assignments and provide comments on grammar, structure, plagiarism and content. Producing ideas, summaries, and even whole talks, may also aid with the composition of speeches. It may aid with research by guiding students in locating and organising data for papers and other types of study. ChatGPT may provide students learning a language immediate feedback on their pronunciation and grammar, assisting them in swiftly and effectively developing their lan- guage abilities. It may help students with trouble reading and writing by suggesting ways to improve their phrases and paragraphs [6,7].

Integrating ChatGPT into higher education might result in a shift towards AI, diminishing the need for professors and possibly lowering opportunities for interpersonal relationships and human engagement. In order to assist students and improve their writing abilities, ChatGPT may check for grammatical and structural problems in their work and provide valuable comments. In order to understand and concentrate on the areas they need to improve, students can also receive personalised feedback based on their writing style. Computers may imitate human conversations using ChatGPT [23,24]. This can accurately respond to user inquiries and personalisation by comprehending user intent and context [25,26]. The students could explore several things with the help of ChatGPT, such as developing a computer program, writing an essay and solving a mathematical problem. All these things could be possible with ChatGPT.

In education, new technology constantly emerges and often vanishes over time, while only some innovations are ingrained in the system. ChatGPT generates a fantastic set of issues for students to work together on, and of course, students may build these problems independently. Even though they may have learned about probability via experience, activities like this solidify their understanding of the subject by en- couraging students to work together on various approaches, test their theories, and refine them. These kinds of problems may be quickly created when a gap is found. ChatGPT enables teachers and students to create various materials, including writing prompts, discussion top- ics, puzzles, and much more [24,33]. Learners may produce these as needed, and they can also self-direct their research and practice.

is that they need to be more challenging to manage, arrange, sort and analyse [36,37]. ChatGPT is helpful since it can convert unstructured data into structured data. By offering clarifications, recommendations, and examples, ChatGPT may help in locating and resolving coding issues. ChatGPT may be used to target specific people with the content. Businesses may use the model to generate personalised content like emails, social media posts, and product recommendations by training the model on a collection of user data [38,39].

With a sophisticated language model, ChatGPT has the potential to alter the way we work and learn thoroughly. Providing with the information in seconds instead of It is a helpful tool for professionals, educators, and students since it can produce text that looks and sounds like human speech. The potential of ChatGPT is limitless, given the ongoing research and breakthroughs in natural language processing. ChatGPT enables users to conduct virtually human-like dialogues to address issues as diverse as making vocab lists, writing essays, generat- ing computer programs, producing pop quizzes, and so much more. It is beneficial, quick, and produces exceptionally high-quality findings. ChatGPT replies are quick, free, and often a wonderful place to start for people to create their own [40,41].

Another significant capability of ChatGPT is its ability to produce text outlines. Copy the original text into the tool, then briefly explain the desired result. The chatGPT will create a paragraph with excellent organisation and the most important details. Using a vast quantity of data gathered from the internet, ChatGPT uses the third generation of the GPT model to produce text that resembles human answers.

ChatGPT uses natural language processing (NLP) and deep learning technologies to understand user input in natural human language and produce text exchanges that are human-to-human conversations. Rein- forcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) is a technique that has been used to train a big language model to converse and respond to questions as if users were speaking to a natural person. As a result, the computer may analyse and modify its replies in response to input from actual individuals [47,48]. ChatGPT can comprehend the context and meaning of those words and provide the correct answers based on that knowledge. Building chatbots that can have exciting and lifelike discussions with users is achievable using ChatGPT. By training it on data related to that area, ChatGPT may be tailored for specific domains or jobs, such as customer service. As a result, the chatbot may provide replies to user input more precisely and relevantly [49,50].

Instructors may utilise ChatGPT to develop questions for discussion with their students based on a book, subject, historical event, idea, etc. This would allow instructors to swiftly come up with interesting questions for discussions on various aspects of the topic. This may be particularly useful if each student could gain from a different speed. For students to better understand a subject or idea, ChatGPT may provide a variety of examples as well as extra practice opportunities. ChatGPT can modify text for various age groups, so the instructor might either rewrite and provide other examples or ask ChatGPT to clarify it for a younger audience. With the aid of ChatGPT, students may increase their knowledge of new terms or add them to their vocabulary. In this way, it is also a helpful tool for learning new terms. Many ideas are explained in ChatGPT, which might benefit students by giving them in-depth explanations. This can be particularly useful for homework assignments or other circumstances when an instructor is not readily accessible to address quarries [53,54].

ChatGPT uses a massive amount of data that it gathers, analyses, and transforms into written sentences. It can write regardless of its kind, structure, or subject. For a variety of disciplines, ChatGPT may provide students with study tools like study guides and flashcards to help them remember key concepts and facts. It may also be used to create examinations and quizzes to ensure students fully comprehend the subject matter. It may also include translations, resources for learn- ing new languages, and tools for enhancing grammar and vocabulary. It may also provide sample test questions and answers, study resources, and flashcards to help students prepare for exams. Incorporating AI into education can improve learning outcomes, make learning more dynamic and exciting and provide students with new learning and development possibilities.

The programme may produce interesting writing assignments for learners based on age and grade. Instructors might ask ChatGPT to provide a writing exercise or story starter that encourages students to express their creativity to complete the assignment. Students may enhance their reading and comprehension abilities by using ChatGPT. Instructors may instruct the programme to produce passages on various text that resembles human writing in response to predetermined cues. Students learning a new language might benefit from conversation practice and feedback via ChatGPT. In order to encourage students to engage in conversations and cooperate, ChatGPT or other models can offer instructions for group projects and assignments. ChatGPT is a newly developed language model that can provide human-like

