The growing industrialization has resulted in an increased influx of industrial effluents containing heavy metals into the aqueous streams. Electroplating and metal surface treatment pro- cesses produce large quantity of wastewater containing heavy metals, which include copper(II) and zinc(II). The presence of cop- per(II) and zinc(II) in aquatic environment, even at low concentra- tions, is potentially harmful to human health. Copper(II), beyond the maximum concentration limit (0.25 mg/L) can cause liver dam- age, Wilson disease, insomnia, and depression, while a person exposed to zinc(II) (exposure limit, 0.80 mg/L) is likely to suffer from neurological disorders, lethargy, and thirst. Considering the toxicity and harmful effects of these metals, it is essential to pre- treat metals bearing wastewater before discharging into aquatic system.

In recent past, biochar derived from many agricultural wastes has been used as an effective, efficient, and low cost adsorbent for the removal of heavy metals and organic contaminants from water and soil [15] because of its highly porous structure, large surface area, high functional groups and mineral components [16]. Biochars are mainly applied for enhancing soil fertility and crops productivity, reducing emission of green house gases, waste management and energy production [17,18]. Biochars are usually prepared by the pyrolysis of carbon rich agro-solid waste materi- als. Various agro-wastes have been used as the precursor for the preparation of biochars and utilized for the removal of heavy met- als from water, which include corn straw [19], rice straw [20] straws of peanut, soybean and canola [21] sugar beet tailing [22,23], oak wood and oak bark [24], rice husks, olive pomace, orange waste and compost [25].

efficiency of muskmelon (Cucumis melo L.) peel biochar for copper and zinc from water has been assessed. The isotherm, kinetics and thermodynamics of the biosorption process has been evaluated from the experimental data. The surface properties of adsorbent are examined by FTIR and SEM analysis to evaluate the surface functionality and morphology of the biosorbent.

