Such systems can be modelled as hidden-variable systems, where one or more unobservable variables encapsulate the history of previous interactions. The in- teractive process may be of finite duration after which, the process ends and the history of interactions is discarded. On the other hand, the interactive process may be of infinite duration, where the history is never discarded.

In general the system is assumed to be maximal ; that is, any state with no incoming constraint is said to have a P modality by default. (Everything is permit- ted, unless forbidden). Only those states that have an incoming P constraint are minimal. They are forbidden, unless their incoming P constraints are active.

In practical applications, the interaction schema is generalized to include richer constraint semantics. (See for example, LogicFence [6], which is an implementation of interaction schema). However, as the objective here is to ultimately develop a theory for HAS, we start with simple formulations of the interaction schema model. We are also aware of several limitations about the expressiveness of the current model of the interaction schema. For instance, constraint disjunctions are not defined. Similarly, constraints do not propagate in the system. However, as a first step towards developing a theory of HAS, we will be working with these simplifications in this paper.

Definition 3.2 In an interaction schema I, a given path S = s0 ... h from one of the start states to one of the end states, is said to have an altruistic collaboration number Am,n(S) if there exists a set of k processes and k states such that:

Since we assume that all collaborators take their positions before the adversaries even take their first step, the only way state si can be unclean is by an incoming P constraint (Lemma 4.1). Adding a P constraint to state si from another state sj increases the length of the chain by 1, and it follows from the previous argument that state si and hence state s, can be made clean only if state sj is clean.

If there is a chain of one or more P constraints leading to s, from Lemma 4.2, s can be made clean by collaborators entering the chain. It does not matter if the P chain has incoming F or O constraints from anywhere since we assume that there are no adversaries in the system until all collaborators have taken their positions (Lemma 4.1).

dencies that are part of the service logic of the system. Interaction schema on the other hand seeks to model interference among disparate mutually-autonomous pro- cesses pursuing their own goals. There need not be any larger shared objective to be collectively achieved. Collaboration features only as an emergent property of convenience, that is used by processes to reduce uncertainties in the system, rather being part of the service logic. In an interaction schema, the actual steps of coor- dinated activity that a set of agents may eventually execute, might well have been unimaginable by the system designer.

This paper addressed the validation problem on a simplified HAS model for altru- istic collaboration. Perhaps the biggest shortcoming of the current approach is the assumption that no adversaries enter the system until the collaborators take their positions. Essentially this addresses the question of how to close an open-world system. However, even when altruistic collaboration is considered, it is necessary to address situations where collaboration happens in the face of adversarial influence. Since the adversaries and their plans are hidden, collaboration in such situations would need to take the form of (game theoretic) strategies with probablistic plans. As an extension to this work, we plan to explore the integration of system design that addresses a system-wide teleological objective, with game theoretic strategies that address individual process objectives.

