Several computational frameworks for modeling in different ways various as- pects of biological systems have been defined in the last decade (see e.g., [28,21,20,25,38,52,39,12,7,29]). However, so far we have not seen one single for- malism for modeling reaction systems with both time and space, and, at the same time, with the ability to express a logic for proving properties which can depend both on time and space locations. Normally, there is one formalism and a language for the modeling and the specification of a biological system and at least another different formalism for expressing the properties of interest (e.g., a temporal logic) and for proving them (e.g., by using a model checker).

Another salient characteristic of CCP is its ability to deal with partial informa- tion: constraints add information on the system variables (e.g., x > 42) rather than determining the value of the variables. Hence, the more information is obtained the more constraints are accumulated and more information can be deduced from the system. Constraints also provide a compact representation of the state of the sys- tem (as predicates on system variables). Moreover, being able to deal with partial information is certainly useful in situations where either some components of the system are not fully specified or we do not have enough quantitative information about them.

In a previous work [16] we used the ntcc calculus [41], a non-deterministic temporal extension of CCP, for representing reaction rules in biological systems. This language allowed us to model discrete-time, and hence biological systems where reactions have a duration over time. Later, in [36], we described a modeling strategy based on ntcc where starting from an abstract model, we built refinements adding further details coming from experimentation or abstract assumptions. In a following work [14], we modeled spatial distributions in biochemical reactions. This thus

In this paper we deal with the problem of specifying and verifying properties of biochemical systems that exhibit both temporal and spatial modalities at the same time. For that, we shall encode the proposed systems as formulas in linear logic with subexponentials (SELL) [23]. The corresponding CCP language able to manipulate such SELL formulas was studied in [42] and [43]. We omit this language here to focus on the logical framework that allows for proving, in a natural way, some relevant properties of the modeled system.

More precisely, we shall show that it is possible to use two kind of subexponen- tials for representing the two main dimensions, namely time and space, for modeling biochemical systems where reactions depend on the location of reactants and on the duration of interactions. Then, we show the expressiveness of our framework by en- coding P-Systems [46,3], a general model of computation inspired on cells structures. We show that our logical characterization of P-Systems has a strong level of ade- quacy, which means that derivations in the logical system follow exactly the rules (reactions) defined for the modeled system. We also show how to exploit the under- lying logic for expressing, and proving, properties of interest that involve temporal and spatial modalities.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we recall some concepts about subexponentials in linear logic. Section 3 defines an encoding of biochemical reactions that considers spatial and temporal modalities. In Section 4 we show how to exploit the underlying logic for expressing properties of the system and how to encode P-Systems as SELL specifications. Section 5 discusses some related work and concludes the paper. The detailed proofs of the results here presented can be found in the companion technical report [17]. In [17] the reader may also find an application of the framework developed here in the context of the TWEAK-Fn14 cell signaling pathway [5].

where A denotes the set of reactants and S the set of domain spaces. If there are no species of kind Aj in the space sk, then cj = 0. Intuitively, !s.t [ct(A, c)] means that the formula ct(A, c) is available at location s.t that represents the time-unit t in the space domain s. Hence, in location s.t we can deduce that the concentration of A is c.

tem. The formula consume consumes the needed reactants and produce adds such reactants k time-units later. We note that once a rule is applied, the concentra- tions of the reactants that do not occur in the reaction are simply copied (without changes) to the time-unit t + k (due to the first cases of Ni above).

In this section we show that our model enjoys interesting properties. In particular, we shall show that a step in a focused derivation [2] corresponds exactly to one step in the evolution of the system. We shall briefly explain the focusing discipline for SELLA but, in order to avoid technicalities, we omit the proof rules for that system. The reader may refer to [42] and [17] for a complete description of the focused SELLA system.

Related work. A close related work to ours is [13] and [7]. In [13], the authors show that temporal properties of biochemical systems can be expressed in HyLL (hybrid linear logic). Basically, in HyLL, a partial order structure on words is defined to model locations where the formulas hold. This is much like the subex- ponential structure in SELLA. Here we show that time and spatial modalities can be considered in the same framework. Another difference is that the work in [13] considers gene networks where signals can be activated or not. Here, inspired in our previous works on modeling biological systems [16,15,14] in CCP, we consider quantitative information of the system, i.e., the concentration of the molecules in each state. This is also akin to the work in [7], where variants of CCP are considered in order to specify biological systems.

[31] and statistical model checking are used in BioNetGen to express and to verify system properties. Temporal properties for BioAmbients processes can be analyzed by using state formulas [32] or modal logics to express spatial and time modalities [9]. Similarly, modal logic can be used to express spatial and temporal properties over membranes and systems, which is known as Brane Logic [40]. In the case of Beta-Binders models, causality properties [33] as well as flow control analyses [6] can be performed.

