Children's acquisition and development of reading skills are impor- tant in modern society. Previous studies have shown that children and adolescents who have reading difficulties and poor spelling skills will be more likely to have poorer academic achievement (Savolainen et al., 2008), which will reflect lower occupational status in adulthood (Smart et al., 2017). This emphasizes the need of action towards reading in early childhood. The present study attempts to build on the current knowledge regarding educational approaches that can facilitate the acquisition of early literacy skills. For this purpose, we will focus on two central early literacy skills, phoneme awareness and letter-sound knowledge. Phoneme awareness and letter-sound knowledge are crucial skills ac- quired during early literacy learning (Ehri et al., 2001; Hulme et al., 2012), known to be strong predictors of later reading and spelling abil- ities (Caravolas et al., 2012; Furnes & Samuelsson, 2009; Hammill, 2004;

Hulme et al., 2012). Children should acquire and retain the connections between the phonemes of spoken words and the graphemes of written words (letter-sound knowledge) when learning to read because this will help them decode unknown words (Byrne & Fielding-Barnsley, 1989). As Danish contains irregular orthography including standard and condi- tional pronunciations of letters, this may be challenging for prereaders (Elbro, 2013; Juul & Sigurdsson, 2005), which supports the importance of acquisition of phoneme awareness and letter-sound knowledge early on. Building on the wealth of knowledge from the field of embodied learning, the current study aims to facilitate the acquisition of both skills in pre-readers through the use of movements.

Attention is an important aspect of children's learning outcomes which should be considered when designing new interventions for reading acquisition. According to Kerns et al. (1999), attention can be separated into different components covering the sustainment of atten- tion over time, being able to attend selectively to different stimuli, an ability to exchange or switch attention between two things, and finally, being able to divide the attention so that more than one ongoing process can be maintained. In a community-based study of seven-year-old boys, it was established that inattentive behaviour is, amongst others, associated with poorly developed reading skills (Warner-Rogers et al., 2000). This behaviour will continue to be manifested in later grades and thereby negatively affect general academic performance (Alexander et al., 1993).

We know that embodied learning may already have a beneficial effect on attention. Cormick and Schnobrich (1971) conducted a study with perceptual-motor training involving both gross and fine motor skills ac- tivities. They saw an increase in reading achievement in the children receiving motor training. In the study, they hypothesized that it was due to improved control over attentional processes and decreased impulsivity and distractibility as their program did not provide any specific reading instruction (Cormick & Schnobrich, 1971). It seems that attentional control (choosing what is task-relevant and leaving out distractors) is a particularly important component as it has both been related to reading abilities during childhood and early attentional abilities that can predict later reading skills (Franceschini et al., 2012). We believe that by focusing the design of embodied learning interventions on the improvement of attentional control, the interventions could become even more effective and potentially more beneficial for children who may experience challenges with sustaining attention naturally.

educational settings. Particularly in domains of science, technology, en- gineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and higher education (Luo et al., 2021; Mikropoulos & Natsis, 2011). The affordances of VR have the potential to enable experimental and inquiry-based learning, leading to advantages such as an enriched learning experience, deeper engagement and enhanced transfer of knowledge (Dalgarno & Lee, 2010; Shin, 2017). The promising results in these subjects are encouraging regarding the use of VR in schools but there remain gaps that further

Letter-sound knowledge and letter knowledge are good predictors of later reading and spelling abilities (Hammil, 2004) and therefore essential for children's literacy acquisition. Furthermore, motivation (Finkelstein et al., 2013; Riva et al., 2020) and learning (Baek-Hwan, 2002) has been positively enhanced in neurodivergent populations by using VR. We will investigate if embodied learning, with and without combination of VR, affects children's knowledge of letter-sound con- nections trained in the intervention (divided into standard and condi- tional sounds) and whether this will affect children's ability to read and spell words in standardized tests. We will test the hypothesis that VR and whole-body movements combined will result in an improved letter-sound knowledge that will transfer positively onto higher word reading and spelling scores in the post-tests compared to the group using whole-body movements but not wearing VR-glasses and the control group that performs no movements and does not wear VR-glasses.

Both intervention activities are completed as whole-body movements. However, one group does the activities while seeing their virtual selves in VR while wearing VR-glasses (VR group) and one group does the activ- ities while seeing themselves in a mirror (mirror group). The control group continues normal teaching with their own teacher. The interven- tion is conducted over a two-week period in three primary schools in Copenhagen. Participants are randomly allocated (1:1:1, stratified by class) to one of the three groups; (1) VR group, (2) mirror group, (3) control group. The stratified sampling method is used to strata the different classes of each school to ensure that in each group there is a similar number of children from each class. In that way the intervention groups are not overrepresented by one of the classes. This prevents bias in the outcome of the study which could relate to the teaching style or the progress that children achieve in different classes. Two researchers from the research team are responsible for enrolment and allocation of par- ticipants. Collection of outcome measurements prior and post the inter- vention period will enable the assessment of short-term intervention effects.

Communication with the school leaders of the three primary schools are initiated by phone and e-mail and afterwards invitations are sent to an initial meeting to discuss the plan of the intervention (non-committal). Provided that the school leader including teachers agree to participate, further planning is conducted in collaboration with the teachers to ensure optimal time schedule of the school day. All children of Grade 1 classes are invited to participate (including non-Danish speaking pupils).

Children who have cognitive or physical disabilities that prevent them from participation in the activities are excluded from the study and will not participate in the activities. Furthermore, children who do not understand Danish or English will be excluded from the study. Only children with written informed consent from parent(s) or legal guard- ian(s) can participate in the study. Children without consent or who do not want to participate in the activities attend teaching in their normal classroom and will not be part of the study. We plan to recruit approxi- mately 90 pupils with 30 children in each group (VR group, mirror group and control group). It is feasible that we reach between 80 and 100 children as we know that the interest in participation is high and exclusion criteria of this study are not strict.

The movements are practiced collectively, going in the reading direction round the circle (without VR glasses). After all movements and sounds for a and c are practiced, sound duel is practiced collectively in the circle. Words including one of the two a- and c-pronun- ciations (simple or conditional) are read aloud. Children have to identify the correct sound and related body pho-neme by themselves (without VR glasses).If wrong, corrections are made collectively.

The children are placed in a square and the instructor makes a quick introduction on how to wear the VR glasses. Afterwards sound duel is performed with the VR glasses on with the children standing in their own square.Corrections are made individually.

In the circle the instructor introduces a and c (simple and condi-tioned sounds) and the belonging body phonemes for both letters. The move-ments are practiced collectively, going in the reading direction round the circle. After all movements and sounds for a and c are practiced, sound duel is practiced collectively in the circle. Words including one of the two a- and c-pronunciations (simple or condi-tional) are read aloud. Children have to identify the correct sound and related body phoneme by them- selves. If wrong, corrections are made collectively.

Individual testing is conducted with only one assessor in a quiet room for the duration of approximately 30 min per child. At the start of indi- vidual testing, the assessor collects background information including sex, dominant hand, and bilingualism. Materials to perform the below- mentioned tests includes computers and VR-headsets.

Naming of letter sounds including the use of movements. During the intervention, the children are taught the coupling between letter sounds and movements for letters containing both standard and condi- tional letter-sounds. In the PLAYMORE study protocol by Gejl et al. (2021), a test to evaluate beneficial effects of using movements in com- bination with letter sounds was constructed and later applied in the study by Damsgaard et al. (2022). Following on from these studies, we are using the same test in the current project to assess children's letter-sound knowledge, including eight standard letter-sounds and nine conditional letter-sounds. With the child standing in front of an assessor, the instructor reads a, c, d, e, o, r, u and v aloud, one at a time. The child is asked to pronounce the letter-sounds of the read letter and told that they are allowed to use movements at the same time, if remembered. The child's answer for every sound is registered as correct/incorrect/missing and whether movement/no movement is used. Numbers of correct

All parents of children in Grade 1 (from the recruited schools) receive written and oral information before their child is included in the study. The children can only participate if written informed consent from par- ent(s)/legal guardian(s) is handed in before baseline measurements. Parent(s)/legal guardian(s) and children can always redraw written consent and stop participation without providing a reason. Data is ano- nymized by giving each child an identification number (ID number), and sensitive personal information is stored alongside data. Execution of the VR PLAYMORE study follows rules from the Danish Data Protection Agency and General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) throughout all phases.

This study will provide additional insights in the research field of embodied learning in combination with the use of technologies. Both intervention groups (VR- and mirror group) will perform whole-body movements and thereby experience high bodily engagement and high task integration (Skulmowski & Rey, 2018). Damsgaard et al. (2022) found that recalling of letter-sounds (both standard and conditional) were significantly higher when performing whole-body movements, which reinforces the idea that movement integrated in the learning content may be more beneficial than conventional methods. This is also called the enactment effect (Engelkamp & Zimmer, 1989), which is that performing an action during learning will promote memory consolida- tion of the information as opposed to getting verbal information only. In this study, we will focus only on letters containing both standard and conditional sounds to promote letter-sound knowledge, as this is an essential part of learning to read (Hammil, 2004).

We are hoping to clarify whether VR combined with whole-body movements can contribute to a learning effect in addition to embodied learning. The rationale behind this is that VR will reduce distractions from the environment by potentially lowering the level of perceptual load (Murphy et al., 2016). When entering the VR environment visual stimuli from the outside world will be lost. It is our belief that children will increase their focus on what is task-relevant and not be distracted from what is task-irrelevant (e.g., visual inputs from the outside world). The intention of using VR during the intervention is to stimulate letter processing and phonological attention, which will possibly transfer into larger learning effects (higher reading and spelling scores in VR group)

Long-term or sustained attention is however not expected to increase during a 2-week intervention and therefore not relevant to perform the Selective Attention Task at post-testing. In addition, there is a risk of bias regarding practice effects in the VR group. In order to show evidence of enhanced attentional control with multisensory processing in VR, we would expect that using VR would lead to attentional benefit at least when presented with multisensory distractors but also perhaps in the case of visual or auditory only distractors. This means that using VR would result inon-task attentional benefit when compared to a non-VR setup. Thereby we will gain insights regarding the use of VR to improve attentional control that has also been shown to be an important aspect in reading abilities (Cormick & Schnobrich, 1971; Franceschini et al., 2012). If we were to show enhanced attentional control and a transfer effect on learning outcome in the VR group, further exploration of VR-use for children with neurodiverse profiles e.g. ADHD, children with sub-clinical attention deficits or dyslexic children would be a new potential route of investigation.

because we want to gain knowledge on how to use VR as a learning tool and not as an entertainment tool in the primary schools of Denmark. Future research could, however, advantageously focus on game-based learning as this seems to be particularly promising (Chen et al., 2020). For example, gamification has been shown to improve learning atten- dance, motivation, and engagement, all of which were crucial for the development of reading skills (Gooch et al., 2016; Hong & Masood, 2014). In this regard, future research on the gamification of reading in- terventions offers exciting opportunities (Jamshidifarsani et al., 2019).

into their lessons and to facilitate embodied learning experiences (Mer- chant et al., 2014). Without appropriate training and support, teachers may not be able to effectively utilize VR technology in the classroom or may inadvertently reinforce incorrect behaviors or misunderstandings. This is specifically important when considering embodied learning VR interventions, as incorrect instructions or child's misunderstanding of the instructions, could hinder the embodiment effect. Overall, while there are potential issues to consider for the protocol's implementation in school settings, the use of VR technology in conjunction with embodied learning holds promise for enhancing learning outcomes and engaging students in novel and immersive educational experiences. Further, the proposed protocol offers a real advantage it its ecologically valid approach. We will integrate the use of VR within the natural setting of the classroom and curriculum-aligned student learning. Continued research and development in this area has the potential to transform the way we approach education and improve outcomes for learners of all ages and backgrounds.

