For most normally sighted, blindness and visual impairment seem a far issue. The daily limitations experienced by this population cannot be imagined when sight is taken for granted. Any common activity (such as information access, mobility, way finding, interaction with the environment and with other people, etc.) repre- sents a serious challenge. Few sighted have ever wondered what would be like to be visually impaired. The possibility of experiencing the disability and facing its challenges would certainly represent a step forward to a better understanding of visual impairment.

Five young adults (3 men and 2 women) undergraduate students at Panamericana University participated voluntarily in the experiments. The only selection criterion used was to have good vision without the need of glasses; this with the sole purpose of not obstructing the use of the VR headset. Ages ranged from 19 to 24 years with an average age of 21.2.

The experiment consisted of reading aloud a text of 180 words with the prototype and with the prototype simulating diabetic retinopathy, hemianopsia, central sco- toma, and tunnel vision. Three different texts of 180 words each (Times Roman font size 14) were used throughout the test to minimize the effects of sentence repetition and text memorization. The reading time was recorded for each participant under each of the low vision conditions.

The system consists of three modules: a video camera, a computer, and a VR headset. Real-time image processing techniques are applied to the video obtained by the camera and the result is projected on the VR headset. Upon the use of the Hadamard product and a set of masks, the system is capable of simulating the eight most common causes of visual impairment.

The simulator was experimentally evaluated with a group of five normally sighted volunteers in a task involving reading texts. Data from this experiment allow us to determine the impact of these impairments on the task. Results obtained suggest that reading speed depends on peripheral vision (in agreement with [4]).

The main goal of our system is to educate and sensitize normally sighted about low vision and the daily challenges the visually impaired face. This is particu- larly useful for professionals involved in the field such as special education teachers, Braille teachers, psychologists, orientation and mobility specialists, low vision spe- cialists, and vision rehabilitation therapists. A second goal is to have a wearable technological platform that simulates low vision conditions for the normally sighted. This is useful for the design and evaluation of new concepts of assistive devices.

