identified. In addition, the proposed conceptual quality model effectively reflects the main views of WBA based on the opinion of highly skilled professionals (visitor, owner, end user). The main goal of this paper is identifying, categorizing, and modeling WBA quality factors.

The World Wide Web (WWW) has grown as a unique space and has become one of our major channels of information and communications. The web provides a wealth of informa- tion to an incredibly diverse user population and designers reflecting the different challenge of developing Web Based Applications (WBA) that need to meet diverse user needs [1]. Considering the turbulence and size of WBA developments, it is not surprising that there has been growing interest with developing WBA with a high quality. WBA are more compli- cated than simple HTML web pages, and consider different views through developing them.

The quality of WBA is a property difficult to define and capture in an organized way. It is clear that WBA are more important. What is not clear is: what are factors that reflect WBA quality? How can we address developing WBA with high quality? [2,3].

To develops a conceptual quality model that identify and organize different WBA quality views and usages. The structure of the paper is as follows: Section 2 pre- sents an overview of previous established quality mod- els and factors of WBA as well as a survey of well- known software quality models. Section 3 propose a conceptual quality model and its different quality views and usages that underlie WBA quality. Section 4 summarizes the paper and intended future work.

A great amount of work in the area of WBA quality has been developed in the last decade. As the dependency on WBA in- creases, the need to assess characteristics with WBA quality in- creases. However, many existing empirical studies focusing on the quality of WBA is mainly exploratory in nature (they were advised prior to the commercialization of the internet and are more focused towards traditional data processing and infor- mation retrieval). Most of the current studies are either dealing with a limited number of quality factors or directed towards a specific WBA perspectives. Recently, research and studies are accumulating including different models to evaluate the quality of WBA. In our study, the extended ISO model was chosen as the reference point, due to its popularity and accep- tance by the software industry. Its software quality character- istics were used to identify key quality factors of WBA. This

Since 1970s, researchers and practitioners have been looking for ways to characterize software quality. They found that software artifact can be breakdown into constructs that can be assured and measured. This enables evaluation of quality through the evaluation of more detailed characteristics [4]. A significant number of quality models have been presented.

ISO/IEC 9126/2001 [6] standard defined software quality, which is described as using internal and external software qual- ities and their connection to attributes of software in a so- called software quality model(SQM). The software quality model defined in ISO 9126 follows the factor-criteria-metrics model proposed by McCall (1977). It defines six quality fac- tors, which are refined into criteria. These criteria are in turn assessed by metrics measuring the design and the development process and the software itself.

In 2002, Albuquerque and Belchior [8] have organized a comprehensive set of software quality attributes into objectives where each objective is composed of a set of quality factors. Each quality factor is further decomposed into sub-factors. According to Albuquerque and Belchior, three broad objec- tives formulate which enables the evaluation of an E-com- merce WBA quality.

In 2000, Fitzpatrick presented WBA quality model consid- ering five quality characteristics related to the WWW domain, their sub characteristics (sub-factors), and a checklist which can be used by all IS professionals as essential issues to be ad- dressed when creating quality web applications. These charac- teristics are visibility, intelligibility, credibility, engaging the visitor, and differentiation. Visibility refers to the ease with which a user can visit web sites. Intelligibility refers to the ease with which a user can assimilate and interpret web content. Credibility refers to the level of user confidence with the con- tent of the web site. Engaging the visitor refers to the extent to which a user achieve a complete experience. And differenti- ation refers to the extent to which a web site demonstrates corporate superiority [12].

more accurate evaluation of WBA should also take account of the needs of its users which may be different than the needs of owner company. We must also remember that the hyperme- dia nature of the Internet and the importance of aspects to do with interfaces, speed of access to information, and the security of transactions differentiate WBA from traditional informa- tion systems. Moreover, those involved in WBA design have different skills. The heterogeneity of the subjects involved in the building of WBA can influence the quality enormously. In many cases, the developers of WBA that are often in charge of WBA development projects, may be unaware of the charac- teristics of the technology determining the performance of WBA.

Developer concerns. Communications between a firm and its customers, other than face-to-face discussions, take place through one or more media, via interactions with the media by both parties. The features of a web-based interface make it an attractive choice as a medium for interaction be- tween the firm and its customers. The need to develop a sound WBA integrated of the visitors needs and owner promotion with various quality characteristics is most crucial problem for any WBA developer [9,10,17,18].

its sub factors based on WBA views and usages. Firstly: this study suggested a conceptual model for identifying WBA dif- ferent views and usages which conclude in visitor, owner, and developer view. Second; identifying and categorizing qual- ity factors and sub factors of WBA that reflects these views. The proposed model applied ISO 9126 quality factors and sub factors to review the common features between WBA and software, and then proposes a set of new WBA quality fac- tors that fits the particular characteristics of WBA. In the fu- ture, the model will be extended by experimental study and supported by validation framework to provide some evidence about the suggested WBA quality factors and sub factors.

