The nodes in Mobile Ad Hoc Network (MANET) are mobile and continuously changing locations. They do not have any fixed infrastructure like base station, etc. They can relay pack- ets to another node without using any base stations. Each node in MANET has a transmission range within which the signals received from that node are strong enough to extract meaning- ful information by other nodes. If two nodes happen to be within the transmission range of each other, they can commu- nicate directly otherwise they use a number of links involving one or more intermediate nodes to communicate with each other. This mode of communication is called multi-hop

MANETs are highly appealing for a lot of applications like deep space communication, disaster relief, battlefield commu- nication, outdoor mining, etc., due to their flexibility and dis- tributed nature. To provide Quality of Service (QoS) for these applications, understanding the fundamental delay perfor- mance of such networks is of great importance [1]. The end- to-end delay is the time taken by a packet to reach its destina- tion after it is generated at its source. Because of multi-hop nature and continuous movement of nodes, end-to-end delay in MANET is higher compared to other infra-structured network. However, the end-to-end delay modeling in MANETs is still a challenge for network research community. One of the primary reasons is very dynamic behavior of MANETs, like node mobility, interference, wireless channel/ traffic contention, packet distributing, packet queueing pro- cess in a node and the complicated packet delivering process among mobile nodes. Still there does not exist any theoretical framework to efficiently depict the complicated network state transitions under these network dynamics. By now, the avail- able works on end-to-end delay analysis in MANETs mainly focus on deriving upper bounds or approximations for such delay.

Along with the causes suggested by Narasimhan and Kun- niyur, node mobility pattern [3] also has a major role in overall packet delay in MANET. The node movement patterns in MANET vary depending on the applications and locations of network deployment. Like the movement of the soldiers will be influenced by the commander hence the nodes will also fol- low same pattern in a battlefield MANET. The movement of vehicles is restricted by obstacles or maps in a city-wide MAN- ET. Widely varying mobility characteristics surely have an im- pact on the end-to-end delay.

In this article, we have tried to predict the future values of delay between a source destination pair based on the previous delays and current path length. We have proposed a weighted delay prediction mechanism using regression on path length and fuzzy time series on previous delays. We have used trape- zoidal fuzzy numbers in the fuzzy time series. The reason using trapezoidal fuzzy number is that Liu [4] proved through exten- sive experiments that trapezoidal numbers give better predic- tion results than triangular fuzzy numbers used for the same purpose. To compare the performances of prediction models, we define several performance evaluation criteria (PEC) such as Root Mean Squared Errors RMSEs, correlation coefficient R, and Efficiency E. The results of models are compared with actual data and the best-fit model structure is determined according to criteria. In our opinion, this work will help the re- search community to analyze and model the delay parameter for MANET in a more comprehensive way.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. A brief survey of works done related to network delay is given in Section 2. Fuzzy times series is explained in Section 3. We describe simulation environment in Section 4. The model development based on path length and fuzzy time series model is given in Section 5. The discussions on the results obtained are discussed in Section [6] and Gamal et al. [7] ascertained the trade-off between the delay experienced and the throughput possible in the network. However, the channel access mechanism and the effect of col- lisions on delay were not considered in both the analyses. The relationship between the MAC delay and the neighbor number in mobile ad hoc networks, and an estimation method of the MAC delay is analyzed by Sheu and Chen in [8]. Sun and Hughes used two dimension finite-state Markov models to analyze the queuing delay [9]. They proposed that the end- to-end delay of a path can be estimated by adding all the node delays and link delays in the path.

Guo at el. [10] presented a scheme for predicting mean per- packet one-hop delays using neural network. They modeled the mean delays as a time series using (i) tapped-delay-line Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) network and (ii) tapped-de- lay-line Radial Basis Function Network (RBFN). The inputs used by them are (i) the mean delay time series itself only, (ii) the mean delay time series together with the corresponding traffic loads. They ignored the effect of any other parameter on delay as well as their scheme predict only one hop delay not the complete end-to-end packet delay. Hongyan et al. [11] used autoregressive models and neural network to predict Internet time delay. Tabib and Jalali [12] used feed-forward multilayer perceptron to predict Internet time delays. Both Hongyan et al. and Tabib et al. considered only internet time delay. They have not considered any other network types and their characteristics.

Lee et al. in [13] proved experimentally that the processing delay of a packet at node increases as its number of neighbors increases. They defined a metric called cumulative processing delay based on the active neighbors of a node and used that metric to propose an enhancement to Dynamic Source Rout- ing (DSR) [14] algorithm. Tickoo and Sikdar [15] presented an analytic model to evaluate the performance of the IEEE 802.11 MAC in terms of its delays and queue lengths and eval- uate its capability to support delay sensitive traffic. A key observation from their queueing model is that the primary contributor to the delay is the channel access and reservation time associated with each packet transmission. However, they fail to address the issues of the multi-hop transmissions and hidden and exposed nodes problems. Bisnik and Abouzeid

[16] derived an analytic model for multi-hop wireless ad hoc networks based on open G/G/1 queuing networks. They used the diffusion approximation to solve open queuing networks and derived a closed form expression for the average end-to- end packet delay in MANET. They also obtained an expres- sion for the maximum achievable throughput. But they have not given any consideration to node mobility patterns and routing protocols which are vital parameters in MANET.

Guo et al. [17] proposed a delay prediction mechanism and integrated that prediction mechanism with a proactive ad hoc network routing protocol called Optimal Link State Routing (OLSR). They used queuing delay only and showed that queu- ing delay can be modeled as a non-stationary time series. They used Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) and Radial Basis function to predict from the non-stationary time series model of queu- ing delay in MANET. The delay prediction mechanism pro- posed by them is distributed and independent and uses only

Ghiasian et al. [23] established a relation between network topology and delay of maximum weight link scheduling algo- rithm for ad hoc network. They derived an upper bound for the average delay of packets analytically in terms of edge chromatic number of the network graph under 1-hop interfer- ence model. Further, they extended those results to general interference model and derived an upper bound for delay as a function of chromatic number of conflict graph. But, they have not given much consideration to node mobility pattern and routing algorithm of the network in their work. Gao et al. [24] used Quasi-Birth-and-Death (QBD) theory to mod- el end-to-end delay in MANETs. They applied the QBD the- ory to develop an efficient theoretical framework for capturing the complex dynamics in MANETs. Then with the help of this framework, they derived a closed form models to analyze the exact end-to-end delay and also per node throughput capacity in MANETs. But for the whole analysis they assumed two-hop relay routing with random walk and Random Way Point mobility models.

the end-to-end packet delay in MANET. They found that path length is most influencing parameter. They also build neural network based model to predict packet delay in MANET using path length as input. They found experimen- tally that Generalized Regression Neural Network (GRNN) and Radial Basis Function Network (RBFN) models are better predictor of end-to-end packet delay in MANET across all mobility pattern and routing protocols. Singh et al. [20] developed a trapezoidal fuzzy numbers based model to predict the end-to-end delay of data packets in mobile ad-hoc network environment. They used the model on network using Ad hoc On Demand Distance Vector (AODV) routing protocol only.

Ciullo et al. [21] considered the impact of correlated mobil- ity models on throughput and delay in MANET. They have considered a simplified group mobility model that is flexible enough to explore various degrees of correlation in the nodes mobility process and found that the existence of a wide range of correlated node movements that can lead to significant bet- ter performance than the one achievable under independent nodes movements. Gupta and Shroff [22] analyzed the delay performance of a multihop wireless network with a fixed route between each source destination pair with arbitrary interfer- ence constraints on the set of links. They derived a fundamen- tal lower bound on the system wide average queuing delay of a packet in multi-hop wireless network for any scheduling policy used.

movement pattern is used for node movement by NS-2. The reason for discarding first 3600 s of movement data is that nodes exhibit a higher probability of being near the center of the simulation area in Random Way Point mobility model in general but initially they are uniformly distributed over the simulation area. In Manhattan Grid mobility model, nodes start from (0, 0) and then they get distributed over the simula- tion area. So, we skip 3600 s at the beginning to mitigate the boundary effects of node movement simulation. The maximum speed Vmax and the minimum speed Vmin of a node is set to 10 m/s and 0.5 m/s respectively. The Vmin was set to a positive value to prohibit decreasing the average speed of the nodes and eventually becoming zero [31]. IEEE 802.11 with distributed

ing algorithm to forecast based on historical data. First of all, the historical data Dvt are collected and the universe of dis- course U for that data set is defined. The appropriate length of interval l is determined to fuzzify the given data Dvt. The fuzzy logical relationship is determined. Based on those rela- tionships, the future values are calculated. Our proposed pre- diction of delay is based on the forecasting algorithm proposed by Liu.

The weighted delay prediction is composed of two stages. In the first stage, a regression is done with path length as indepen- dent variable and delay as dependent variable. In the second phase, the historical data are fuzzified to trapezoidal fuzzy numbers and are used to predict delay. The obtained predicted delay using regression and time series is then combined in proper proportion to give the final predicted delay.

