Exploring the usability of educational virtual reality (VR) is essential. Research in this area can explain the adoption of VR as a new technology, contribute to examining paths toward effective learning, and provide recommendations for effective educational design. This study investigated usability in a sample of N = 64 university students learning about simplified construction engineering topics from an interactive VR field trip. Two research objectives were pursued. First, the level of achieved usability was examined using a mixed-methods approach, including data from semi-structured interviews and a survey on system usability and satisfaction. Second, the relationships between several connected variables (ease of use, usefulness, presence, and cognitive load) and system usability and satisfaction were investigated quantitatively. With respect to the first research objective, system usability and satisfaction were evaluated positively in the interviews and rated highly in the surveys. These results indicate that VR field trips, which are increasingly replacing excursions, are regarded as an appropriate instructional method. Concerning the second research objective, ease of use, usefulness, presence, and extraneous load were found to predict system usability. Further, the factors of usefulness, presence, and intrinsic cognitive load helped explain the variance in satisfaction. These findings highlight that the variables connected to system usability and satisfaction in VR learning vary. In addition to these and other theoretical implications, practical implications and recommendations for educational design are discussed.

The relevance of usability in educational VR learning environments becomes apparent from three points of view. From a cognitive perspective, usability can influence instructional effectiveness. VR learning environments must possess a certain level of usability so that users can carry out learning processes efficiently. A lack in usability can directly distract from learning or necessitate spending resources for engaging with the system itself (Ardito et al., 2006). From an affective standpoint, usability can influence emotions and moods. Studies indi- cate that usability is related to motivation, enjoyment, and presence, which are, in turn, associated with perceived learning and satisfaction using VR (Lee et al., 2010; Makransky & Petersen, 2019). From a behavioral angle, usability is critical to adopting new educational technologies. With greater usability, users may be more inclined to engage with and continue to use new educational technologies, for instance, in self-regulated learning (Nagy, 2018).

were with VR applications (Dos Anjos et al., 2021). Ten out of the twelve studies included in this review reported that university students were satisfied with using VR and preferred it over traditional teaching methods (Dos Anjos et al., 2021). Next, we discuss the broader topic of technology acceptance theories.

Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT; Venkatesh et al., 2003). This model integrates key suppositions and findings from eight different acceptance frameworks. According to this model, behavioral intentions and usage behavior are mainly determined by performance expectancy, effort expectancy, social influences, facilitating conditions, gender, age, experience, and voluntariness of use. Some of the variables contained in the TAM are in the UTAUT model part of other variables. Perceived usefulness is considered a subconstruct of performance expectancy, whereas perceived ease of use is included under effort expectancy. An evaluation study using different types of software used in the workplace has demonstrated that the UTAUT predicted intention to use the soft- ware better than other frameworks, including TAM and TAM2 (Ven- katesh et al., 2003).

Since TAM and UTAUT were published, further advances have been made in measuring and predicting user acceptance in educational VR. For instance, Ustun et al. (2023) published an instrument based on the UTAUT to assess user acceptance in VR. This instrument has four sub- scales: performance expectancy, social influence, effort expectancy, and facilitating conditions. The instrument displayed good psychometric properties in two evaluation studies with college students who had experience in using VR. Further, Karaoglan-Yilmaz et al. (2023) intro- duced an attitude scale for educational VR settings. This scale contains to these findings, a study has shown that ease of use and usefulness are linked with satisfaction in mobile learning (Ohk et al., 2015). Despite this wealth of empirical findings, not all relationships are yet clear. A recent literature review shows that empirical findings on the system usability scale and variables contained in the technology-acceptance literature are missing, particularly for VR with HMDs (Vlachogianni & Tselios, 2022).

HMDs. Brade et al. (2017) report evidence for this link in a context where VR was used with a CAVE system containing multiple displays surrounding the participants. In addition, a theoretical perspective proposes that increased flow experiences and similar states like presence can positively impact user satisfaction. In line with this reasoning, a study in which participants learned from a desktop-based VR application discovered that higher presence perception was linked positively with higher satisfaction (Liu et al., 2023).

usability. The field of educational psychology, however, has been pri- marily interested in cognitive processes during learning and usage in- tentions. We are convinced that through integrating both research traditions, we can obtain many valuable findings to close the research gap in this area. To make a valuable contribution to the relevant

Another critical aspect of the research gap is the lack of mixed- methods approaches. The large majority of studies we reviewed used surveys that were analyzed quantitatively. Mixed-methods research makes additional insights accessible through combining quantitative and qualitative analyses. This type of research provides opportunities to test known theories but is also helpful for idea generation and theory development (Almalki, 2016).

Research questions RQ1 and RQ2 address the usability and satis- faction attained in a VR learning environment. These research questions are investigated using a mixed-methods approach. First, data from semi- structured interviews are analyzed qualitatively. Then, the results are reexamined through quantitative analyses of survey data.

This hypothesis assumes that decent usability scores reported for various educational technologies by Vlachogianni and Tselios (2022) can also be reached in educational VR with HMDs. It aligns with results from a VR study by Othman et al. (2022) and is partially in contrast to lower system usability discovered in a VR study by Huang et al. (2021). RQ2: What level of satisfaction does the VR learning environment reach? 20.3% (n = 13) above 24 years, with data missing for 3.1% (n = 2). Most participants had very little (81.2%, n = 52) or little (14.1%, n = 9) VR experience; a few participants skipped this question (4.7%, n = 3). In

As this study also explores the topic of perceived authenticity, a two- group between-subjects design was used in the learning phase (see Fink et al., 2023a for more details). One group learned from a VR learning environment, including a bridge model created through 3D modeling with a graphics program (3D-model group). The other group received a VR learning environment comprising a bridge model created by (Faul et al., 2014). For RQ1 and RQ2, power analyses were conducted for one-tailed, single sample t-tests against a constant value, medium effects (d = 0.50), an alpha error level of 5%, and a power of 80%. The power analyses determined a necessary sample size of 27 participants for these research questions. For the power analyses of the regression models of RQ3 and RQ4, medium to large effects (f2 = 0.25) were assumed. We calculated statistics with six predictors, an alpha error level of 5%, and a power of 80%. The power analyses yielded a sample estimate of at least 62 participants.

To approach the third research question, we investigated variables connected with system usability. Similar to assumptions included in the TAM (e.g., Davis, 1989), ease of use and usefulness were found to explain system usability (H3.1 and H3.2), and the effect sizes of their relations were medium and small, respectively. The effect sizes are comparable in magnitude to relations found for these predictors and results add to the literature that ease of use and usefulness predict us- ability facets also in complex VR learning environments experienced with HMDs. This finding is significant, because data on the association of ease of use and usefulness with system usability were missing for this specific context (Vlachogianni & Tselios, 2022). It should be noted that a direct comparison of our results on system usability with findings from other theories of technology acceptance, such as UTAUT (Venkatesh et al., 2003) and its specific adoption for VR contexts (Ustun et al., 2023), would be complicated. These technology acceptance theories are more extensive and incorporate ease of use and usefulness as compo- nents of larger scales.

Lastly, we discuss the relation between cognitive load and system usability. Before interpreting our results, let us briefly inspect the cognitive load level. Since all three cognitive load scores were low to medium, we can conclude that cognitive overload was not an issue in our study. In line with hypothesis H3.4, extraneous load proved a sig- nificant negative predictor in our multiple regression. This finding suggests that extraneous cognitive load can reduce the usability of VR learning environments, as proposed in the literature (Hollender et al., intrinsic and germane load with usability. The effect sizes of intrinsic and germane load in the multiple regression were visibly smaller than that for extraneous load and not close to the 5% alpha level. These re- sults are consistent with a conceptualization of intrinsic and germane load independent from the system usability of the learning environment (Hollender et al., 2010). This conceptualization makes sense because intrinsic and germane load arise mainly from the demands of the learning material and schema construction processes (Sweller et al., 1998).

The fourth research question focuses on variables connected with satisfaction. Contrary to our expectations, ease of use did not predict satisfaction (H4.1). We assumed this variable would be associated with satisfaction based on the following reasoning. Satisfaction is part of the ISO usability definition (ISO, 2018), and various usability variables (e.

Our results indicate that the known relations between ease of use and usability do not extend to satisfaction. A conceptualization of satisfac- tion independent from usability as a separate perceived learning outcome (Makransky & Lilleholt, 2018) would fit these results. Such perceived learning outcomes can be predicted, in particular, by positive affective and motivational states, but are not theorized to be related to usability variables (Makransky & Lilleholt, 2018). That being said, the conceptualization of satisfaction we selected based on ISO (2018) should also not be viewed too critically, because other prominent usability conceptualizations also include satisfaction as a key component (Har- rison et al., 2013; Nielsen, 1994).

(utility value). These factors could be considered when developing VR learning environments to ensure high usefulness. We also examined the association of satisfaction with presence and found presence to be a positive predictor of satisfaction (H4.3), suggesting that higher presence contributes to the experience of greater learning satisfaction. This result aligns with the theoretical argument that increased flow experiences and similar states like presence positively impact satisfaction (Liu et al., 2023). As far as we know, only one study has investigated this rela- tionship in the context of a desktop-based VR application (Liu et al., 2023). Since this study used other questionnaires to measure presence and usability, and our VR was conducted with HMDs, our study repre- sents a vital contribution to the literature. Due to the described rela- tionship between presence and satisfaction, educational designers and developers should aim to enhance the presence experienced by partici- pants. Higher levels of presence might be attained when learning envi-

One limitation of our study concerns the measures used. Instead of measuring usability variables extensively with larger surveys (e.g., UTAUT from Venkatesh et al., 2003, or TAM 3 from Venkatesh & Bala, 2008), we used several short measures for system usability, satisfaction, ease of use, usefulness, presence, and cognitive load. With this approach, several components of the mentioned larger surveys were skipped and thus could not be examined. For instance, TAM3 contains a set of indi- vidual variables (e.g., computer self-efficacy, computer playfulness, computer anxiety) and externally influenced variables (e.g., the volun- types of interaction can be implemented in VR. In some learning envi- ronments, participants can navigate freely by walking (Schmeil et al., 2012). Other learning environments enable participants to interact directly with the user interface by pushing buttons or by manipulating and using objects with hand motions (Schmeil et al., 2012). Because our study was focused on a learning environment with simple interaction types, our results cannot be generalized to learning environments with more complex interaction types without restrictions.

Our results also have implications for assessing the technology acceptance of VR. The UTAUT for VR contexts (Ustun et al., 2023) dis- tinguishes between the subscales performance expectancy, social influ- ence, effort expectancy, and facilitating conditions. This instrument seems appropriate for investigating the technology acceptance of VR among university students in the coming years. Our study has shown that cognitive load and presence are linked to system usability and satisfaction. These associations suggest that it may be beneficial to supplement technology acceptance scales for VR by measuring critical variables included in frameworks for VR learning. Behavioral intention and usage may be better predicted if technology acceptance models and VR-specific variables are used in combination.

In addition, further recommendations for educational design can be provided. Our study shows that the connected variables of system us- ability and satisfaction differ. System usability is affected by ease of use, usefulness, presence, and extraneous load. Satisfaction is linked to use- fulness, presence, and intrinsic load. Educational designers and de- velopers should, thus, keep the following recommendations in mind: System usability can be optimized through increasing ease of use, use- fulness, and presence and reducing extraneous load. Satisfaction can be enhanced by maximizing usefulness and presence and preventing an overly high level of intrinsic load. Moreover, our study reveals that extraneous cognitive load negatively predicts ease of use. This result suggests that decreasing extraneous load may also have positive effects on connected variables to usability. The interdependence of cognitive load and usability variables (Hollender et al., 2010) should be explored further to provide more guidance to practitioners.

