Array 13 (2022) 100114
Available online 18 December 2021
2590-0056/© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/array
A prospective interoperable distributed e-Health system with loose coupling
in improving healthcare services for developing countries
Mahnuma Rahman Rinty, Uzzal Kumar Prodhan, Md. Mijanur Rahman ∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Jatiya Kabi Kazi Nazrul Islam University, Trishal, Mymensingh 2224, Bangladesh
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Keywords:
Distributed database
Distributed e-Health system
Electronic Health Record (EHR)
Health level 7 (HL7)
Interoperability
Loose coupling
A B S T R A C T
A loosely coupled distributed system enables interoperability in healthcare structures and can be used to
create flexible architecture. The key limitation in adopting electronic health (e-Health) services in developing
countries is the health data interoperability problem. Most developing countries are being confronted with
the utilization of e-Health systems for their health care services. This study aims to develop a prospective e-
Health system for developing countries to improve the effectiveness of health care services. This paper presents
an enhanced e-Health framework using distributed memory and heterogeneous data handling mechanisms
with loose coupling. The distributed e-Health has been designed using e-Health standards that are compatible
with health level 7 (HL7) and can facilitate interoperability among health information systems. The Message
Passing Interface (MPI) has been implemented to store regular backups of heterogeneous health data. The HL7
standards can also handle security threats. Data interchange from one e-Health system server to another has
been conducted based on the experimental results. The distributed database has been made accessible from
a remote server by using loosely coupled technology. It also provided the e-Health data recovery features
and handled an extensive database through a distributed environment. According to the study, the developed
system can deliver a low-cost service to the intended developing-country community effectively.
1. Introduction
Electronic health (e-Health) and Telemedicine services are benefits
of information and communication technology (ICT). Electronic medi-
cal records (EMR) and other health information systems (HIS) can help
enhance health care facilities [1]. Electronic health record (EHR) is
broadly used by most developed countries in Europe and the USA to
improve health care quality [2]. Massive volumes of medical informa-
tion are now available because of the healthcare system’s digitization
[3]. The ability to generate healthcare-related records allows the health
management information system to combine all people’s health care
services [4]. E-Health, if well performed, significantly increases the de-
livery of healthcare to individuals in low-resource nations. Healthcare
Quality and cost are the most crucial factor in the success of these e-
Health services [5]. Still, only a few developing countries have e-Health
systems capable of implementing digital interventions on a small scale
[6]. Like e-Health, m-Health (Mobile Health) enhances the performance
of existing health schemes by utilizing automated tools and mobile
networks to strengthen health system tasks [7]. However, eye programs
in developing countries are still insufficient, as they are designed to
provide effective acute treatment at secondary and tertiary levels. An
eye program-related study [8] emphasized the need to improve primary
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: mahnumarinty@gmail.com (M.R. Rinty), uzzal_bagerhat@yahoo.com (U.K. Prodhan), mijan@jkkniu.edu.bd (M.M. Rahman).
health care services to avoid diabetes-related blindness. In addition, it
requires reorganizing health services to focus on lifelong preventative
and integrated standards. Thus, the study is essential in settling how to
combine these, avoiding further weakening wellness methods. Flexible
designs that promote health care structure’s interoperability can be
realized via a loosely coupled distributed system [9]. But, there is a
lack of interoperability, which is one of the key obstructions in adapting
e-Health services [10]. Most of the developing countries do not follow
a proper electronic health standard. Data interoperability of distributed
EHR is critical for bettering medical decision-making, saving health
care costs, and enhancing health care quality. As the e-Health system’s
data are fragmented, it leads a costly service in fragmentation results
[11]. The HL7 standard, a worldwide health level 7 standard that can
be integrated into various systems, is considered the convergence of
healthcare and information technology [12]. Authors in [13] applied a
‘‘Service Oriented Approach (SOA)’’based on HL7 and ‘‘Fast Healthcare
Interoperability Resources (FHIR)’’ to provide interoperability, security,
and secrecy at every level. This method resulted in considerable im-
provements in service delivery. A study [14] showed that women in
Pakistan’s rural regions confront various hurdles to healthcare, making
gender-responsive health programs critical, particularly for tuberculosis
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2021.100114
Received 28 August 2021; Received in revised form 4 November 2021; Accepted 23 November 2021
Array 13 (2022) 100114
2
M.R. Rinty et al.
(TB). Therefore, the focus group discussion platform included peo-
ple’s queries on different healthcare/TB care systems and community
standards. In addition, a recorded deficiency of TB-related stigma,
intermediate awareness about TB disease, and complete perception
of tuberculosis as a treatable illness were all identified as facilitators
to TB care access. During the COVID-19 pandemic, an evaluation
[15] intended to outline activities in judging the satisfaction of help-
less people with teleconsultation, like e-Health assistance provided by
healthcare professionals in their areas. As a result, we added studies of
teleconsultation-based services extended to low-income and clinically
susceptible people worldwide. It emphasizes COVID-19 monitoring,
treatment, and prevention as well as enhances/delivers services and
offers treatment from a human rights viewpoint.
The key objective of this study is to attain interoperability among
e-Health systems for connecting each other and share data in a secure
way involving efficient health data management. Data interchange
standards, such as HL7 standard, as well as digital imaging and commu-
nications in medicine (DICOM), can help with interoperability [16,17].
The feature of DICOM telemedicine is to increase radiology system
services so that underprivileged remote people can avail the services
easily. It also mitigates the technology gap, reduces the cost and
ensures faster treatment. The message passing interface (MPI), which
provides key virtual topology, synchronization, and communication
functionality among a set of processes, is another solution to the
data interoperability challenge [18]. Information technology, such as
the EHR, is changing healthcare and we need to cope up with it
effectively [19]. The importance of openness or interoperable EHR
of effective health information exchange becomes an urgent topic of
study in the current situation [20]. In developing countries e-Health
services are limited in use. Due to the lack of interoperability, health
standard and heterogeneous data make it difficult to manage. There
were substantial challenges, such as a lack of required technology, tech-
nological incompatibilities, limited network coverage areas, restricting
the number of health institutions that could participate in various
e-Health programs, and distribution techniques [21]. The mobile multi-
agent based distributed information platform provided a new way
to integrate and evaluate the massive amounts of data generated by
patient monitoring [22]. It offered a lot of promise to change the way
health care monitoring is done, and potentially even the outcome.
Apart from, in the biomedical field, loosely coupled technology enables
for adapting to the digital data collection and integration [23]. But it
includes utilizing Web services to design strategies for transmitting data
across an environment with limited resources.
The comparison behind this study is that there have not been many
efforts to establish interoperability across different e-Health systems.
On the other hand, the key downsides are the system’s complexity,
expenses, database integrity control, lack of standards, and database
design complexity. Because existing standards were difficult and expen-
sive to adopt, HL7 is formed. All the current EHR records in developing
nations use centralized databases. Link failure and minimal or no-fault
tolerance are two significant drawbacks of such a centralized web-
based system. In this regard, a decentralized, distributed database is an
appropriate solution for maintaining e-Health care remotely. According
to a survey [24] conducted in Bangladesh, a tiny developing nation
in South Asia, 94.80% of expert physicians, 74% of local doctors,
91.42% of patients, and 80.32% of pharmacy owners wish to pro-
vide telemedicine services to the Bangladesh vast rural population. As
shown in a case study [25] from Saudi Arabia, around 70% of pro-
fessionals knew e-Health, even though the majority had never utilized
it. ‘‘Electronic Health Records’’, ‘‘Patient Information Systems’’, and
‘‘Hospital Information Systems’’ were all recognized as very or highly
beneficial by more than 80%of underprivileged nations [21]. Nowa-
days, the e-Health system is underutilized, cost-effective, and facing
technical obstacles to implementation in developing countries. Thus,
the distributed EHR system’s acceptance and potential for improving
e-Health care is very high in consideration. In the literature, it is
found that distributed EHR has some advantages over centralized EHR.
However, the people of urban areas are only familiar with the central
e-Health system. Furthermore, the absence of a backup plan is another
trouble for centralized EHR. The study aims to develop an interoperable
distributed system integrated EHR where data is made flexible by loose
coupling to overcome these difficulties. The data recovery, MPI, is also
included in the proposed framework.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
a literature related to the problem domain is described and reviewed.
Section 3 describes the system architecture and development phases.
The experimental results and the evaluation of this study are discussed
in Section 4. Section 5 presents the conclusion.
2. Background and significance
The idea behind this study comes from the analysis of the re-
cent works related to e-Health systems. The literature helps us to
find out the different approaches on the e-Health frameworks and
guides an advanced approach to overcome the current health care
challenges. In the treatment of chronic disease, an ICT-based method
was developed, which has a number of foreseeable future trends and
scenarios in e-Health [26]. A study on telehealth and e-Health found
the cost-effectiveness of telehealth and e-Health services for primary
care patients [27]. There is a tremendous improvement in e-Health
services and people are evolving with the innovative technologies of
health [10]. Depends on the availability of smart devices and systems,
health management and treatment have changed drastically [28].
2.1. E-Health systems and its challenges in developing countries
An improvement of the effectiveness of e-Health services in de-
veloping countries still needs more attention. According to a 2016
assessment, around 70% of physicians were aware of e-Health, al-
though the majority of them had never used it [25]. A distributed
e-Health system was more efficient in terms of better managing health
professional personnel, reducing travel times, and facilitating medical
information interchange between sites via electronic communications
[29]. It lowers the cost of healthcare services, yet there are several
impediments to e-Health adoption in developing nations. According
to a study [30] on e-Health in low and middle-income countries,
the evolution of e-Health has resulted in the reduction of numerous
obstacles due to the widespread use of ICT. Health systems in low- and
middle-income nations confront issues such as a paucity of medical
examiners in remote areas, varying quality of care, lack of patient
compliance, and fraud. A study conducted by health ICT profession-
als [31] with ‘‘Botswana’s National e-Health Strategy’’ analyzed the
benefits of interoperability, possibilities, and difficulties and drew the
study’s significant future direction. Respondents described that the
existing m-Health applications and e-Record systems were implemented
based on the expectations of the then-draft ‘‘National e-Health Strat-
egy’’. In contrast, e-Record systems in the private sector were based
on in-house ‘‘standard operating procedures (SOPs)’’, following with
the ‘‘Southern African Development Community Accreditation Services
(SADCAS)’’ standards. The resulting study discovered some challenges
of interoperability among e-Record systems, included:
(i) A lack of e-Record system law and governance.
(ii) A lack of ICT support.
(iii) Insufficient support funds.
(iv) A lack of expertise to use e-Record systems.
(v) Non-uniform unique patient identifiers (UPI).
(vi) Non-enforcement of interoperability standards.
In addition, at the district level, internet connectivity was described
as poor and inconsistent, with some facilities lacking both access and
energy.
Array 13 (2022) 100114
3
M.R. Rinty et al.
Table 1
Different types of health facilities of Bangladesh [34].
Level of the Health care Center
(higher to lower)
Health Services
Service Delivery Platform
Divisional Level Hospital
(i) Nursing Institutes in Medical College Hospitals, (ii) Nursing Institute and
as well as General Hospital, (iii) Hospital for Infectious Diseases, (iv) Health
Technology Center
Based on hospitals and clinics
District Level Hospital
(i) Nursing Institutes in District Hospitals, (ii) Nursing Institute and General
Hospital, (iii) Nursing Institute of Medical College Hospital, (iv) Clinic for
Chest Disease and Tuberculosis, (v) Laproscopy Hospitals and MATS
Hospital and clinic based
Upazila Level Hospital
(i) Health Complex of Upazila
Onsite services
Union Level Hospital
(i) Health Center for Rural Communities, (ii) Substation Union, (iii) Union
Health and Family Welfare Center (non-profit organization that provides
health and family welfare services to the community)
Onsite services
Hospital at Ward Level
(i) Community Health Clinic
Onsite services
The applicability of the technology acceptance model (TAM) [32]
was later proven in Pakistan, with the addition of additional factors
to simulate the uptake of telemedicine services in poor nations. This
model provided useful information for policymakers and health care
professionals in determining the facilitators and inhibitors to large-scale
e-Health service deployment. Personal motivation, innovativeness, and
cultural constructions were the restrictions, which should be inves-
tigated further to reveal more trustworthy findings of the suggested
model for the adoption of e-Health services in a developing nation.
In light of Ghana’s status as a developing country, the authors [21]
discovered that the country was also having difficulty adopting e-
Health due to its incapacity to appreciate the potential benefits. They
drew attention to some of the most pressing issues confronting devel-
oping countries, which, regrettably, are the engine of any economic
development and the driving force behind successful e-initiatives.
The restrictions included gaining vital insight from lessons learned
from the successes and failures of e-commerce, e-government, and
e-Health in industrialized countries by rigorous evaluation of those ex-
periences. In order to address issues and opportunities in Zambia,[33]
an e-Health system was presented in that combined e-Health with a
new paradigm for information exchange. The study found that while
e-Health core design and information products were deemed com-
petent in the past, workforce training, clinical compliance, gover-
nance, legislation, and policy, as well as change management, re-
mained severely lacking, owing to insufficient ICT infrastructure. Thus,
it requires some knowledge about challenges to adopt e-Health sys-
tem, potential techniques and technologies, as well as the scope of
advancements.
But the actual healthcare facilities in developing countries are par-
tially unalike, and most of them are hospital based. For this instant, this
study addresses the different types of health facilities and their plat-
forms of a developing country, especially Bangladesh perspective (see
Table 1). In Bangladesh, the rural people receive primary healthcare
services through ward, union, and upazila level hospitals or medical
centers. The secondary level hospitals are more advanced and provide
special care to the patients, and it is given through district and divi-
sional level hospitals. But there are some hospitals that deliver high-end
health care services are also called tertiary hospitals. As the number
of secondary and tertiary hospitals is limited in Bangladesh, the rural
people are deprived of the advanced level health services. Most of the e-
Health services focus on tertiary and secondary care through hospitals.
These services can be extended to the primary healthcare from rural
areas through the proposed system. The people can get the profes-
sional health services through the proposed e-Health platform from the
primary healthcare centers. As a result, an interoperable distributed e-
Health system can play a critical role in improving healthcare for rural
people in developing countries such as Bangladesh.
2.2. Design issues in interoperable distributed EHRs
Electronic Health Record (EHR) is a vital part of a digitized health
care delivery centers [35]. EHR maintains the medical record of a
person’s lifetime health condition and medication electronically. It
replaces the paper-based health records to the digital platform. In e-
Health, the sharing of health data among multiple health care centers
with the common structures and organizations is called interoperability
[36]. Interoperability among health care centers impedes to maintain
EHR, and a distributed EHR is the main solution to the interoperability
problem. Very few developing countries nowadays are familiar with
distributed EHRs, and most of the developing countries are suffering
from interoperability problems. Thus, the people in rural areas of
developing countries are mostly affected for this scenario. Also, they are
not motivated and willing to adapt to an EHR system. But a distributed
EHR system can only enable health data interoperability.
This study reviewed various methods and technologies related to
the interoperable distributed EHR systems. Rubi et al. [37] proposed
an interoperable internet of medical things platform by the joint use
of Open Electronic Health Record (openEHR) and semantic sensor
network semantics. For continuous patient monitoring in emergency
wards, a vertical IoT architecture using open protocols was employed
in [38]. They developed an e-Health system that utilized open commu-
nication protocols and openEHR standards, allowing interoperability
across various devices and software, ranging from wired sensors to
databases. It was also discovered during the deployment of an advanced
telemedicine service for Bangladesh’s rural population, where they
developed a centralized electronic health system (EHS) for telemedicine
services [39]. The development of a distributed architecture model
to integrate personal health information yielded significant benefits,
particularly in terms of digital storage of patients’ health records [40].
In 2018, authors in [41] worked about the open-access of health
care including its confidentiality. They also discovered that patients
were more worried about having simple access to their EHR from
health care personnel other than doctors. Enterprise e-Health inte-
gration and interoperability challenges the use of information and
communication technology (ICT) and health information systems (HIS)
in health care was the responsibility of architecture [42]. An estimation
presents the current state of interoperability in health care to assess
its progress [43]. It also found that interoperability saves cost and
improves health care service quality. Lehne et al. [44] proposed the
digital medicine platform depends on interoperability that can improve
medical information communication worldwide.
2.3. Some e-Health models and related technologies
This study reviewed various methods and technologies related to
the distributed EHR systems, and investigated their findings, outcomes,
and limitations. Some of them are centralized and some of them are
decentralized or distributed. Some of the potential solutions and related
technologies are described in the following sub-sections.
Array 13 (2022) 100114
4
M.R. Rinty et al.
Fig. 1. The architecture of the IS-ACTIVE system [26].
2.3.1. An e-Health system model with centralized technology
Today ICT is responsible for reducing healthcare costs. The analysis
[26] examined the existing state of e-Health solutions for chronic
illnesses and forecasted future trends and scenarios. The wireless sensor
collected data. IS-ACTIVE (‘‘Inertial Sensing Systems for Advanced
Chronic Condition Monitoring and Risk Prevention’’) architectural com-
ponents are shown in Fig. 1. IS-ACTIVE intended to provide person-
centric healthcare solutions for chronic diseases based on new wireless
inertial sensing devices. The sensor-based system suggested by IS-
ACTIVE offers a beneficial strategy for patients. It analyzes their phys-
ical activity and condition in real-time with an effective remote moni-
toring tool that allows them to investigate the success of physical ther-
apy and adapt it accordingly. IS-ACTIVE technology included ‘‘Wire-
less Sensors Networks (WSNs)’’ or ‘‘Body Sensor Networks (BSNs)’’.
They contain various sensors used for signaling possible adverse en-
vironmental conditions concerning the user-specific condition. TAOs
were technology-aided objects that helped monitor patients’ physical
training performance remotely. The ‘‘Extended Body Sensor Network
(BSN+)’’ was made up of on-body sensors and TAOs. Feedback Devices
covered all user interaction elements, supplying the user with the
information detected and processed by the WSN. The wireless commu-
nication infrastructure seamlessly connected the following components,
like WSNs, technology-assisted items, feedback devices, etc. Multiple
users allowed numerous patients to exercise and used the IS-ACTIVE
system at the same time. Communication with the Caregiver permitted
them to assess the patient’s progress and provide appropriate advice
based on the present condition and progression of the disease. This
system was established centrally. There was no distributed feature in
this study.
2.3.2. EHR model with decentralized technology
Normally, most of the health care IT are very fragmented, health
data are scattered across different hospitals. The goal of this study [45]
was to propose a solution to the interoperability problem by fast health
care interoperability resources (FHIR) framework. This technology was
effective for decentralized, secure and trustless personal health records
management. The front-end application [45] of this technique is repre-
sented by a flowchart in Fig. 2. For the front-end application, the React
Java script framework was used here. For the client the official libraries
of Ethereum, BigchainDB, IPFS and FHIR were used, where Ethereum,
BigchainDB, and IPFS are applying logic, database, and file system
respectively. Although this system was able to enable interoperability
and security, but it had some significant drawbacks such as, health
data were immutable with this decentralized technology, public DLTs
(decongestive lymphatic therapy) were not desirable for the private
Fig. 2. Basic front-end application flowchart [45].
health record and Ethereum was a blockchain technology which was
slow and not familiar.
Developed countries are more advanced in technologies about e-
Health care. The purpose of our study introduces an effective approach
into the distributed EHS in developing countries which provides the
conceptual architecture for the implementation of an interoperable
distributed EHR.
2.3.3. Some developed e-Health system models in Bangladesh
Developing countries require e-Health applications that may assist
in a variety of conditions, such as when physicians are in short supply in
comparison to the population. Among them, we need to consider some
e-Health system models of Bangladesh developed by the Bangladeshi
researchers. In 2015, a sensor-based remote patient diagnostic center
[46] was established to provide telemedicine to South Asia’s poor
and emerging countries. The patient’s data were collected using four
sensors: an electrocardiogram (ECG), a blood-oxygen saturation (SpO2)
level, temperature, and blood pressure. The main objective was to
deliver primary health care to the unprivileged community of the rural
area. But the limitations were central server was used for data storage
and system was not interoperable with the other health system.
In 2016, authors performed a smartphone-based telemedicine tech-
nique [47] for a remote patient monitoring system. Biomedical sensors
and photo-electronic sensors were employed to collect input param-
eters. The method was created to keep track of hypertensive and
hypotensive patients in rural India. This system was also centralized
and a small number of sensors were used here for data collection. In
2017, Bangladesh created a wireless health monitoring system [48] that
employed passive wifi sensing to track three activities: respiratory rate,
essential tremor, and falls. The goal of this study was to demonstrate
the accuracy rate of employing a passive wifi system rather than tradi-
tional intrusive health sensors. There was no any distributed feature
in the developed model. In 2018, a telemedicine toolkit [39] was
created to provide e-Health services to Bangladesh’s rural population.
The approach prioritized primary health care for the underserved rather
than specialized treatment. But the system was centralized so that any
failure of the central server causes system failure.
Array 13 (2022) 100114
5
M.R. Rinty et al.
Table 2
Developed e-Health system models of Bangladesh.
SL.
E-Health system
Features
Technology
Limitations
1
A remote diagnostic center with four sensor
[46]
Primary health care: ECG, blood pressure,
SPO2 and temperature
Centralized
Lack of interoperability with other
health systems
2
A smartphone-based telemedicine system for
remote patient monitoring [47]
Rural patient monitoring suffering from
hypertension and hypotension
Centralized
System needs to include more
sensors
3
Passive Wi-Fi sensing allows for wireless
health monitoring [48]
As a conventional tool for health care, it
replaces invasive medical instruments
Centralized
–
4
An Advanced Telemedicine Toolkit for
Bangladesh [39]
Primary health care services with nine
sensors
Centralized
System was centralized without no
data recovery
From the above discussion, Table 2 summarizes the e-Health system
models of Bangladesh perspective. Moreover, the developed models
of e-Health in Bangladesh are a few in number and all of them are
centralized. In case developing countries (like Bangladesh) needs to
adopt a distributed e-Health system following an open source health
standard.
2.4. HL7, loosely coupled technology, and message passing interface in
e-Health
At present the hospitals themselves do not use an appropriate e-
Health standard for system integration. It is one of the most common
reasons about lack of interoperability. HL7 [49] is a set of international
standards, norms, and definitions that is used to communicate and
transfer medical information across health care practitioners, and it
is considered here in relation to the proposed system. It is one of the
most significant design patterns in health data standards. The goal of
the HL7 is to provide standards for exchanging and sharing health care
information electronically, which enables health data interoperability.
Loose coupling or loosely coupled technology [50] is an approach to
interconnecting the components independently that provides stability
by allowing persistent behavior of the system for certain inputs. A
change made to one element in a coupling architecture will cause unin-
tended modifications to other elements. A loose coupling architecture
is designed to minimize the risk of unplanned changes. Loosely coupled
technology enables the synchronization of the different institutional
application platform. Loosely coupled distributed technology for the e-
Health system is capable of executing health data independently. Loose
coupling enables the interoperation between health data sources and
makes the system flexible. To design a flexible, decentralized e-Health
system we must consider the advantages of loose coupling in e-Health.
The message passing interface (MPI) is one of the most extensively
used methods for specifying applications that will execute on scalable
distributed memory systems, which are made up of several compute
nodes connected by one or more interconnection networks. The goal
of this study is to design a distributed e-Health system which has the
ability of parallel computing to exchange data from one site to another.
MPI comes up with parallel and distributed application which has the
ability of achieving an efficient environment by the host network in-
terface required [51].MPI’s communication section includes traditional
point-to-point communication as well as collaborative communication
[18]. Also the performance of MPI broadcast is comparatively fast. We
have considered the use of MPI in this study for regular backup of
heterogeneous health data. Based on the above findings on e-Health,
there are several issues of consideration, including-
(i) lack of skill and experience in e-Health,
(ii) most of the expert doctors and health care centers are urban
based in developing countries,
(iii) more than half of the doctors in hospitals are not connected with
the e-Health system but most of them want to introduce e-Health
services and want to connect with the EHS,
(iv) in order to get proper health care services, rural people will have
to go to urban areas, and
(v) although a few number of e-Health services exists but still health
data are not interoperable with the other services.
Considering this practical scenario, a loosely coupled distributed
interoperable e-Health system will be a feasible solution and has vast
potential in developing countries. It can be an appropriate tool to serve
the huge number of rural people of developing countries through local
health care centers.
3. Materials and methodology
The study presents the overall design and development of the
e-Health model for improving health care services. The system archi-
tecture, data storage and EHR server module, data backup system, and
implementation phase are discussed in the following subsections.
3.1. Proposed system architecture
As HL7 based e-Health care is a new paradigm based on the use
of distributed computing and interoperability, this system uses the
standard structure of HL7 to interchange health information and design
the framework. Fig. 3 shows the system architecture. The distributed
e-Health system is a loosely coupled architecture that separates the
interface from the implementation. The servers are connected to other
servers via standard protocols.
To interface with the GNU Health open source HL7 based e-Health
system ‘Tryton’ client [52] is used. Since Tryton supports hospitals,
health care modules such as complete clinical workflow, patient records
management, laboratory management, medical stock management, and
more have been available.
3.1.1. HL7 based clinical document architecture (CDA)
The primary framework for arranging electronic health records is
CDA designed by HL7. The HL7 CDA is a markup standard for clinical
documents that defines their structure, semantics and specifies how
to organize health records and encode data pieces for exchange. The
CDA document structure [53] is illustrated in Table 3.
The CDA
document’s output seems to be an XML-based document. The layout
for converting a CDA document to another format is valuable to the
designer in creating a readable document that contains information
about the patient’s health. The conversion process is pictured by Fig. 4.
3.1.2. Functionality of the e-Health system
We have considered the architecture of the search component and
local EHR data sources which focuses on the interfaces between them.
Figure 3 depicts the conceptual architecture. End users of the e-Health
system can request health-related information via electronic commu-
nication from anywhere and at any time. Then the health system
administrator distributes the request to the local administrator and co-
ordinates their execution. At the same time health system administrator
controls the limit of concurrent searches that are running concurrently
so as to avoid overloading. Local administrator analyzes and translates
the request into executable statements and sends it to the local EHR
Array 13 (2022) 100114
6
M.R. Rinty et al.
Fig. 3. Conceptual architecture.
Fig. 4. Conversion flow of XML based CDA file to readable format.
server of the e-Health system. The executable statements are suitable
to run on the EHR server. Getting the results from the EHR server local
administrator delivers the results to the health system administrator.
Finally the health system administrator accumulates the individual re-
sults and delivers back to the users. With this configuration the system
enables loose coupling and interoperability between health data and
search interface. Thus, this architecture allows flexible implementation
of individual e-Health systems.
3.2. Data flow diagram of loosely coupled distributed EHR system
To demonstrate the design and development of the distributed
EHR system with loose coupling, an architectural schematic dataflow
between communication modules is used. Fig. 5 represents the dataflow
diagram of the system with n nodes. This figure shows that each
remote area has its own e-Health system where it is connected with the
central or main server. Furthermore, Tryton is used here to enter the
e-Health system by the health professionals or service providers. The
working place of health professionals is considered as a service delivery
center. Patients can register and send/receive data from anywhere.
Local doctors can log in to the system, observe the patient’s profile, and
send medication according to the patient’s problem to the health pro-
fessionals. Then patients receive information from health professionals.
For any kind of system failure, a data backup operation is performed
so that data can be recovered from the main server since our system is
distributed in nature.
3.3. Components of the system
The proposed e-Health system was developed with different com-
ponents, such as an EHR server module, user login module, HL7 based
health system, server data backup. The major components along with
the deployment diagram are described in the following subsections.
3.3.1. Login module
Two login modules, one for the client and another for the local
doctor, have been developed in the system; the client module will act
as the remote health care center for the rural patients with the neces-
sary components. Rural patients will come to the remote health care
service center or a pharmacy for e-Health service. The administrator in
pharmacy will input the patient history to the health system. In order
to connect the service center with electronic health system for patient
registration and service delivery, we have followed the following steps
to implement this module:
Step 1. Install GNU Health server
Step 2. Install Tryton client
Array 13 (2022) 100114
7
M.R. Rinty et al.
Fig. 5. Dataflow diagram of distributed e-Health system with n nodes.
Table 3
HL7 CDA document structure [53].
<ClinicalDocument>
... CDA Header ...
<StructuredBody>
<section>
<text>...</text>
<Observation>...</Observation>
<Observation>
<reference>
<ExternalObservation>... </ExternalObservation>
</reference>
</Observation>
< /section>
<section>
<section>...</section>
</section>
</StructuredBody>
</ClinicalDocument>
<ClinicalDocument>
... CDA Header ...
<StructuredBody>
<section>
<text>...</text>
<Observation>...</Observation>
<Observation>
<reference>
<ExternalObservation>... </ExternalObservation>
</reference>
</Observation>
</section>
<section>
<section>...</section>
</section>
</StructuredBody>
</ClinicalDocument>
Step 3. Connect with electronic health system by using valid user-name
and password.
Local doctors provide the primary health care to the rural patients.
Following patient registration, local doctors will collect data from
patients and verify everything before uploading it to the server. Expert
doctors can also communicate with the local doctor through the health
system. To implement this module we have followed the following
steps:
Step 1. Arrange the patient data in a logical manner in HL7 based
e-Health system
Step 2. Give access to the patient profile to make medication plan
Step 3. Upload the prescription or further update to the server.
3.3.2. Electronic Health Record (EHR) server module
In this system, we have used an EHR server module for each e-
Health sub-system. Fig. 6 shows data importing mechanisms to the
server. In each server, we are storing patient-wise different basic data
by using individual patient ID and test ID. Each data is unique and can
be easily searched, managed, and used for distributed EHR services.
All patients’ data are stored in a local database primarily and all data
of the local database are exported in the main server database. If the
patient result is ready, the local database gets updated. Finally, after
the finalization of patient data from the server, we export patient-wise
data to the e-Health system module for EHR services. Generally, the
patient is registered with a local server in our model. If the patient
changes his/her geographical position and wants to take a service from
our system, he/she can receive the service from the local server of the
new location in the same system. Then the patients’ new data will be
exported to the main server again.
3.3.3. Health Level 7 (HL7) based health system
In designing our system, we employed an open source health system
based on Health Level Seven International (HL7). We have customized
the health system according to the requirements of developing coun-
tries. All the electronic health record will be stored in the electronic
health system. The developed model will be interoperable with other
HL7 based health systems.
3.4. Data preparation
The data preparation includes the storage of all health related
information of patient, doctor, and health professional. To test the e-
Health system we use here the demo dataset of the GNU Health system
where GNU Health is an open-source hospital information management
Array 13 (2022) 100114
8
M.R. Rinty et al.
Fig. 6. Flowchart of the EHR server module.
system that is free to use (HIS). The demo database of GNU Health
makes it easier to use the interchangeable demo data. The dataset
includes the heterogeneous amount of data under 40 modules of the
health system. We have randomly evaluated 100 patients’ data who
receive treatment from 20 health professionals under 5 different health
care centers for our experiment.
3.5. Server data backup operation
It must require server data backup from the central server if a local
server of an EHR system goes in failure. The ‘‘Message Passing Interface
(MPI)’’ module performs server data backup operations to recover data
for a system, and helps to create a new one. The overall MPI-based data
backup procedure is summarized in the following steps:
Step 1. Initialize the MPI execution environment which is the first call
that
can
be
made
by
any
MPI
program
by
MPI_Init
(&argc,&argv).
Step 2. Declare and set an integer variable 𝑟 by system(‘‘sshpass -
p "REMOTE_USER_PASSWORD" scpfile.sqlremote_username@
remote_ip:/remote/directory’’) [ssh (keyboard-interactive pass-
word authentication) transfer file from local to remote server],
and Print (r).
Step 3. Determine the number of processes in the group associated
with a communicator by MPI_Comm_size(MPI_Commcomm, int
*size), where size = number of processes.
Step 4. Determine the rank of the calling process in the communicator
by MPI_Comm_rank(MPI_Comm comm, int *rank), where rank
= rank of a calling process.
Step 5. Return the name of processor on which it was called at the
moment of the call by MPI_Get_processor_name(char *name, int
*resultlen).
Step 6. Provide a notification to confirm backup is sent from one
processor to another.
Step 7. End the MPI program to terminate the MPI execution environ-
ment by MPI_Finalize().
3.6. Deployment diagram of developed distributed e-HealthSystem
A deployment diagram is also presented here to represent the devel-
oped system. Fig. 7 shows the deployment diagram of the developed
loosely coupled distributed EHR system. The developed distributed
EHR system will be used in remote rural locations with access to the
internet. We have considered pharmacy as an EHR service delivery
center. The server part consists of an EHR server for primary storage
of vital health information. There is an interface with the health
system for pharmacy administrators through Tryton. Remote users will
communicate with the e-Health system through the pharmacy module.
3.7. Implementation of the system
We have developed the system according to the system design and
methods. For the practical implementation of the system, we have used
three nodes (see Fig. 7) for creating a distributed environment in which
node 1 is considered as the main server and other nodes are considered
as local servers. Each node has its own e-Health system. We have
installed HL7 based open source e-Health system for each node. Here,
we have considered each node as a loosely coupled distributed remote
health care center of the e-Health system. All the electronic health
records are stored in the electronic health systems. In our system, main
server contains all data of other nodes. If the storage of the local server
fails, data are retrieved from the main server. The e-Health system is
hosted on a central server that is distributed and accessible from any
remote location with a health care facility. The servers are connected
via a communication network.
To store health data in the server database, we have used the
PostgreSQL [54] database which is an open-source secured database.
Each node is able to send, receive, and update data. For a distributed
e-Health system, it is necessary to store a regular backup of data. MPI
is used here for the backup operation which stores data in the main
server. The results of the implemented system ensure the e-Health
system’s distributed qualities, which are briefly detailed in the results
and discussion section.
Array 13 (2022) 100114
9
M.R. Rinty et al.
Fig. 7. Deployment diagram of developed distributed EHR system.
Fig. 8. Results of the developed e-Health system.
4. Results and discussion
We have established a proposed low-cost distributed EHR with
loose coupling in this study. We have used HL7 compatible electronic
health system (EHS) in each health care center. Each center has its
own e-Health system which is connected through a communication
network. Create, delete, backup, and restore data are all administrative
actions available through the Tryton client for databases. For testing,
we created a distributed environment using personal computers in
health care center in which one is for the main server and others are
for local servers. The overall result of the developed system is pictured
by a diagram in Fig. 8, and the key outcomes are summarized below:
Array 13 (2022) 100114
10
M.R. Rinty et al.
Fig. 9. Illustration of system-to-system data exchange.
(a) Accessibility of the e-Health system from anywhere of the coun-
try through local service provider.
(b) Health data of any local health care center are interoperable with
the other health care center in the e-Health system (Fig. 9).
(c) A rural patient easily gets the service through distributed envi-
ronment with multiple hosts.
(d) There is no need to change the geographical position of the
patients, patients can get any kind of update or retrieve their
history from the local service center of their location when
required. If a new record added or any information gets updated
into a local health care center, the update will be available in
the other health care center connected to the e-Health system
(Fig. 10).
(e) Regular backup of data prevents the data loss from any local
system failure (Fig. 11).
4.1. Health data intercommunication with multiple hosts
Fig. 9 depicts data interoperation from system to system. Main
server data are represented by Fig. 9(a). Any local user connected to
this system can successfully access the system by user ID and password.
Fig. 9(b) shows the same data of the main server from the local user
end. Any local user from any network can get their required infor-
mation whenever they want. Therefore, both figures show the same
content that means interoperation among all EHS is achieved. There
is easy access to health data so that loose coupling is also achieved.
Health professionals can add new records or delete some records among
which many of them need to be modified. All users of the system will
be aware of this modification by accessing the system from anywhere.
4.2. Health data update/delete operation
Patients’ registration, new records addition or deletion, prescrip-
tions generation of doctors is possible in our system. New record
insertion process in the local server is shown in Fig. 10(a). Moreover,
Fig. 10(b) and Fig. 10(c) depict the status of the database after new
patient record inserted in the local and main server respectively. If
any of the information gets updated, all users of the system will be
aware of the changes in their records by accessing into the system from
anywhere.
4.3. Health data backup operation
If any of the hosts of distributed EHR fails, the whole system will be
stopped and the total service will be hampered. In this regard, a backup
operation is performed using MPI to recover any uncertainty between
any servers. Fig. 11 shows the backup file creation.
The black arrow sign of Fig. 11(a) marks the ‘‘healthbackup.sql’’
file which is the backup database of the system. It shows the time
of the backup file creation is 23:11 (in black rectangle mark of the
figure) and Fig. 11(b) shows the ‘‘healthbackup.sql’’ file is received in
a local EHS but here the time is 23:13 (in black rectangle mark of the
figure). That means, the created backup database is sent to and received
from the local servers successfully. The time depends on the size of
the database and the network or internet connectivity. The more the
database becomes larger, the more it takes time to send to all the local
servers. Generally, data backup operation is performed at a specific
time per day in our system. Therefore, the backup operation of health
data has performed here.
In such digitized era e-Health systems have great importance in
developing countries. So it is clear that developed interoperable dis-
tributed e-Health system plays a significant role in the health care of
developing countries. This section presents the current health care chal-
lenges and how these challenges are addressed in-terms of advanced
and sustainability.
Array 13 (2022) 100114
11
M.R. Rinty et al.
Fig. 10. New record added or information updated in e-Health system.
4.4. Comparison of the proposed systems with existing systems
Unlike related work that offered distributed components or client–
server architecture, but with tightly coupled technology, the proposed
system provides a loose coupling that allows flexibility across e-Health
systems. In addition, it makes the database distributed for developing
nations. Although similar system databases in developed countries are
distributed, most techniques in developing and undeveloped countries
pretend centralized databases, limiting the EHR’s scalability. Further-
more, most systems lack data recovery, whereas the proposed approach
provides MPI-based data recovery. Thus, adapting with HL7 CDA to
provide interoperability for developing countries is a challenge ad-
dressed in this study compared to developed countries. The compar-
ative analysis of the proposed work with related studies is summarized
in Table 4.
4.5. Comparative advantages of developed loosely coupled distributed EHR
As a result, people in developing countries are unfamiliar with the
e-Health system, and e-Health services are ineffective for rural people.
But, the developed system can be accessed from any remote areas
anytime. People need not to change their position to use this service.
Patients and doctors can use the system according to their desired. No
matter that the database becomes larger; the term distribution in this
regard maintains it smoothly. Table 5 clarifies the potential advantages
derived from the developed distributed e-Health system over present
systems.
As compared to the centralized shared memory health systems
have so many limitations such as, database gets larger day by day
and maintaining such kind of database is really difficult, also if the
central system collapses, the whole system will be stopped and the
total service will be hampered. A distributed database is an acceptable
approach for remotely sustaining e-Health care in this case. Current e-
Health service focuses on urban health care. This study focuses on rural
Array 13 (2022) 100114
12
M.R. Rinty et al.
Fig. 11. Backup file send and receive operation.
Table 4
Comparison among proposed system and other related systems based on key features.
Systems/Year
Architectural
Model
Database
Access
Management
Interconnection
Model
Interoperability Authentication
Data Backup
Perspective
Proposed
System (2021)
Distributed with
loose coupling
Distributed
Health service
provider
Loosely coupled
HL7 CDA
Login by user ID and
Password
MPI based regular
backup
Developing
countries
HL7 FHIR &
GraphQL
Approach
(2021) [55]
Distributed
Components
Distributed
Both patient and
professional
–
HL7 FHIR,
openEHR
HTTP request and
access token
No (two server’s data
are not same at a time)
–
Regional HIS
(2021) [13]
Client–Server
Centralized
Professional
Tightly coupled
HL7 and FHIR
Login by user ID and
Password
–
Regional
Distributed
Integration
System (2019)
[9]
Distributed
Components with
cloud
Distributed
Both patient and
professional
–
HL7/CDA2
HTTP request and
software as a service
(SaaS) tools
Infrastructure as a
service (IaaS)
Regional
Distributed
Architecture
Model (2017)
[40]
Distributed
peer-to-peer
network
Distributed
Both patient and
professional
–
HL7 with FHIR,
openEHR
Digital signature
–
–
HL7 & SOA
based System
(2014) [56]
Distributed
Components
Distributed
Professional
–
HL7 CDA
Login by user ID and
Password
–
–
Table 5
Advanced features of developed system compared to present systems.
Present health care challenges
Advantages of developed distributed EHS
Provides hospital based services
Provides rural local health care center based services
Accessibility
Anytime
Health data interoperability problem
HL7 based e-Health system enables interoperability
Focus on urban health care
Focus on rural health care
High costs
Affordable
Rural patient needs to travel urban area to receive health services
Patient does not need to change position
Centralized and no data recovery
Distributed, MPI based data recovery
Fail to maintain large database
Distributed feature handles large database smoothly
Array 13 (2022) 100114
13
M.R. Rinty et al.
health care because a large number of people live in the rural areas of
developing countries. Health care facilities are inadequate for them. So,
the developed system will be beneficial and people will not suffer from
cost issues.
The authorities and health care organizations tend to be developed a
distributed e-Health system to enhance public well-being and improved
healthcare outcomes with lower costs. Distributed e-Health, or the use
of ICT tools in the healthcare system, recommend benefits in world-
wide health care, such as remote interactions with patients, fast access
to medical care specialists, and remote monitoring skills. As technolog-
ical advancements compete effectively into the third world, e-Health
and medical information technology is anticipated to rise rapidly in
developing countries.
4.6. Challenges and prospective
The experimental results of the developed system emphasize the
presence of many challenges. The shift from hospital based health
care services to electronic health care services needs organizational,
cultural, and technical changes and supports. An incomplete health
standard also gives us trouble to develop a complete health care sys-
tem. Without greater knowledge rural doctors, patients, and health
professionals cannot cope up with this system.
Because of the distributed nature this application is built with mul-
tiple hosts, so the testing environment is simulated. But the simulated
result may not reflect on the real health care services. Moreover, loose
coupling leads to a price because a tightly coupled system has the prop-
erty of reducing security attack, but loose coupling may limit security.
The data layer is made up of a server database that stores the patient
information. Another significant problem for this system is ensuring the
data’s authenticity. In this regard, we have used PostgreSQL which is an
open source database with the highest level of security. The security of
this database is enriched by First Health care Interoperability Resource
recommended by Health Level Seven International. We have discussed
the potential advantages of the developed distributed e-Health system.
This work could be expanded in the future in the areas listed below.
(i) Although the health standard and database provides potential
security, but a security model can be developed to show the
security level of the developed system.
(ii) A real time e-Health system can be implemented by using this
technology.
(iii) Large scale practical implementation of this model can be carried
out in the rural areas of Bangladesh.
(iv) Low cost portable e-Health system tool kit can be used with it
to collect vital signs of patients.
(v) Internet of Things based distributed health care system will
be developed where IoT and distributed databases will use to
connect various medical resources.
(vi) Cloud based distributed e-Health care system can be developed
to improve the efficiency of health care.
(vii) Machine learning (ML) procedures in health care applications
will attempt to acquire patient distinctiveness or comprehend
the possibility of disease impacts.
However, authors expect that the results and the proposed technol-
ogy of this study will add a new paradigm and advance the e-Health
services of developing countries. This study will help the researchers
in the further development of the standard loosely coupled distributed
e-Health system in developing countries.
5. Conclusion
Being the world’s most populous countries, developing countries
face significant challenges in serving people in various industries,
including health care. The use of ‘‘information and communication
technology (ICT)’’ plays a critical role in increasing efficiency and ac-
cess to services. The capacity to integrate and synchronize data supplied
from health information (e-Health) systems with other heterogeneous
platforms is the major problem associated with data interoperability.
The objective of this study was to provide a framework for data
interoperability and information interchange among e-health systems.
The interoperability of the developed e-Health system allows different
information systems and organizations to collaborate. Interoperability
among e-Health systems is complicated by heterogeneities in data
representation and care procedures (EHRs). The developed system
can integrate distributed technologies into the e-Health systems and
independently track the health records of various organizations. Each
remote region has its e-Health system linked to the central server
according to the system architecture. In rural health care, the developed
system employs HL7 CDA to manage decentralized health data. How-
ever, the designed system is distributed among multiple hosts to avoid
the challenges of a central system. Because most current healthcare
services are hospital-based, the developed system is made cheap to the
general public in developing countries so that the system may last for
a long time. In the event of a breakdown, a regular backup operation
of health data has been undertaken to recover data from the backup
server. In summary, the contribution of this study is the use of the HL7
standard and MPI-based data recovery in the construction of a loosely
coupled distributed e-Health system, which is truly revolutionary in
developing countries. It is concluded that the established system helps
to progress e-Health in developing nations throughout the world.
The approach will require more evaluations in the future, partic-
ularly in terms of security and privacy. Although the system design
shows the considerable potential of privacy preservation, more protec-
tion and privacy testing are necessary. A security mechanism based on
blockchain technology might be created in the future to ensure that
only authorized informants have access to health information. Devel-
oped technology may be used to create a real-time e-Health system,
and it is possible to carry out a large-scale practical implementation
for further development. As a follow-up study, we will look at the
acceptability of combining multiple healthcare systems. It will allow us
to monitor patient behavior using a data mining and machine learning
tools.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Mahnuma
Rahman
Rinty:
Conceptualization,
Methodology,
Software, Data curation, Writing – original draft, Visualization.
Uzzal Kumar Prodhan: Conceptualization, Validation, Investigation,
Resources, Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Md. Mijanur
Rahman:
Methodology,
Validation,
Formal
analysis,
Resources,
Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of competing interest
No author associated with this paper has disclosed any potential or
pertinent conflicts which may be perceived to have impending conflict
with this work.
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to acknowledge the ICT Division (Ministry of
Posts, Telecommunications and Information Technology, Bangladesh)
for their ICT fellowship, and the department of Computer Science and
Engineering of Jatiya Kabi Kazi Nazrul Islam University (@JKKNIU,
Bangladesh) for their supports in conducting the research.
Array 13 (2022) 100114
14
M.R. Rinty et al.
References
[1] Jawhari B, Ludwick D, Keenan L, Zakus D, Hayward R. Benefits and challenges
of EMR implementations in low resource settings: A state-of-the-art review. BMC
Med Inform Decis Mak 2016;16(1):1–12.
[2] Williams F, Boren S. The role of the electronic medical record (EMR) in care
delivery development in developing countries: A systematic review. J Innov
Health Inform 2008;16(2):139–45.
[3] Goenaga I, Lahuerta X, Atutxa A, Gojenola K. A section identification tool:
Towards HL7 CDA/CCR standardization in spanish discharge summaries. J
Biomed Inform 2021;121:103875.
[4] Rahman MM, Khatun F, Uzzaman A, Sami SI, Bhuiyan MA-A, Kiong TS. A
comprehensive study of artificial intelligence and machine learning approaches in
confronting the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. Int J Health Serv 2021;1–16.
[5] Archer N, Lokker C, Ghasemaghaei M, DiLiberto D, et al. Ehealth implementation
issues in low-resource countries: Model, survey, and analysis of user experience.
J Med Internet Res 2021;23(6):e23715.
[6] Shull JG. Digital health and the state of interoperable electronic health records.
JMIR Med Inform 2019;7(4):e12712.
[7] Khan A, Mir MS. E health and m health: Future of healthcare. J Anat Physiol
2021;2(3):38.
[8] Maseko SN, van Staden D, Mhlongo EM. The rising burden of diabetes-related
blindness: A case for integration of primary eye care into primary health care in
eswatini. In: Healthcare, vol. 9. (7):Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute;
2021, p. 835.
[9] Muriana C, Gilia G, Mistretta V, Piazza T, Vizzini GB. A distributed integration
system enabling electronic health records: An Italian experience. Int J Med Eng
Inform 2019;11(1):1–13.
[10] Tsiouris KM, Gatsios D, Tsakanikas V, Pardalis AA, Kouris I, Androutsou T,
Tarousi M, Vujnovic Sedlar N, Somarakis I, Mostajeran F. Designing interoperable
telehealth platforms: Bridging IoT devices with cloud infrastructures. Enterp Inf
Syst 2020;14(8):1194–218.
[11] ATA.
Telehealth
interoperability.
2020,
https://www.americantelemed.org/
initiatives/interoperability/. Online. [Accessed 5 October 2020].
[12] Mursi MF, Salama MA, Emad SE. Towards A secure E-health system for
public healthcare sector in Egypt using HL7.(dept. A). MEJ Mansoura Eng J
2021;46(2):11–22.
[13] Lazarova E, Mora S, Rubartelli P, Vitale AC, Pareto L, Maggi N, Ruggiero C,
Giacomini M. Integrating an electronic health record system into a regional
health information system: An HL7 FHIR architecture. Stud Health Technol
Inform 2021;281:1087–8.
[14] Habib SS, Jamal WZ, Zaidi SMA, Siddiqui J-U-R, Khan HM, Creswell J, Batra S,
Versfeld A, et al. Barriers to access of healthcare services for rural women—
Applying gender lens on TB in a rural district of Sindh, Pakistan. Int J Environ
Res Public Health 2021;18(19):10102.
[15] Silva AB, Sindico SRF, Carneiro AC, Henrique SM, Fernandes AG, Gomes JP, Mar-
inho TP, Fernandes VR. COVID-19 remote consultation services and population
in health inequity-concentrating territories: A scoping review. Telemed E-Health
2021;27(8):881–97.
[16] Bidgood W, Tucker M, Prior F, Hagan G, Mattison J. The role of digital
imaging and communications in medicine in an evolving healthcare computing
environment: The model is the message. J Digit Imaging 1998;11(1):1–9.
[17] Blazona B, Koncar M. HL7 and DICOM based integration of radiology de-
partments with healthcare enterprise information systems. Int J Med Inform
2007;76:S425–32.
[18] Bruck J, Dolev D, Ho C-T, Roşu M-C, Strong R. Efficient message passing
interface (MPI) for parallel computing on clusters of workstations. J Parallel
Distrib Comput 1997;40(1):19–34.
[19] Borycki E, Kushniruk A, Armstrong B, Joe R, Otto T. Integrating electronic health
records into health professional and health informatics education: A continuum
of approaches, faculty publications (human & social development). UVicSpace
2010;18(1).
[20] Garber S, Gates SM, Keeler EB, Vaiana ME, Mulcahy AW, Lau C, Kellermann AL.
Redirecting innovation in US health care: Options to decrease spending and
increase value. Rand Health Q 2014;4(1).
[21] Yusif S, Jeffrey S. Preparedness for e-health in developing countries: the case of
ghana. J Health Inform Dev Countries 2014;8(2).
[22] Su CJ. Mobile multi-agent based, distributed information platform (MADIP) for
wide-area e-health monitoring. Comput Ind 2008;59(1):55–68.
[23] Ndume V, Nkansah-Gyekye Y, Lyatu I, Ko J. A methodology for data collection
and integration of e-health records: A case study of ifakara health institute in
tanzania. In: 2013 Pan African international conference on information science,
computing and telecommunications. IEEE; p. 131–6.
[24] Prodhan UK, Rahman MZ, Jahan I. A survey on the telemedicine in Bangladesh.
In: 2016 International conference on computing, communication and automation.
IEEE; 2016, p. 857–61.
[25] Alajmi D, Khalifa M, Jamal A, Zakaria N, Alomran S, El-Metwally A, Al-
Salamah M, Househ M. The role and use of telemedicine by physicians in
developing countries: A case report from Saudi Arabia. In: Transforming public
health in developing nations. IGI Global; 2015, p. 293–308.
[26] Felizardo V, Sousa P, Sabugueiro D, Alexandre C, Couto R, Garcia N, Pires I. E-
health: Current status and future trends. In: Handbook of research on democratic
strategies and citizen-centered E-government services. IGI Global; 2015, p.
302–26.
[27] Dixon P, Hollinghurst S, Edwards L, Thomas C, Gaunt D, Foster A, Large S,
Montgomery AA, Salisbury C. Cost-effectiveness of telehealth for patients with
raised cardiovascular disease risk: Evidence from the healthlines randomised
controlled trial. BMJ Open 2016;6(8):e012352.
[28] Kher RK. Mobile and E-healthcare: Recent trends and future directions. J Health
Med Econ 2016;2:10. http://dx.doi.org/10.21767/2471-9927.100010.
[29] Kasemsap K. Telemedicine and electronic health: Issues and implications in
developing countries. In: Health information systems and the advancement of
medical practice in developing countries. IGI Global; 2017, p. 149–67.
[30] Lewis T, Synowiec C, Lagomarsino G, Schweitzer J. E-health in low-and middle-
income countries: Findings from the center for health market innovations. Bull
World Health Organ 2012;90:332–40.
[31] Ndlovu K, Scott RE, Mars M. Interoperability opportunities and challenges in
linking mhealth applications and erecord systems: Botswana as an exemplar.
BMC Med Inform Decis Mak 2021. Preprint.
[32] Kamal SA, Shafiq M, Kakria P. Investigating acceptance of telemedicine ser-
vices through an extended technology acceptance model (TAM). Technol Soc
2020;60:101212.
[33] Gregory
M,
Tembo
S.
Implementation
of
E-health
in
developing
coun-
tries
challenges
and
opportunities:
A
case
of
Zambia.
Sci
Technol
Soc
2017;7(2):41–53.
[34] Management Information System (MIS), Directorate General of Health Ser-
vices (DGHS). Health bulletin 2016. 2021, https://dghs.gov.bd/index.php/en/
publications/. Online [Accessed 1 May 2021].
[35] Odekunle Florence F. Current roles and applications of electronic health record
in the healthcare system. Health Sci 2016;5(12):48–51.
[36] Cardoso L, Marins F, Quintas C, Portela F, Santos M, Abelha A, Machado J.
Interoperability in healthcare. In: Health care delivery and clinical science:
concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications. IGI Global; 2018, p. 689–714.
[37] Rubí JNS, Gondim PRdL. Interoperable internet of medical things platform for
e-health applications. Int J Distrib Sens Netw 2020;16(1):1550147719889591.
[38] Pereira C, Mesquita Ja, Guimarães D, Santos F, Almeida L, Aguiar A. Open IoT
architecture for continuous patient monitoring in emergency wards. Electronics
2019;8(10):1074.
[39] Prodhan UK, Rahman MZ, Jahan I. Design and implementation of an advanced
telemedicine model for the rural people of Bangladesh. Technol Health Care
2018;26(1):175–80.
[40] Roehrs A, Da Costa CA, da Rosa Righi R. Omniphr: A distributed architecture
model to integrate personal health records. J Biomed Inform 2017;71:70–81.
[41] MS A, GF H, SHE L, ANSJ J. EMR access and confidentiality based on patient
and hospital staff perspectives. Open Public Health J 2018;11(1).
[42] Adenuga OA, Kekwaletswe RM, Coleman A. Ehealth integration and interoper-
ability issues: Towards a solution through enterprise architecture. Health Inf Sci
Syst 2015;3(1):1–8.
[43] Holmgren AJ, Patel V, Adler-Milstein J. Progress in interoperability: Mea-
suring
US
hospitals’
engagement
in
sharing
patient
data.
Health
Affairs
2017;36(10):1820–7.
[44] Lehne M, Sass J, Essenwanger A, Schepers J, Thun S. Why digital medicine
depends on interoperability. NPJ Digit Med 2019;2(1):1–5.
[45] Karadimos A. Personal health records management with decentralized technolo-
gies and the FHIR framework. 2019, http://dx.doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.10299.
46889, Preprint January 2019, University of Patras.
[46] Jafar
IB,
Shahin
MZI,
Chakraborty
P.
Prospect
and
implementation
of
telemedicine centers in south Asian countries. In: International conference on
electrical engineering and information communication technology. IEEE; 2015,
p. 1–5.
[47] Ahmed SST, Thanuja K, Guptha NS, Narasimha S. Telemedicine approach for
remote patient monitoring system using smart phones with an economical hard-
ware kit. In: International conference on computing technologies and intelligent
data engineering. IEEE; 2016, p. 1–4.
[48] Khan UM, Kabir Z, Hassan SA. Wireless health monitoring using passive
WiFi sensing. In: 2017 13th international wireless communications and mobile
computing conference. IEEE; p. 1771–6.
[49] Dolin RH, Alschuler L. Approaching semantic interoperability in health level
seven. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2011;18(1):99–103.
[50] Glassman RB. Persistence and loose coupling in living systems. Behav Sci
1973;18(2):83–98.
[51] Hariri S, Park J, Yu F-K, Parashar M, Fox GC. A message passing interface
for parallel and distributed computing. In: Proceedings the 2nd international
symposium on high performance distributed computing. IEEE; 1993, p. 84–91.
[52] trytonorg. Tryton - modularity, scalability & security for your business. 2020,
https://docs.tryton.org/en/latest/. Online [Accessed 7 October 2020].
[53] Duteau
J,
Madra
J.
Introduction
to
CDA
and
C-CDA.
2016,
https:
//www.hl7.org/documentcenter/public/calendarofevents/himss/2016/
Introduction%20to%20Clinical%20Document%20Architecture%20%28CDA%
29%20and%20Consolidated%20CDA%20%28C-CDA%29.pdf. Online. [Accessed
5 October 2020].
Array 13 (2022) 100114
15
M.R. Rinty et al.
[54] The PostgreSQL Global Development Group. PostgreSQL: The world’s most
advanced open source relational database. 2019, https://www.postgresql.org/.
Online. [Accessed 1 May 2021].
[55] Mukhiya SK, Lamo Y. An HL7 FHIR and graphql approach for interoperabil-
ity between heterogeneous electronic health record systems. Health Inform J
2021;27(3):14604582211043920.
[56] Kalode P, Kemkar OS, Gundalwar P. HL7 and SOA based distributed electronic
patient record architecture using open EMR. Int J Innov Res Comput Commun
Eng 2014;2(12).
