A review of imaging techniques for plant disease detection
Vijai Singh ⁎, Namita Sharma, Shikha Singh
GL Bajaj Institute of Technology and Management, Gr. Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 20 May 2020
Received in revised form 2 October 2020
Accepted 2 October 2020
Available online 6 October 2020
Keywords:
Plant disease detection
Machine learning
Imaging sensors and systems
Plant disease classiﬁcation
Image processing
Agriculture is the basis of every economy worldwide. Crop production is one of the major factors affecting do-
mestic market condition in any country. Agricultural production is also a major prerequisite of economic devel-
opment, be it any part of any country. It plays a crucial role as it even provides raw material, employment and
food to different citizens. A lot of issues are responsible for estimated crop production varying in different
parts of the world. Some of these include overutilization of chemical fertilizers, presence of chemicals in water
supply, uneven distribution of rainfall, different soil fertility and others. Other than these issues one of the com-
monly faced challenges across the globe equally includes destruction of the major part of production due to dis-
eases. After providing effective resources to the ﬁelds, major section of the production is diminished by the
presence of diseases in the plants grown. This leads to focus on effective ways of detection of disease in plants.
Presence of various diseases in plant is a major concern among farmers. Plant diseases acts as a major threat to
small scale farmers as they lead to major destruction in overall food supply. To provide effective measures for de-
tection and avoidance of the destruction requires an early identiﬁcation of type of plant disease present. In recent
time major work is being done for the identiﬁcation of plant disease presents in varied parts of the world affection
varied crops. Major work is being done in the domain of identiﬁcation of causing factors of these diseases. Some of
the diseases are marked by the presence of viruses while some are resultant of fungal infection. This becomes a
major issue when the causing factor is not traceable before it has already spread to major production section. This
paper brings a review on effective use of different imaging techniques and computer vision approaches for the
identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of plant diseases. Detection of Plant disease is initiated with image acquisition
followed by pre-processing while using the process of segmentation. It is further accompanied by different tech-
niques used for feature extraction along with classiﬁcation. In this Paper we present the Current Trends and Chal-
lenges for detection of plant disease using computer vision and advance imaging technique.
© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open
access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents
1.
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
230
2.
Imaging sensors and systems for plant disease detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
230
3.
Literature survey. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
231
3.1.
Magnetic resonance imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
231
3.2.
Photo acoustic imaging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
231
3.3.
Tomography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
231
3.4.
Thermography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
231
3.5.
Spectroscopic and imaging technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
231
3.6.
Multispectral imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
231
3.7.
Hyperspectral imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
231
3.8.
Fluorescence techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
235
3.9.
Thermal imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
236
3.10.
3D imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
237
4.
Image classiﬁcation methods for plant disease detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
237
4.1.
Interactive segmentation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
237
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229–242
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: vijai.cs@gmail.com (V. Singh).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2020.10.002
2589-7217/© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage: http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-
intelligence-in-agriculture/
5.
Challenges and future trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
239
6.
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
240
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
240
1. Introduction
Agricultural products are used to cater the dietary needs of animals
as well as human beings. Agriculture has been a part of everyone's life
directly or indirectly. It is the way of crop production which results in
providing food, the building block of every human being. Whether a
human resides in a metro city or lives in a village everyone survives
on this crop production one or the other way. With the advent of civili-
zation humans have started cultivating crops like wheat, cotton and
others. With the development in every area of life there has been
some vast development in the domain of agriculture also. Along with
the variation in the types of crops being grown other activities were
also started such as farming, raising cattle etc.
But today also crop production largely contributes to the agricultural
output. There have been major changes in crop production also. With
the raising knowledge technology has brought some modernization in
the area of crop production also. Modern agronomy makes the use of
best technological devices and techniques for the increase in the yield.
There has been an increased use of modern tools for easy identiﬁcation
of the suitable conditions for larger crop production. Various types of
fertilizers and pesticides are being used to bring an increase. Even ge-
netically modiﬁed seeds are being tested on a larger scale to pump up
the overall production in any area.
Crop production involves taking care of all the activities for the
better yield across all the seasons. It involves complete analysis of
the soil being used, the type of seeds used, the major nutrient re-
quirement of the particular crop and many others. Yields obtained
from the crops, and other sources are being used to meet the daily
needs of not only the farmers, but for others also. But as every ﬁeld
suffers from some form of issues agriculture or crop production
also faces major challenge in the form of crop diseases. With the
huge demand of food around the world, it becomes necessary to
focus on the crop production. It is aimed to protect the overall
yield from any type of loss before reaching to the market. Besides ca-
lamities caused by nature such as draught, earthquakes, diseases
also accounts to major crop yield losses.
In context of quality or in the context of quality, yields are re-
duced due to various types of plant diseases. Plant disease can be de-
scribed as some form of modiﬁcation that hampers the normal
processes in it. Crop production can be majorly affected by these dis-
eases which may reduce the quality and quantity of the overall pro-
duced yield. Management of large amount of crop yield involves
various timely activities such as keeping a watch for diseases,
which reduces it to undesirable stuff. It also involves ﬁnding imme-
diate cure for various challenges faced. Disease can affect the overall
functional capacity of the plant. It may result in reduced growth, less
fruit production, more leaf falls and many other ailments also. Some-
times the disease may spread from crop to crop or may be spread by
some pathogen or other means. Sometimes they may be caused by
some fungi or some bacteria. Sometimes even viruses get transferred
with seeds from one place to another.
Main reasons of crop diseases are the infections such as insect pests,
bacteria, fungi and viruses. These diseases are found and can spread in
all parts of the plants like in stem, vegetables, fruits and others can be
detected by one of the listed below:
• Discerning the affected area
• Retrieving the features set of the affected area
• Identifying and categorizing the diseases
From a long time, identifying the crop disease is done by the experts
through their naked eyes based on their knowledge and experience.
Find an expert and contact them is not only a tedious and time consum-
ing task but also a very long and expensive method. Therefore, the com-
plete process sometimes takes so much time which become time taking
for the disease to be eradicated and also very tedious in case of large
areas (Liu et al., 2020), (Mishra et al. (2020)).
Modern techniques available, for plant disease detection, like pro-
cessing, similarity identiﬁcation and deep learning based classiﬁcation
techniques better in respect of time saving than the old methods used
(Nagaraju and Chawla, 2020), (Nagasubramanian et al., 2019),
(Kulkarni and Ashwin Patil, 2012), (Jasim and Tuwaijari, 2020), (Sun
et al., 2020). They help farmers to improve the quality of crops, also
bringing a reduction of disease occurrence by early detection and timely
curing them (Sinha and Shekhawat, 2020).
In the process of detection of disease, number of imaging techniques
is being used. One of the imaging techniques being used id photo acous-
tic imaging, which makes the use of light absorption in case of tissues. It
makes the use of property of light's absorption by tissues and its conver-
sion into heat further resulting in the generation of photo acoustic sig-
nals. Here the pressure distribution radiated by tissues further being
mapped and used for imaging purposes. Considering various imaging
techniques one of the important techniques is magnetic resonance im-
aging. It can be described as imaging technique that gives detailed im-
ages that are mostly used for knowing different types of diseases. In
this method strong magnets are being deployed generating strong mag-
netic ﬁeld resulting in proper alignment of the protons. Later application
of electric ﬁeld makes the movement in these protons. Finally turning
off of the rf ﬁled sensors help in the detection of energy being released
from movement.
Among the various spectroscopies one of the recent methods is of
ﬂuorescence spectroscopy. It makes the use of ﬂuorescence measure-
ment, being released after the excitation of light with area of interest.
Mostly for vegetative studies or plant disease detection laser induced
ﬂuorescence are often used on a large scale. These are mostly needed
for identiﬁcation of various physiological states of different plants. Ma-
jorly the green leaves are being tested for chlorophyll ﬂuorescence or
blue green ﬂuorescence. These help in early identiﬁcation of any type
of impairment resulting from major nutrients deﬁciencies. (Sankaran
et al., 2010).
Among the recent techniques being used one of the effective imag-
ing methodology is using hyper spectral imaging. In this technique elec-
tromagnetic spectrum of an image's pixel is being used for the detection
of plant disease present. In this technique wide spectrum of light is
being used for the analysis of each image's pixel. It helps in the detection
of various diseases in more reasonable manner among the variety of
plants being considered. Hyper spectral imaging is further extended
when used with microscopy for higher resolution clear images. It
helps in microscopic studies at the genotypic level of varied plant leaves.
(Rumf et al., 2010).
2. Imaging sensors and systems for plant disease detection
Digital Image Analysis has evolved over many years. It ﬁrstly began
with the era of 2D image analysis came. Secondly, knowledge based ap-
proaches using MRI and CT changed the developmental procedures.
Lastly, analysis of fully 3D images was brought to the light. Digital
V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229–242
230
model driven approaches were introduced in the beginning and then
after 1999 till today advanced imaging and computing technologies
are used for better and more realistic visualization as per requirements.
Machine Learning methods have also evolved eventually.
For identiﬁcation of different plant disease, sensors for imaging sys-
tem are deployed to accumulate the data for study of leaves from differ-
ent aspect. Various useful imaging techniques include thermal imaging,
multispectral imaging, ﬂuorescence imaging, hyper spectral imaging,
visible imaging, MRT. Also 3D imaging methods are also tested along
various other methods. In next sections we present a state of survey
on these techniques along with their applications in different ways.
3. Literature survey
3.1. Magnetic resonance imaging
Also termed as NMR, meaning nuclear magnetic resonance scanner,
it is mostly known as magnetic resonance imaging device, is usually
identiﬁed for its powerful magnets. These magnets are good as they ef-
ﬁciently polarize and further excites the focused proton singly included
in water molecules present in the tissue, helping in a detectable signal
spatially encoded giving various images of the body. Radio Frequency
(RF) pulses are emitted by MRI machines that bind only to oxygen.
This system works by initially generating the pulse and transferring it
to the examined area of the body. Later they are made to spin in a differ-
ent orientation by absorption of the send energy. This is called the res-
onance process involved in the MRI.
3.2. Photo acoustic imaging
Photo acoustic imaging is a technique that has been derived using
hybrid biomedical imaging that is originated around the photo acoustic
effect. It involves the amalgamation of different beneﬁts such as optical
absorption contrast along ultrasonic spatial resolution involved in deep
imaging of diffusive and other regime. The studies bring the fact that
photo acoustic imaging can be used for various purposes such as
tumor analyzing, mapping of the level of blood oxygen, imaging of the
brain activity, and other disease detection, etc.
3.3. Tomography
Tomography is one of the techniques that involve imaging of a single
plane, or an object giving a tomogram. There are different types of to-
mography such as linear, poly tomography, zonagraphy, computed
type or computed axial and Positron Emission type of tomography.
3.4. Thermography
One of the most common applications of it is breast imaging. Usually
one of the three approaches are being used commonly, the tele- ther-
mography, the dynamic angio-thermography and the contact thermog-
raphy type. The imaging thermographic digital methods involve the
advantage of the principle derived from metabolic activity. Also vascular
circulation with the area surrounding a developing breast cancer is
studied to detect the higher value.
The paper (Anne -Katrin Mahlein et al., 2012) brings the use of nonin-
vasive sensors for detection of plant diseases. Sensors types like thermog-
raphy, chlorophyll ﬂuorescence and hyper spectral sensors are being
studied and compared. It is observed that hyper spectral systems record
very large amount of data and hence require different approaches to ob-
tain result. In thermography, temperature is the crucial parameter. The
challenge is that the potential of these technologies have not yet been
fully explored. Another challenge is the interpretation of sensor data.
This paper (Fang and Ramasamy, 2015) gives the various methods of
disease classiﬁcations in plants. Direct method includes PCR (polymer-
ase chain reaction), IF (Immuno Fluorescence), (Fluorescence in situ
hybridization), FCM (Flow cytometry) and ELISA (Enzyme linked im-
munosorbent assay) etc. Types of indirect method includes Fluores-
cence imaging, also discusses the hyper spectral imaging. The direct
method is widely available but is difﬁcult to operate, time consuming
for data analysis and require expert technicians. Also they are not
much apt for different type of testing. Indirect method can be used in
on ﬁeld disease detection but lack speciﬁcation of different disease
types with the advent of nanotechnology, there is vast advancement
of sensitive biosensor whose specify can be further improved using en-
zymes, DNA, antibiotics as the detection element.
3.5. Spectroscopic and imaging technologies
The paper compares the technologies like imaging technologies
using spectroscopy along proﬁling based techniques used to asset in
looking the usual health and disease in leaves. The advantage of using
these technologies is that they are accurate in detecting pant disease.
The challenges which are faced in these techniques is to ﬁnd the opti-
mize solution for a deﬁnite disease of plant and also automating the
techniques for continuous checking of the plant disease. (Sankaran
et al., 2010).
Major oil content makes peanut an important agricultural product.
This paper (EwisOmran, 2016) presents a method for early identiﬁca-
tion of plant disease. It basically focuses on the study of effect of fungal
disease as leaf spots in peanut plant leaves. Early and late leaf indices
were identiﬁed with the help of in situ spectroscopy. It further involved
thermal and spectral calculations for differentiating healthy and in-
fected plant leaves. Later plant chlorophyll decrease is also being identi-
ﬁed as a stress detection factor among the infected leaves.
This paper (Federico Martinelli et al., 2015) describes modern
method of identiﬁcation of disease in plants based on nucleic acid and
protein analysis. This paper describes different mobility spectrometer
and lateral ﬂow devices which will detect early infections directly on
ﬂuid. It also summarizes that remote sensing technologies coupled
with spectroscopy based methods results in high spatialization and
hence help in early identiﬁcation of any infections in plants. The paper
discusses all these tools and how they are helpful in looking for different
plant disease and also nucleic acid based methods and serological
methods.
3.6. Multispectral imaging
Multispectral imaging techniques use different types of wavebands
such as of green, as of red, or near infrared wavebands to capture all
types of images rather it be invisible or being it visible images of fruits
or crops or it being vegetation. For plant diseases detection the multi-
spectral images integrate with machine learning and classiﬁcation algo-
rithms which give the information into meaningful data.
3.7. Hyperspectral imaging
Hyper-spectral imaging makes the use of much traditional imaging
technique along with the spectroscopy to aggregate different spectral
information simultaneously. The objective of this technique is to ﬁnd
the spectrum for involved pixel contributing to the image being consid-
ered. In Hyper spectral imaging device is deployed for a wavelength dis-
persion and also a transportation stage are present in addition different
from the traditional computer vision system. (Li et al., 2017) (Rumf
et al., 2010).
The human eye has a capacity of vision for a deﬁnite range from the
electromagnetic spectrum that belongs 400 to 700 nm (Fig. 1) (Amy
Lowe et al., 2017). Hyperspectral imaging typically contains number of
restricted wavelength bands across a spectral range. This brings a
color dataset with useful information, also containing huge spatial reso-
lution which contains thousands of data pixels per leaf (Amy Lowe et al.,
2017). (See Tables 1 and 2.)
V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229–242
231
In plants stresses can be classiﬁed as biotic and non-biotic where bi-
otic are being induced by beings as viruses, fungi and others. In paper
(Baranowski et al., 2015) hyper spectral imaging and the thermal imag-
ing identiﬁes plant stress due to fungi in oilseed rape. Initially the ther-
mal images of oilseed rape were being analyzed for temperature
distributions. Also hyper spectral images were also recorded. Further
distributions temperatures were compared using kernel density curves.
Spectral analysis of the leaves with different reﬂectance was again
analyzed.
Paper (Calderón et al., 2015) gives a description about a method for
automatic classiﬁcation of Verticillium Wilt in olive plants considering
techniques useful for large scale. Initially thermal and hyper spectral.
Images were acquired over large scale olive orchid. Various vegeta-
tion indices as optimized soil adjusted vegetation indices were taken
into account while modeling for this study. Correlation coefﬁcient for
completer canopy was also used for determining the level of disease
spread. Later SVM classiﬁcation was done for the bifurcating levels of
disease. Almond production depends on major environmental factors
as climate, sites, resistance to diseases and others.
Paper (López-López et al., 2016) detects early onset of red leaf blotch
using thermal and hyper spectral imagery while studying the infection
spread subjected to different factors. Here Spectral reﬂectance across vis-
ible regions was used for measurement along with near infrared region
also. Later indices as pigment concentration of chlorophyll, chlorophyll
ﬂuorescence were considered for comparison. Finally amalgamated in-
formation from the different parameters was used for analyzing while
developing model to quantify disease seriousness. Further the informa-
tion gained from the analysis was again passed to multiple classiﬁcation
methods as linear discriminate analysis, support vector machine for
proper analysis. Also it is found that linear SVM method is more efﬁcient
in early detection of red leaf blotch.
The paper (Cao et al., 2015a) demonstrated that for wheat powdery
mildew detection, canopy hyperspectral reﬂectance can be used while
analyzing the unhealthy symptoms. It being observed that wheat culti-
vators responded more sensitively to canopy reﬂectance in which
wheat cultivars were more susceptible to powdery mildew. The chal-
lenge faced here included discriminating the wheat powdery mildew
from other ailments. This paper (Kamlesh Golhani et al., 2018) discusses
various techniques for the processing and detailing of the data used for
hyper spectral analysis, giving special emphasis on detection of plant
disease. This paper introduces NN techniques for the development of
spectral disease index (SDI). Data being different from camera images,
results in difﬁculty of linearity detection of hyperspectral image. The
various challenged faced in NN are like detection of the diseases of
three categories such as pre symptomatic and asymptomatic for a single
plant.
The paper (Lowe et al., 2017) summarizes the techniques to detect
different stress in plants and it focuses on hyperspectral imaging
method to detect the early beginning of disease and to predict about
the health of the plant. Various indices are increasing day by day and
they are important to detect speciﬁc criteria for vegetation. For example,
vegetation index can be used identify the normal health of the plant but
the challenge is we cannot use the index set for one plant and use it for
the data of another plant.
The paper (Mahlein et al., 2013) discusses development of different
disease index (SDIs) for the identiﬁcation of diseases in crop plants of
sugar beet and the leaf diseases as leaf spot, sugar beet and others. At
different stages of development, hyper spectral signatures were
assessed for both healthy and diseased leaves. For differentiating be-
tween diseased and healthy leaves, several optimized indices of disease
were tested. The advantage of SDI is that SDI disease can be easily distin-
guished which is difﬁcult using vegetative indices. The challenge is to
send the generated SDI and to specify its usability for disease monitor-
ing on canopy with different sensors.
This paper (Mahlein et al., 2017) discusses hyperspectral imaging
and data analysis routines to identify and quantify relevant plant dis-
eases. Hyperspectral imaging can be helpful in giving new insight into
data of different plant at different level. This paper (Moghadam et al.,
2017) discuses imaging methods (VNIR and SWIR) along ml technolo-
gies for the identiﬁcation of TSWW, i.e. Tomato Spotted Wilt Virusin
capsicum in plants.
The paper (Ochoa et al., 2016) discusses about building a hyper-
spectral imaging system for identiﬁcation of Black Sigatoke (BS) disease
found in plant and its pre-symptomatic responses in banana leaves. To
Fig. 1. Hyperspectralrange in Electromagnetic spectrum (Amy Lowe et al., 2017).
V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229–242
232
capture images, a highly sensitive VIS-NIR camera is used the HS
cube images with reduce motion blur. After the step of capturing of
images another step is performed for enhancement of the quality
of HS images. The paper (Okamoto et al., 2007) proposes to develop
a weed detection method using hyperspectral imaging to control
weed detection. According to the species, plants can be categorized
as crops and weeds. Using hyper spectral imaging, ﬁrst of all the
plants is segmented from the soil surface. Then image pixel of crop
and weed are classiﬁed with the help of species other characteristics.
Various classes of variables are generated which are then used for
data compression, followed by the process of extraction of features
and then on it linear discrimination is applied. Among other advan-
tages one of the major advantages is that this classiﬁcation method
can be practically applied.
Table 1
Analysis of various algorithms.
Species
Optical technique
Application
Method
Accuracy
Reference
Apple
Multispectral Imaging
Identifying defects in images
Rotating in front of camera
90%
(Sankaran et al., 2010)
Sugar Beet
leaves
Support Vector Machine
Comparison between healthy and diseased
sugar beet leaves
Plants inoculated with pathogens
97%
(Rumf et al., 2010)
Pear Plants
Near infrared Based technique
To identify ﬁre blight disease
Spectroscopy based imaging technique
(Sankaran et al., 2010)
Grapevines
Leaf spectral reﬂectance
To identify leaf roll disease
Spectroscopy Used
75%
(Sankaran et al., 2010)
Blue
Berries
Electric nose system
To detect post harvest fungal disease
Series of gas sensors used
(Sankaran et al., 2010)
Onion
To identify fungi
Molecular Technique (PCR)
DNA of disease causing microorganism is
extracted and puriﬁed.
(Sankaran et al., 2010)
Citrus
To identify virus
Molecular Techniques(PCR)
DNA of disease causing microorganism is
extracted and puriﬁed
(Sankaran et al., 2010)
Potato
To identify bacteria
Molecular Techniques (PCR)
DNA of disease causing microorganism is
extracted and puriﬁed
(Sankaran et al., 2010)
Tomato
To identify virus
Molecular Techniques (PCR)
DNA of disease causing microorganism is
extracted and puriﬁed
(Sankaran et al., 2010)
Almond
To identify bacteria
Molecular Techniques (PCR)
DNA of disease causing microorganism is
extracted and puriﬁed
(Sankaran et al., 2010)
Rice
To identify bacteria
Molecular Techniques (FluoroscenesPCR)
DNA of disease causing microorganism is
extracted and puriﬁed
(Sankaran et al., 2010)
Sugarcane
PLS based method
To identify disease rating
For classiﬁcation of post harvest
(Sankaran et al., 2010)
Winter
wheat
Fluorescence Imaging
To identify yellow rust
Fluorescence images are obtained using
camera
(Sankaran et al., 2010)
Iris leaf
Color transform method
To identify heterosporium leaf spot
Otsu threshold is applied to identify
disease spot
(Chaudhary et al.,
2012b)
Rice Leaf
Color transform method
To identify brown spot
Otsu threshold is applied to identify
disesae spot
(Chaudhary et al.,
2012a)
Blueberry
Color transform method
To identify bacterial canker
Otsu threshold is applied to identify
disesae spot
(Chaudhary et al.,
2012a)
Cotton
Particle Sworm Optimization
To identify injured leaf spot
Feature extraction by PSO and forward
Neural Network
95
(Sladojevic et al., 2016)
Tea Leaf
Neural Network Ensemble
To identify plant disease
Feature Extraction and neural network
ensemble
91%
(Sladojevic et al., 2016)
Wheat
Hyperspectral imaging
Identifying fusarium
Rotating in front of camera
(Bauriegel and
Herppich, 2014b)
Barley
Support Vector Machine
Hyperspectral imaging
To identify drought stress on barley
(Behmann and
JorgSteinrucken, 2014)
Wheat
Hyperspectral reﬂectance
To identify wheat powdery mildew
Rotating camera
(Cao et al., 2015b)
Sugar beet
plant
Spectral disease indices
To identify leaf spot, sugar beet rust, powdery
mildew
Hyperspectral signatures were assessed
(Mahlein et al., 2013)
Capsicum
plant
Hyperspectral imaging(VNIR
and SWIR)
To detect TSWW(Tomato Spotted Wilt Virus)
Collect hypercubes of capsicum plant
leaves in VNIR and SWIR range
90%
(Moghadam et al.,
2017)
Winter
Wheat
Fusion of hyperspectral
andﬂuorescence imaging
To detect yellow rust disease
Ground based real time remote system
(Moshou et al., 2005)
Banana
plant
Hyperspectral imaging
To identify Black Sigatoke
Rotating camera
(Ochoa et al., 2016)
Weed
Hyperspectral imaging
To control weed production
Capturing images
(Okamoto et al., 2007)
Potato
Hyperspectral imaging
To identify late blight disease
Rotating camera
(Ray et al., 2011)
Cucumber
leaves
Hyperspectral imaging
To identify Chlorophyll and cartenoid content
in cucumber leaves
Finding the pigment distribution in
cucumber leaves
(Zhao et al., 2016)
Almond
orchards
Hyperspectral imaging and
thermal imagery
To identify red leaf blotch in almond orchards
Use of canopy temperature and vegetation
indices
(Zhao et al., 2016)
Wheat
MLP, SOM
To identify yellow rust
99%
(Moshou et al., 2004)
Avocado
Hyperspectral sensing, RBF,
MLP
To identify Laurel wilt disease
98%
(Abdulridha et al.,
2016)
Cotton
NN- SOM
To identify disease Reniform Nematode
97%
(Lawrence et al., 2004)
Egg Plant
Hyperspectral sensor
To identify gray mould
(Wu et al., 2008)
Maize
Portable Hyperspectral
imaging system
Fungal infections
(Del Fiore et al., 2010)
Wheat
QDA
Yellow rust
92%
(Bravo et al., 2003)
Sugarbeet
Decision tree (DT)
cerospora leaf spot
95%
(Cao et al., 2015a)
Sugarbeet
Decision tree (DT)
powdery mildew
86%
(Cao et al., 2015b)
Sugarbeet
Decision tree (DT)
leaf rust
92%
(Cao et al., 2015a)
Grapefruit
Spectral Information
Divergence
cankerous, normal, greasy spot. Insect
damage, melanose, scab, wind scar)
95.2%
(Qin et al., 2009)
V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229–242
233
Table 2
Challenges and future trends.
Title
Sample plant
Method
Accuracy
Type of disease detected
Future work
References
Identiﬁcation of Plant Disease using Image
Processing Technique
Fruit leaves
K-mean clustering and
random forest classiﬁer
–
Alternaria alternata,
Antracnose, Bacterial
Blight along with
Cercospora Leaf Spot
Work could be extended
to other type of fungal
disease detection
(Jhuria et al.,
2013)
Diagnosis of pomegranate plant diseases using
neural network
Pomegranate
K-mean clustering and Gray
level co-occurrence matrix
(GLCM) method, Back
propagation algorithm
90%
Bacterial blight, fruit rot
and leaf spot in
pomegranate plant
Work could be extended
to other fruit disease
detection
(Dhakate and
Ingole, 2015)
An Application of image processing
techniques for Detection of Diseases on
Brinjal Leaves Using K-Means Clustering
Method
Brinjal leaf
Kmeans clustering algorithm
along with Neural-network
for classiﬁcation.
–
Cercospora Leaf Spot,
Tobacco mosaic virus
and Bacterial Wilt.
Work can be extended to
identify all possible
diseases
(Anand et al.,
2016)
Detection of Potato Diseases Using Image
Segmentation and Multiclass Support
Vector Machine
Potato
Multiclass support vector
machine classiﬁer, Gray
level Co occurrence Matrix
95%
Phytophthora infestans
(Late blight), Alternaria
solani (Early blight).
Automatic detection of
severity of disease
(Islam et al.,
2017)
Wheat Disease Detection Using Image
Processing
Wheat
K-means clustering, Neural
network
80.2%
Fungal disease of wheat
plant
Improve the proposed
algorithm for reduction of
error due to classiﬁcation
(Gaikwad and
Musande,
2017)
Diseases Detection of Cotton Leaf Spot using
Image Processing and SVM Classiﬁer
Cotton
leaves
K-means clustering, Gray
Level Co-occurrence Matrix,
Support Vector Machine
classiﬁer
98.46%.
Bacterial blight and
Magnesium Deﬁciency
Work can be done to
develop a more efﬁcient,
and robust system for
early automatic tracing
(Bhimte and
Thool, 2018)
Plant Leaf Disease Diagnosis from Color
Imagery Using Co-Occurrence Matrix and
Artiﬁcial Intelligence System
Grape leaves
Gray-level co-occurrence
matrix, simpliﬁed fuzzy
Artmap(SFAM)
–
Scab disease,downy
mildew disease, rust
disease
Work can be done to
consider other diseases
also.
(Khitthuk
et al., 2018)
Detection and Classiﬁcation of Groundnut Leaf
Diseases using KNN classiﬁer
Groundnut
Leaf
Fast Feature extraction
method and k-NN algorithm
–
Early leaf spot, Late leaf
spot, Rust,Bud Necrosis
Can be done for other
groundnut plant disease
(Vaishnnave
et al., 2019)
Tea diseases detection based on fast infrared
thermal image processing technology
Tea Leaves
Infrared thermal imaging
technology
–
Tea leaf blight
Work could be extended
to other type of disease
detection
(Yang et al.,
2019)
Early detection of plant disease using infrared
thermal imaging
Tomatoes
leaves
Digital infrared thermal
imaging
–
Tobacco mosaic virus
Work could be extended
to other viral disease
detection on many more
species of tomatoes
(Xu et al.,
2006)
Automatic Detection of Diseased Tomato
Plants Using Thermal and Stereo Visible
Light Images
Tomato
plants leaves
Color, depth, and
temperature using thermal
and stereo visible light
images along with SVM
Classiﬁer
90%
Fungus
Oidiumneolycopersi
giving powdery mildew
Work can be extended to
study complete canopy
scanning on larger scale.
(Raza et al.,
2015c)
Detection of the dynamic response of
cucumber leaves to fusaric acid using
thermal imaging
Cucumber
Digital infrared
thermograph, stomata
aperture measurement
–
Fusarium wilt
Work can be extended by
consideration of other
features also
(Wang et al.,
2013)
Huanglongbing (Citrus Greening) Detection
Using Visible, Near Infrared and Thermal
Imaging Techniques
Orange
Leaves
Thermal Imaging and
Visible-near infrared
techniques
87%
Huanglongbi ng (HLB)
disease
Work can be done on a
larger set of canopy.
(Sankaran
et al., 2013)
Registration of thermal and visible light
images of diseased plants using silhouette
extraction in the wavelet domain
Tomato
plants
Thermal and visible imaging
with stationary wavelet
transform
–
Fungus
Oidiumneolycopersici
which causes powdery
mildew disease
Work can be further
extended to stereo
images for 3D
information
(Raza et al.,
2015b)
Early sensing of peanut leaf spot using
spectroscopy and thermal imaging
Peanut
leaves
Image Spectroscopy,
reﬂectance factor calculation
89.3%
Fungal disease causing
early leaf spot and late
leaf spot
Work can be done for
other fungal disease
infections
(EwisOmran,
2016)
Thermal imaging of cucumber leaves affected
by downy mildew and environmental
conditions
cucumber
leaves
Digital infrared
thermograph, Measurement
of stomata conductance
–
downy mildew
Work can be extended by
including more factors
(Oerke et al.,
2006)
Plant disease detection based on data fusion of
hyper-spectral and multi-spectral
ﬂuorescence imaging using Kohonen maps
Wheat Plant
Fluorescence induction and
spectral reﬂection method
–
Yellow Rust
Work can be extended
over larger canopy study.
(Moshou
et al., 2005)
Thermal and Chlorophyll-Fluorescence
Imaging Distinguish Plant-Pathogen
Interactions at an Early Stage
Tobacco
plants, Sugar
beet plants
Chlorophyll ﬂuorescence
imaging, thermograph
–
Tobacco mosaic virus
and C. beticola infection
Measurement can further
be extended to more
varied samples.
(LauryChaerle
et al., 2004)
Hyper spectral and Chlorophyll Fluorescence
Imaging for Early Detection of Plant
Diseases, with Special Reference to
Fusarium spec. Infections on Wheat
Wheat plant
Chlorophyll Fluorescence
along with Hyper spectral
Imaging
–
Fusarium resulting
Head Blight
Work can be extended to
involve various other
plant diseases.
(Bauriegel and
Herppich,
2014b)
Hyper spectral and Thermal Imaging of
Oilseed Rape (Brassica napus) Response to
Fungal Species of the Genus Alternaria
Oilseed rape
thermograph and hyper
spectral imaging
80.5%
Alternaria fungal
disease
Work further requires
involvement of genetic
data.
(Baranowski
et al., 2015)
Early Detection of Powdery Mildew Disease in
Wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) Using Thermal
Imaging Technique
Wheat Plant
thermal imaging,
temperature monitoring
before and after inoculation
–
Erysiphe graminis
fungus causing Powdery
mildew disease
.Work can be used for
developing an expert
system
(Awad et al.,
2014)
Early Detection and Quantiﬁcation of
Verticillium Wilt in Olive Using Hyper
spectral and Thermal Imagery over Large
Areas
Olive plant
Hyper spectral imaging
linear discriminate analysis,
support vector machine
92.7%
Verticillium wilt
Work further requires
analysis using different
variation in surrounding
conditions
(Calderón
et al., 2015)
V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229–242
234
The paper (Ray et al., 2011) discusses late blight disease detection in
potato using hyper spectral reﬂectance data using spectro radiometer
over speciﬁc spectral range. It was observed that in 770–860, also
920–1050 nm range there can be noticeable difference found between
healthy and diseased plants of potatoes. This paper discusses the advan-
tage of spectral data for identiﬁcation of disease.
The paper (Zhang et al., 2012) discusses the use of hyperspectral re-
ﬂectance of normal in comparison to infected leaves. This is checked
with a spectro radiometer is a lab 32 spectral features were extracted,
and then they are examined with t-test, correlation analysis, ﬁsher linear
discriminant analysis. It was observed that PLSR performed well as com-
pared to MLR model. Also FLDA gave accuracy of 90% for heavily damaged
leaves. The challenge is to use these methods on ﬁelds i.e. at canopy level.
The paper (Zhao et al., 2016) discusses the technique of hyperspectral
imaging to identify chlorophyll and carotenoid contents in cucumber
plant leaves with major infection cases of angular leaf spot (ALS). It
was observed that PLSR models results with coefﬁcient correlation
predicting 0.871 and 0.876 for Chlorophyll and Carotenoids. The out-
comes showed that hyperspectral imaging with chemometrics is a feasi-
ble approach to ﬁnd the presence of disease leaf spot in cucumber leaves.
The paper (Lopez-Lopez et al., 2016) discusses the application of
hyperspectral imagery and high resolution imagery to detect the pres-
ence of leaf blotch in almond studied. The paper discusses the use of can-
opy temperature and vegetation indices to early identify presence of
disease. It was observed that all three including chlorophyll ﬂuorescence
are prominent in early identiﬁcation of detection in almond plants.
3.8. Fluorescence techniques
Fluorescence techniques (Fig. 2.) have been widely used for investi-
gation of the photosynthetic performance in plants. This technique is
very useful for crop monitoring which allow us to alleviate stress at an
early stage and thus substantially reducing yield losses.
In this (Pérez-Bueno et al., 2016) paper the proposed work high-
lights the useful beneﬁts of imaging systems based on multicolor ﬂuo-
rescence, making use of thermograph for zucchini plants affected by
disorder, caused by Dickeyadadantii. Different machine learning tech-
nique has been applied which classify the input samples as healthy or
infected samples. (Pérez-Bueno et al., 2016). In paper (Moshoua et al.,
2005) the detection of Wheat plant disease is being identiﬁed with
the data fusion techniques. It also shows the use of self-organizing
map neural network on reﬂectance data. It reﬂects the method of iden-
tiﬁcation of yellow rust using wheat plant spread over farm area. Later
multi-spectral ﬂuorescence imaging systems was done on sampled can-
opy. Further leaf disease detection is done using indices as normalized
vegetation and others. This paper shows the use of ﬂuorescence induc-
tion and spectral reﬂection for the disease presence detection.
Paper (LauryChaerle et al., 2004) makes use of chlorophyll ﬂuores-
cence imaging and thermograph for knowing and comparison of infec-
tion by fungus and viral infection in plant leaves. Here both the imaging
techniques are used comparatively under different growth scenarios for
pathogen plant interaction study. Firstly, the imaging of tobacco leaf is
analyzed for the lesion presence resulting from TVM. Also the usage of
salicylic acid application on tobacco leaves is further checked by color
reﬂectance. Secondly beet root is again sprayed with Cercosporabeticola
spore solution. Here the different response of different temperatures
resulting in varied ﬂuorescence effects is being characterized. This
paper briefs about the combined usage of multiple types of imaging
for plant and various pathogen combination for early symptoms
detection.
Crop quality is also a great factor taken into consideration while es-
timation of agricultural overall production. Paper (Bauriegel and
Table 2 (continued)
Title
Sample plant
Method
Accuracy
Type of disease detected
Future work
References
Early Detection and Quantiﬁcation of Almond
Red Leaf Blotch Using High-Resolution
Hyper spectral and Thermal Imagery
Almond
Plant
Hyper spectral imaging,
thermal imaging, linear
discriminate
analysis,support vector
machine,
96.2%
Red leaf blotch
Work can be further
extended using other
classiﬁcation methods
(López-López
et al., 2016)
Robust ﬁtting of ﬂuorescence spectra for
pre-symptomatic wheat leaf rust detection
with Support Vector Machines
Wheat plant
Fluorescence
measurements, support
vector machine classiﬁcation
93%
Wheat leaf rust
Work can be extended for
other disease detection at
early stages
(Römer et al.,
2011)
Fig. 2. Fluorescence Imaging Techniques.
V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229–242
235
Herppich, 2014a) presents the detection of head blight disease in wheat
plants using chlorophyll ﬂuorescence and also with hyper spectral im-
aging. It signiﬁes the ways in which hyper spectral imaging is being use-
ful for higher information density extraction. In this paper the different
imaging techniques are being further highlighted as better methods of
early bight disease detection.
Timely identiﬁcation of disease among the plants may result in bet-
ter procurement and agricultural productions. Paper (Römer et al.,
2011) presents a method for differentiating leaf rust wheat leaf from
healthy leaf at early level. This paper presents pre symptomatic detec-
tion and further classiﬁcation using support vector machine method. It
also presents use of Fluorescence detection using ﬂuorescence spec-
trometer for collection of various parameters. Further support vector
machine was being used classiﬁcation for healthy and inoculated leaves.
Finally, ﬂuorescence signatures used during polynomial ﬁtting presents
a technique for detection of disease.
The paper (Bauriegel and Herppich, 2014b) discuss about how chlo-
rophyll ﬂuorescence and hyper spectral imaging, can help in identifying
fusarium head blight in wheat both in laboratory and ﬁeld. Also two
methods hyperspectral imaging and CFI analysis are compared seeking
their usage in detecting fusarium. The CFI methodology is helpful during
the initial phase of inspection whereas hyperspectral imaging involves
various wavelengths in image analysis and thus helps in meaningful
monitoring of the disease. Hyperspectral imaging is effective while deal-
ing with the visibility of infection symptoms. The challenges are that for
any image based methodology on ﬁeld recording of head blight will re-
quire two passages over crop whether the imaging system are used sin-
gle or being combined.
The paper (Moshou et al., 2005) discusses about combination of im-
aging techniques using hyper spectral reﬂection with ﬂuorescence for
distinguishing yellow rust disease with wheat of the increasing disease,
hence the paper discusses about the formation of a real time remote
sensing system for disease detection. The images from hyper and
multi spectral ﬂuorescence reﬂection, are used to ﬁnd the of disease
present. It is found that fusing the measurements from the two methods
gave discrimination of 94.5% by using QDA. The methodology used for
date fusion is SOM (self-organizing map) NN. The advantage of using fu-
sion of measurements from different optical sensors is that they identify
disease is ﬁeld with more accuracy. This methodology shows potential
for implementing in ﬁeld also.
3.9. Thermal imaging
This (Fig. 3) is a process that convert the various radiation identiﬁed
from an object to different types of images for extraction of varied fea-
tures, analysis along with classifying them. It was ﬁrstly used for defense
needs but later gained a major use in different ﬁelds such as engineering
techniques used in agriculture.
Several instruments and methods have been developed for thermal
imaging of plant. The thermal imaging method is very useful for many
different operations of agriculture before and after harvesting. For this
site speciﬁc Crop management and precision farming, Thermal imaging
is an important phenomenon where Plant, soil, and water relationship
has been studied in detail by several researchers. (Vadivambal and
Digvir, 2011).
In paper (Yang et al., 2019) a method has been described for fast de-
termination of disease in tea leaves using a method making use of appli-
cation of infrared thermal imaging technology. In paper (Xu et al., 2006)
the comparison of different temperature distribution under the effect of
virus strain-TMV on three species of tomato plant leaves are shown.
Here thermal images are being used for the determination of changes
in pathogen related proteins and salicylic acid in infected leaves and
normal leaves. It is also highlighted how the transpiration is affected
by pathogen infection.
This Paper (Raza et al., 2015a) focus on the involvement of thermal
depth data with visible light image for automatic identiﬁcation of dis-
ease in tomato plant leaves. It shows the way of initial setup done for
the acquisition of visual and thermal images. Here a technique for dis-
parity detection has also been proposed.
This paper (Wang et al., 2013) gives a way of using digital infrared
thermography for detection of the changes as water loss further affect-
ing the temperature also. It also shows the importance of identiﬁcation
and prevention of fungal toxin for agricultural needs. In this paper the
leaf temperature is observed under variant conditions. It also estimated
stomata apertures by nail varnish method. Later on leaves with
Fig. 3. Thermal imaging.
V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229–242
236
membrane injury were identiﬁed along with FA content being mea-
sured in different temperatures.
Here paper (Sankaran et al., 2013) shows the requirement of a sen-
sor efﬁcient of determining HLB for overall complete cover. Here infra-
red along with thermal images are used for detected HLB-infected
citrus trees. This paper briefs about the evaluation of the use of multi-
spectral images for HLB detection, by the medium of a mobile ground-
based sensor. It initially used two multispectral cameras and one ther-
mal camera for capturing images from the head of the citrus canopies.
It further shows the method of using various indices as the average
spectral reﬂectance, structure insensitive pigment and many others. It
also uses thermal imaging for identiﬁcation of stress due to pathogens
in plants. Later on different classiﬁers were used including LDA, BDT,
SVM and QDA for classiﬁcation study for many features.
Thermal imaging of plant leaves result in early identiﬁcation of dis-
ease thus reducing large agricultural losses. In paper (Raza et al.,
2015b) an algorithm is proposed for the identiﬁcation of disease in
plants using silhouette registration through visible images. Initially the
algorithm detects silhouette through visible light images. It also em-
ploys stationary wavelet transform for thermal images for the same. It
makes use of gradient-based method in this multi scale approach. This
paper also shows that another method that can be further used for dif-
ferent sample using silhouette presence while registering the images.
Detection of Plant Disease is possible by digital infrared thermograph
as temperature measurement is directly related to water quantity
decrease by stomata aperture openings. This paper (Oerke et al., 2006)
shows the study of irregularities presence in plant affected by
P. cubensis. It also describes detection of downy mildew through temper-
ature difference. Initially the leaves were analyzed for the presence of
disease by visual inspection various lesions were recorded for sensitizing
disease presence. Later spectral images were used to study the presence
of disease on basis of various factors including transpiration rate, stomata
apertures and others. Finally, the relation established between electro-
lyte leakage and transpiration rate for the disease presence d is analyzed.
Paper (Awad et al., 2014) gives a study for early identiﬁcation of
disease such as powdery mildew in plants using thermal images of
wheat samples. Firstly, wheat leaves were artiﬁcially infected with
Erysiphe graminis fungus for experimental purpose. It also made
use of greenhouse conditions for complete experimental study. Fur-
ther the difference in the temperature was measured in normal and
was compared with the infected leaves under various conditions. It
also shows the various monitoring process after artiﬁcial infection.
Further changes in temperatures were analyzed. This paper de-
scribes the need for recommended expert system for the detection
of different disease.
3.10. 3D imaging
In 2D Imaging data is taken from two different dimensions which
differentiate given some denominations of plants such as development,
overall height, and yield estimation. Thus, the need of 3D imaging ap-
pears as an essential for automatic plant diseases detection. There are
various techniques for 3-D image acquisition (Bellmann et al., 2007)
(Jarvis, 1983) (Blais, 2004) and 2-D together with 3-D machinery in
applications pertaining to agriculture (Grift, 2008) (McCarthy et al.,
2010). Block diagram of 3-D imaging system is given below in Fig. 4.
There are two main 3D representations i.e. one concerned with the
surface and other with the volume presentations. The ﬁrst one involves
the depth details, the surface element and the different points given by
their dimension coordinates. The volume is also given deﬁning the vol-
umetric component and a frequency component of the model's coordi-
nates. In now a day different types of affordable sensors are available.
They also exhibhits technologically advanced to a great extent for vari-
ous domains like nutrient content, growth level, crop presence, biomass
estimation, and height and health status. Plant leaf diseases being fur-
ther analyzed using these sensors because the gathered data can be
used for quantifying the previously identiﬁed various production char-
acters. (Vázquez-Arellano et al., 2016).
Sensors including various types of LIDARs and TOF cameras with
their sensors, determine the depth using the light velocity (Fig. 5)
(Underwood et al., 2013) (Lachat et al., 2015).
4. Image classiﬁcation methods for plant disease detection
Most important step of Leaf image analysis is segmentation. Image
Segmentation is the process which takes an image as a single input
and further partition that particular image into different sub segments.
In the area of imaging for classiﬁcation (Fig. 6.) purpose, these segments
often constitute various classes of tissues, organs or biologically impor-
tant structures. Here image segmentation becomes challenging due to
various factors including low contrast and other imaging ambiguities
along with noise.
4.1. Interactive segmentation
It can be described as one of the techniques that are beneﬁcial where
expert can give certain useful information about the seed region or a
brief description about the region used to perform segmentation. Fur-
ther an algorithm works ﬁne for the reﬁnement including the segmen-
tation. There can be other methods also some including manual
intervention for providing the different classes of the tissue using
pixel information. Along with all lastly, feedback control principle is
also being involved with segmentation, which adds to other beneﬁts
for the users such as ﬂexibility, the automatic removal of issues.
There can be numerous methods that have been brought to applica-
tion by researchers in last many years; some of them are reviewed as
following.
Yan Cheng Zhang et al. (2007) brought one of the Selection methods
to light, that makes use of fuzzy curves for the identiﬁcation of presence
of disease in cotton plant leaves. The given technique has been found to
be better in terms of the speed of the execution. It yields a better classi-
ﬁcation result without being affected by the local minima issues that are
otherwise usually prominent in the nonlinear methods. Savita N
Ghaiwat also gave a survey of the different types of the classiﬁcation
methods feasible for detection of various diseases in plant leaves
(Ghaiwat and Arora, 2014).
Al Bashish et al. (2010) discussed one of the segmentation method
based on K-mean. Here different disease such as cottony meld, tiny
Fig. 4. Block diagram of 3-D imaging.
V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229–242
237
whiteness is being detected using this. It also shows the use of ANN for
further identiﬁcation of disease as early scorch and ashen meld present
in various plants. In this paper the results giving accuracy rate of 93% has
been discussed. A. Meunkaewjinda et al. (2008), also has given a tech-
nique for the early identiﬁcation of disease present in speciﬁcally
grape leaves. It also exhibits classiﬁcation using support vector machine.
Jaware et al. (2012) has proposed a faster classiﬁcation algorithm. Here
different types of diseases such as Early Scorch, Cottony meld and tiny
whiteness have been identiﬁed easily using this technique. This method
has been shown as an optimum method for detection of the varied dis-
eases in shorter span of time.
Gurjar and Gulhane (2012) briefed about the regularization method.
Here a technique has been discussed that involves the use of Eigen fea-
tures. It has been highlighted how it is being better than some of the
other techniques with respect to accuracy. For the identiﬁcation of
some of the disease caused by fungus such as red spot, it is able to
work with an accuracy of 90%.
Revathi and Hemalatha (2012) have given disease identiﬁcation
method that makes use of detection of edges based on uniform Segmen-
tation. One of the disease commonly found in cotton leaves such as
Fusarium wilt gets easily identiﬁed using this technique. Other types
of diseases as Root rot, Gray mildew, Leaf blight, Bacterial blight, Boll
rot, and Leaf curl have also been detected through neural networks.
Here application of this method beneﬁcial in smart farming has also
been discussed. Madhogaria et al. (2011) have given technique of
classiﬁcation using individual information of each pixel for classifying
diseases of plants. It has also shown use of svm. Tian et al. (2010)
discussed a technique using different classiﬁer such as support vector
for the early detection of disease present in wheat plant. The disease de-
tected here includes leaf blight and powdery mildew.
Sannakki et al. (2011) has given the detection of disease profoundly
present in pomegranate leaves. The technique shown also helps in the
identiﬁcation of the speciﬁc detoriation stage of the disease discussed.
Here the use of decision tree learning, fuzzy logic along with Bayesian
network has been discussed.
Arivazhagan et al. (2013) discussed a technique involving four
stages of early disease detection. It also shows the use of software for
the automatic identiﬁcation. The various stages discussed here include
formation of a color transformation for the given image that is followed
by masking of the green pixels. These are further followed by removal of
deﬁnite threshold values along with segmenting them. Feature extrac-
tion and computation of texture information has also been discussed.
It is being shown on a data of 500 plant samples including lemon, to-
mato, beans, banana and others resulting in an accurate rate of 94%.
Anand et al. (2016) have given a technique for the presence of plant
diseases. This work brings about the use of different techniques of image
processing for disease detection. It also makes use of artiﬁcial neural
network while identifying these. One of the ﬁlters as Gabor ﬁlter has
been deployed for ﬁltering purpose before complete segmentation. Var-
ious features are later trained that helps in differentiating between
healthy and unhealthy leaves. Naikwadi and Amoda (2013) also gave
a software solution for early disease detection in different plants. Only
after the stage of segmentation, green pixels are detected. These are fur-
ther being masked for deﬁnite threshold found using Otsu's method.
The technique used provides a precision ranges from 83% to 94%. Patil
and Bodhe (2011) makes use of threshold method for segmentation of
the leaf region. Later in categorization it shows an accuracy of 98.60%.
Beyyala and Beyyala (2012) discussed different methods of early
identiﬁcation of plant diseases making use of image Processing. Piyush
Chaudhary et al. (2012b) have given an algorithm for disease detection.
It involves the segmentation of spot using varied processing methods in
plants. Also a systematic comparison among HIS, cielab and ycbcr color
has been derived while spot identiﬁcation.
The paper (Mohanty et al., 2016) proposes to train a deep neural
network by using 54,306 images having healthy unhealthy leaves both
to identify 26 diseases and 14 crop species. It proposes the use of
Smartphone for diagnosing crop diseases. The model proposes both
classifying the crop species and identifying the disease on images of
the plant thus making use of Smartphone for detection of crop disease
Fig. 5. Imaging through TOF Sensors.
Fig. 6. Plant disease detection and classiﬁcation.
V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229–242
238
feasible. The shortcoming of this paper is that this model gives higher
accuracy for the dataset for which model is trained. However, if the
data set is collected from different condition, the accuracy of model
would be reduced. Also the image collected is more focused on only
upper side of leaves which needs to be elaborated.
The paper (Konstantinos P. Ferentinos, 2018) proposes the develop-
ment of convolution neural network models for detecting and diagnosing
diseases in different leaves making use of deep learning methodologies.
In paper Sladojevic et al., 2016, proposes the method of deep neural net-
works for leaf image classiﬁcation to recognize plant diseases. The model
which is developed helps in identiﬁcation of plant diseases. Further a
method for differentiating them has also been shown. Caffe is used to
give the training in deep CNN. The ﬁnal accuracy of the trained model
was 96.3%. The challenge highlighted here includes the collection of im-
ages for better accuracy of the model, having apt augmented done.
This paper (Rumf et al., 2010) proposes a procedure for detecting and
differentiating between healthy and diseases plant leaves using support
vector machines with vegetative indice. This paper also differentiates be-
tween the different diseases like lercospora, powdery mildew and leaf
rust also identifying the diseases at an initial stage. The leaves are inocu-
lated with the different pathogens like lercosporapeticola, uromycesbetac
or E rysiphebetac causing lercospora leaf spot, and powdery mildew and
hyperspectral data are recorded from these diseases leaves and healthy
leaves. In this paper diseased leaves and healthy leaves. This paper
shows use of 9 vegetation indices for automatic classiﬁcation. The classi-
ﬁcation accuracy has been drastically improved to 97%. The advantage
of using SVMs method based on Vis is that this procedure can also applied
to other plant pathogen systems.
This paper (Chaudhary et al., 2012b) proposes a technique for
disease spot detection in affected area since the disease spots in
plants are different in color; this paper proposes color transforma-
tion of RGB image to get better segmentation of disease spots. Vari-
ous color models like YCbCr and CIELAB are differentiated from ‘A'
component of CIELAB model. Then the image which is color trans-
formed is passed through median ﬁlter and the spots includes seg-
mentation by OTSU threshold. The advantage of this method is that
the noise introduced by background, vein and camera ﬂash are
wiped out using CIELAB model. The only challenge left is differenti-
ating the same colored veins from spots.
The paper (Behmann and JorgSteinrucken, 2014) proposes an ap-
proach combining supervised and unsupervised methods to identify
drought stress on barely. The methodology is applied on both polled
plants found in drought stress condition or properly watered. Ordi-
nal classiﬁcation with support vector machine has been brought to
use for visualizing the division of different sections. It also differen-
tiates between both easily. Paper shows that drought stress is de-
tected 10 days earlier than NDVI. The advantages of this method
are that it is an optimum technique for early identiﬁcation of
drought.
In now a day's Deep Learning (DL) have an edge over accuracy. A
huge amount of work has been done for improving the varied DL ar-
chitecture that is useful in early classiﬁcation of different types of
diseases found in plants. They provide an effective way of many dif-
ferent beneﬁts related to agricultural processes. In paper (Hall et al.,
2015), classiﬁcation has been carried out by hybrid CNN. It also
makes the use of Random Forest (RF) classiﬁer for experimentation
giving accurate results. Paper (Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú,
2018) shows its drawback for identiﬁcation of occluded objects.
Counting of fruits and leaf were also done using CNN in (Itzhaky
et al., 2018) (Ubbens et al., 2018). For classiﬁcation among different
plants, (Raza et al., 2015b) (Kussul et al., 2017) used modiﬁed CNN.
Plant recognition has been done by the different Deep Learning algo-
rithm in (Kussul et al., 2017) (Grinblat et al., 2016) (Singh et al.,
2015). For detection and classiﬁcation of Crop different experiments
was performed in (Pound et al., 2017) (Milioto et al., 2017).
5. Challenges and future trends
Major research done in the last few years discussing various types of
techniques have been shown earlier in this paper. The state of art survey
with current challenges on Plant diseases detection has been done and
given below-
This paper (Khitthuk et al., 2018) mainly involves analyzing the dif-
ferent plant features based on varied statistics. It also includes the pro-
cess of classiﬁcation. Here ﬁrstly the image is processed using
Gaussian low pass ﬁlter. This paper (Vaishnnave et al., 2019) discusses
the technique for the early determination of disease such as in ground-
nut plant leaves.
In paper (Jhuria et al., 2013) images of leaf is ﬁrst captured and
preprocessed for noise ﬁltering. It also involved image enhancement
and application of morphological operation. Later on Kmean clustering
has been shown for cluster formation. Finally, random forest classiﬁer
enabled the classiﬁcation of different fungal disease as Bacterial blight,
Cercospora Leaf spot and as Alternaria alternata.
In paper (Dhakate and Ingole, 2015) a system is being shown for the
determination of presence of disease in pomegranate plant. Here differ-
ent way has been highlighted for training purpose using back propaga-
tion method. Bacterial blight, fruit rot were among the major identiﬁed.
It also described the use of k mean clustering for cluster formation of the
images used.
This paper (Anand et al., 2016) focus on the identiﬁcation of brinjal
plant leaves disease. It showcases the process of pre-processing of the
plant leave images. Further K mean clustering has been used, followed
by the feature extraction step that is accomplished by using the color
Co-occurrence Method. This highlights the various parameters used
for the identiﬁcation as Area, perimeter, centroid, and diameter for
showing presence of disease.
This paper (Islam et al., 2017) gives a method that involves machine
learning technique along with image processing for detection of pres-
ence of disease in potato plant leaves. It shows the importance of early
detection of disease. Firstly, the region of interest has been extracted
by masking the background. Further a multicast support vector classiﬁer
is being for differentiating between the absence and presence of disease
using color and texture characteristics. Later Gray Level Co-occurrence
method is also being placed for extracting speciﬁc features including ho-
mogeneity, correlation contrast, and energy.
Detection of disease in plant is the most important step for reduction
of agricultural yield losses. Here paper (Gaikwad and Musande, 2017)
involves development of early detection methods for different plant dis-
ease. Initially the wheat plant leaves image taken were undergone the
process of preprocessing. This is further followed by K mean clustering
partitioning method. Here the basic features extracted include texture,
shape and color. It highlights the neural network classiﬁcation method
for the detection of fungal disease presence wheat plant leaves.
The challenge in this approach is that it is required to use sensors
also for practical use in future. In paper (Padol and Yadav, 2016) the de-
tection and further classiﬁcation of grape leaf disease is processed using
SVM classiﬁcation technique. The fungal diseases occurring in grape
leaves being discussed here includes Downy Mildew and Powdery Mil-
dew. It also includes the classiﬁcation done through training and testing
phases.
Increasing huge losses in cotton yield due to various diseases is a cru-
cial reason for developing an early disease detection system for cotton
plant. In paper (Bhimte and Thool, 2018) a method is proposed for
early detection of disease among cotton leaves through Support vector
machine. This paper (Pawar and Jadhav, 2017) proposes a novel method
for identifying disease and classiﬁcation. It highlights this process in-
volving acquisition. Here k mean clustering algorithm is being used for
pomegranate plant leaves analysis. Various features as. Color, morphol-
ogy, edges, texture have been extracted and classiﬁed using ANN
method.
V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229–242
239
Following are the research gaps which are observed and they still
exist in research on Plant diseases detection and classiﬁcation:
a. Automatic cluster centre initialization is lacking.
b. improves the proposed algorithm for reduction of error due to clas-
siﬁcation
c. Can be done for other groundnut plant disease
d. To integrates advance imaging technique and Computer vision algo-
rithms
e. For automatically detection of plant leaf disease algorithms are still
required.
f. Work further requires analysis using different variation in surround-
ing conditions.
g. Need an expert System for plant diseases detection.
6. Conclusions
This paper gives an overall review for the various techniques of dis-
ease identiﬁcation. It also presents brief summary of different imaging
methods useful for early detection of plant diseases. We present the
Current Trends and Challenges for detection of plant disease using com-
puter vision and advance imaging technique. These techniques include
thermal, hyperspectral, ﬂuorescence, Multispectral, and 3D imaging.
We have also presented different techniques for early determination
of plant diseases and classiﬁcation. The major techniques are SVM, K-
means clustering, Deep learning, and K-NN. This review concludes
that there is a need for efﬁcient method with comparison to the cost in-
curred. Also a reliable and efﬁcient sensor deployed for looking fulﬁll-
ment of proper criteria of plant health would facilitate advancements
in agriculture. In future, work can be done to develop a more efﬁcient,
and robust system for early automatic tracing and can be extended to
identify all possible diseases.
References
Abdulridha, J., Ehsani, R., Castro, A., 2016. Detection and differentiation between laurel
wilt disease, phytophthora disease, and salinity damage using a hyperspectral sens-
ing technique. Agriculture 6 (4), 56.
Al Bashish, Dheeb, Braik, Malik, Bani-Ahmad, Sulieman, 2010. A framework for detection
and classiﬁcation of plant leaf and stem diseases. International Conference on Signal
and Image Processing, pp. 113–118.
Anand, R., Veni, S., Aravinth, J., 2016. An application of image processing techniques for
detection of diseases on brinjal leaves using k-means clustering method. Interna-
tional Conference on Recent Trends in Information Technology (ICRTIT).
Arivazhagan, S., Newlin, Shebiah R., Ananthi, S., Vishnu, Varthini S., 2013. Detection of un-
healthy region of plant leaves and classiﬁcation of plant leaf diseases using texture
features. Agric. Eng. Int. CIGR J. 15 (1), 211–217.
Awad, Yasser Mahmoud, Abdullah, Ahmed Ameen, Bayoumi, Tarek Youssef, Abd-Elsalam,
Kamel, Hassanien, Aboul Ella, 2014. Early detection of powdery mildew disease in
wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) using thermal imaging technique, intelligent systems.
Adv. Intell. Syst. Comput. 323. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-11310-4_66.
Baranowski, P., Jedryczka, M., Mazurek, W., Babula-Skowronska, D., Siedliska, A.,
Kaczmarek, J., 2015. Hyperspectral and thermal imaging of oilseed rape (Brassica
napus) response to fungal species of the genus Alternaria. PLoS One 10 (3),
e0122913. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0122913.
Bauriegel, E., Herppich, W.B., 2014a. Hyperspectral and chlorophyll ﬂuorescence imaging
for early detection of plant diseases, with special reference to Fusarium spec. Infect.
Wheat Agric. 2014 (4), 32–57.
Bauriegel, Elke, Herppich, Werner B., 2014b. Hyperspectral and chlorophyll ﬂuorescence
imaging for early detection of plant diseases, with special reference to Fusarium
spec. Infect. Wheat Agric. 4 (1), 32–57.
Behmann, Jan, JorgSteinrucken, Lutz Plumer, 2014. Detection of early plant stress re-
sponses in hyperspectral images. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 93, 98–111.
Bellmann, A., Hellwich, O., Rodehorst, V., Yilmaz, U., 2007. IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition. A Benchmarking Dataset for Performance Evaluation
of Automatic Surface Reconstruction AlgorithmsIEEE, Minneapolis, MN, USA, pp. 1–8.
Beyyala, Arun Kumar, Beyyala, Sai Priya, 2012. Application for diagnosis of diseases. In
crops using image processing. Int. J. Life Sci. Bt. Pharm. Res. 1 (2), 171–176 2012.
ISSN 2250–3137. www.ijlbpr.com.
Bhimte, Namrata R., Thool, V.R., 2018. Diseases detection of cotton leaf spot using image
processing and SVM classiﬁer. Second International Conference on Intelligent Com-
puting and Control Systems (ICICCS).
Blais, F., 2004. Review of 20 years of range sensor development. J. Electron. Imaging. 13,
231–240. https://doi.org/10.1117/1.1631921.
Bravo, C., Moshou, D., West, J., McCartney, A., Ramon, H., 2003. Early disease detection in
wheat ﬁelds using spectral reﬂectance. Biosyst. Eng. 84 (2), 137–145 01 Feb 2003.
Calderón, R., Navas-Cortés, J.A., Zarco-Tejada, P.J., 2015. Early detection and quantiﬁcation
of Verticillium wilt in olive using hyperspectral and thermal imagery over large areas.
Remote Sens. 2015 (7), 5584–5610.
Cao, X., Luo, Y., Zhou, Y., Fan Xu, X., West, J.S., et al., 2015a. Detection of powdery mildew
in two winter wheat plant densities and prediction of grain yield using canopy
hyperspectral reﬂectance. PLoS One 10 (3), e0121462. https://doi.org/10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0121462.
Cao, X., Luo, Y., Zhou, Y., Fan, J., Xu, X., West, J.S., et al., 2015b. Detection of powdery mil-
dew in two winter wheat plant densities and prediction of grain yield using canopy
hyperspectral reﬂectance. PLoS One 10 (3), e0121462. https://doi.org/10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0121462.
Chaudhary, Piyush, Chaudhari, Anand K., Cheeran, A.N., Godara, Sharda, 2012a. Color
transform based approach for disease spot detection on plant leaf. Int. J. Comput.
Sci. Telecomm. 3 (6) (June 2012).
Chaudhary, Piyush, Chaudhari, Anand K., Cheeran, A.N., Godara, Sharada, 2012b. Color
transform based approach for disease spot detection on plant leaf. Int. J. Comput.
Sci. Telecommun. 3 (6), 65–70.
Del Fiore, A., Reverberi, M., Ricelli, A., Pinzari, F., Serranti, S., Fabbri, A.A., 2010. Early detec-
tion of toxic fungi on maize by hyperspectral imaging analysis. Int. J. Food Microbiol.
144 (1), 64–71 2010 Nov 15.
Dhakate, Mrunmayee, Ingole, A.B., 2015. Diagnosis of Pomegranate Plant Diseases Using
Neural Network. Fifth National Conference on Computer Vision. Pattern Recognition,
Image Processing and Graphics (NCVPRIPG).
EwisOmran, El-Sayed, 2016. Early sensing of peanut leaf spot using spectroscopy and ther-
mal imaging. Arch. Agron. Soil Sci. https://doi.org/10.1080/03650340.2016.1247952.
Fang, Yi, Ramasamy, Ramaraja P., 2015. Current and prospective methods for plant dis-
ease detection. Biosensors https://doi.org/10.3390/bios5030537.
Ferentinos, Konstantinos P., 2018. Deep learning models for plant disease detection and
diagnosis. Comput. Electron. Agric. 145 (2018), 311–318.
Gaikwad, Varsha P., Musande, Vijaya, 2017. Wheat disease detection using image process-
ing. First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Information Manage-
ment (ICISIM).
Ghaiwat, Savita N., Arora, Parul, 2014. Detection and classiﬁcation of plant leaf diseases
using image processing techniques: a review. Int. J. Rec. Adv. Eng. Technol. (IJRAET)
2 (3), 1–7 ISSN (Online): 2347–2812.
Golhani, Kamlesh, Balasundaram, Siva K., Vadamalai, Ganesan, Pradhan, Biswajeet, 2018.
A review of neural netwoks in plant disease detection using hyperspectral data. In-
form. Proc. Agric. 5 (3), 354–371 September 2018.
Grift, T., 2008. A review of automation and robotics for the bioindustry. J. Biomech. Eng. 1,
37–54.
Grinblat, G.L., Uzal, L.C., Larese, M.G., Granitto, P.M., 2016. Deep learning for plant identi-
ﬁcation using vein morphological patterns. Comput. Electron. Agric. 127, 418–424.
Gurjar, Ajay A., Gulhane, Viraj A., 2012. Disease detection on cotton leaves by Eigen fea-
ture regularization and extraction technique. Int. J. Electr. Commun. Soft Comput.
Sci. Eng. 1 (1), 1–4.
Hall, D., McCool, C., Dayoub, F., Sunderhauf, N., Upcroft, B., 2015. Evaluation of features for
leaf classiﬁcation in challenging conditions. Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE Winter
Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, Waikoloa Beach, HI, USA, 6–8 Janu-
ary, pp. 797–804.
Islam, Monzurul, Dinh, Anh, Wahid, Khan, Bhowmik, Pankaj, 2017. Detection of potato
diseases using image segmentation and multiclass support vector machine. IEEE
30th Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering (CCECE).
Itzhaky, Y., Farjon, G., Khoroshevsky, F., Shpigler, A., Bar-Hillel, A., 2018. Leaf counting:
multiple scale regression and detection using deep CNNs. Proceedings of the BMVC,
North East, UK, p. 328.
Jarvis, R., 1983. A perspective on range ﬁnding techniques for computer vision 1983. IEEE
Trans. Patt. Anal. Mach. Intell. 1983 (PAMI-5), 122–139. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TPAMI.1983.4767365.
Jasim, M.A., Tuwaijari, J.M.A.L., 2020. Plant leaf diseases detection and classiﬁcation using
image processing and deep learning techniques. International Conference on Com-
puter Science and Software Engineering (CSASE), Duhok, Iraq, 2020, pp. 259–265
https://doi.org/10.1109/CSASE48920.2020.9142097.
Jaware, Tushar H., Badgujar, Ravindra D., Patil, Prashant G., 2012. Crop disease detection
using image segmentation. Proceedings of Conference on Advances in Communica-
tion and Computing (NCACC’12).
Jhuria, Monika, Kumar, Ashwani, Borse, Rushikesh, 2013. Image processing for smart
farming: detection of disease and fruit grading. IEEE Second International Conference
on Image Information Processing (ICIIP-2013).
Kamilaris, A., Prenafeta-Boldú, F.X., 2018. Deep learning in agriculture, a survey. Comput.
Electron. Agric. 147, 70–90.
Khitthuk, Chaowalit, Srikaew, Arthit, Attakitmongcol, Kitti, Kumsawat, Prayoth, 2018.
Plant leaf disease diagnosis from color imagery using co-occurrence matrix and arti-
ﬁcial intelligence system. International Electrical Engineering Congress (iEECON).
Kulkarni, Anand H., Ashwin Patil, R.K., 2012. Applying image processing technique to de-
tect plant diseases. Int. J. Mod. Eng. Res. 2 (5), 3661–3664.
Kussul, N., Lavreniuk, M., Skakun, S., Shelestov, A., 2017. Deep learning classiﬁcation of
land cover and crop types using remote sensing data. IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens.
Lett. 14, 778–782.
Lachat, E., Macher, H., Mittet, M., Landes, T., Grussenmeyer, P., 2015. First experiences
with Kinect v2 sensor for close range 3D modeling. The International Archives of
the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences. ISPRS,
Avila, Spain, pp. 93–100 Vol. XL-5/W4.
V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229–242
240
LauryChaerle, DikHagenbeek, De Bruyne, Erik, Valcke, Roland, Van Der Straeten,
Dominique, 2004. Thermal and chlorophyll-ﬂuorescence imaging distinguish plant-
pathogen interactions at an early stage. Plant Cell Physiol. 45 (7), 887–896.
Lawrence, G.W., Kelly, A.T., King, R.L., Vickery, J., Lee, H.K., McLean, K.S., 2004. Remote
Sensing and Precision Nematicide Applications for Rotylenchulus Reniformis Man-
agement in Cotton.
Li, Xiaona, Li, Ruolan, Wang, Mengyu, Liu, Yaru, Zhang, Baohua, Zhou, Jun, 2017.
Hyperspectral Imaging and their Applications in the Nondestructive Quality Assess-
ment of Fruits and Vegetables. https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.72250.
Liu, Linyi, Dong, Yingying, Huang, Wenjiang, Xiaoping, Du, Ren, Binyuan, Huang, Linsheng,
Zheng, Qiong, Ma, Huiqin, 2020. A Disease Index for Efﬁciently Detecting Wheat Fu-
sarium Head Blight Using Sentinel-2 Multispectral Imagery.
8. IEEE Access,
pp. 52181–52191. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2980310.
López-López, M., Calderón, R., González-Dugo, V., Zarco-Tejada, P.J., Fereres, E., 2016. Early
detection and quantiﬁcation of almond red leaf blotch using high-resolution
Hyperspectral and thermal imagery. Remote Sens. 2016 (8), 276.
Lopez-Lopez, Manuel, Calderon, Rocio, Gonzalez-Dugo, Victoria, Zarco-Tejada, Pablo J.,
Fereres, Elias, 2016. Early detection and quantiﬁcation of almond red leaf blotch
using high resolution hyperspectral and thermal imagery. Remote Sens. 8, 276.
Lowe, Amy, Harrison, Nicola, French, Andrew P., 2017. Hyperspectral Image Analysis tech-
niques for the detection and classiﬁcation of the early onset of plant disease and
stress. Plant Methods 13, 80.
Madhogaria, Satish, Schikora, Marek, Koch, Wolfgang, Cremers, Daniel, 2011. Pixel-based
classiﬁcation
method
for
detecting
unhealthy
regions
in
leaf
images.
Informatikschafft Communities 41. Jahrestagung der Gesellschaft fürInformatik, 4.-
7.10.2011, Berlin.
Mahlein, A., Kuska, M., Thomas, S., Bohnenkamp, D., Alisaac, E., Behmann, J., Kersting, K.,
2017. Plant disease detection by hyperspectral imaging: from the lab to the ﬁeld.
Adv. Anim. Biosci. 8 (2), 238–243. https://doi.org/10.1017/S2040470017001248.
Mahlein, A.K., Rumpf, T., Welke, P., Dehne, H.-W., Plumer, L., Steiner, U., Oerke, E.-C., 2013.
Developments of spectral indices for detecting and identifying plant diseases. Remote
Sens. Environ. 128 (21), 21–30.
Mahlein, Anne-Katrin, Oerke, Erich-Christian, Steiner, Ulrike, Dehne, Heinz Wilhelm,
2012. Recent advances in sensing plant diseases for precision crop protection. Eur.
J. Plant Pathol. 133, 197–209.
Martinelli, Federico, Scalenghe, Riccardo, Davino, Salvatore, Panno, Stefano, Scuderi,
Giuseppe, Ruisi, Paolo, Villa, Paolo, Stroppiana, Daniela, MircoBoschtti, Luiz, Goulart,
R., Davis, Cristina E., Dandekar, Abhaya M., 2015. Advanced methods of plant disease
detection. Agron. Sustain. Dev. 35 (1), 1–25 Springer Verlag/EDP Sciences/INRA,
2015.
McCarthy, C.L., Hancock, N.H., Raine, S.R., 2010. Applied machine vision of plants. 2010. A
review with implications for ﬁeld deployment in automated farming operations.
Intell. Serv. Robot. 3, 209–217. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11370-010-0075-2.
Meunkaewjinda, A., Kumsawat, P., Attakitmongcol, K., Kaew, Sri, 2008. Grape leaf disease
detection from color imagery using hybrid intelligent system. Proceedings of ECTI-
CON 2008. 1. Krabi, pp. 513–516.
Milioto, A., Lottes, P., Stachniss, C., 2017. Real-time blob-wise sugar beets vs weeds classi-
ﬁcation for monitoring ﬁelds using convolutional neural networks. Isprs Ann.
Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 4, 41.
Mishra, P., Polder, G., Vilfan, N., 2020. Close range spectral imaging for disease detection in
plants using autonomous platforms: a review on recent studies. Curr. Robot. Rep. 1,
43–48.
Moghadam, Peyman, Ward, Daniel, Goan, Ethan, Jayawardena, Srimal, Sikka, Pavan,
Hernandez, Emili, 2017. International Conference on Digital Image Computing: Tech-
niques and Applications (DICTA). 2017. Plant Disease Detection using Hyperspectral
Imaging, Sydney, NSW, pp. 1–8.
Mohanty, Sharada P., Hughes, David P., Salathe, Marcel, 2016. Using deep learning for
image based plant disease detection. Front. Plant Sci. 7, 1419. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fpls.2016.01419.
Moshou, D., Bravo, C., West, J., Wahlem, S., McCartney, A., Ramon, H., 2004. Automatic de-
tection of “yellow rust” in wheat using reﬂectance measurement and neural net-
works. Comput. Electron. Agric. 44 (3), 173–188.
Moshou, D., Bravo, C., Oberti, R., West, J., Bodria, L., McCartney, A., Ramon, H., 2005. Plant
disease detection based on data fusion of hyper spectral and multi spectral ﬂuores-
cence imaging using Kohonen maps. Real-Time Imag. 11 (2), 75–83.
Moshoua, D., Bravoa, C., Obertib, R., Westc, J., Bodriab, L., McCartney, L., Ramona, H., 2005.
Plant disease detection based on data fusion of hyper-spectral and multi-spectral
ﬂuorescence imaging using Kohonen maps. Real-Time Imag. 11 (2), 75–83. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.rti.2005.03.003.
Nagaraju, M., Chawla, P., 2020. Systematic review of deep learning techniques in plant
disease detection. Int. J. Syst. Assur. Eng. Manag. 11, 547–560.
Nagasubramanian, K., Jones, S., Singh, A.K., et al., 2019. Plant disease identiﬁcation using
explainable 3D deep learning on hyperspectral images. Plant Methods 15, 98.
Naikwadi, Smita, Amoda, Niket, 2013. Advances in image processing for detection of plant
diseases. Int. J. Appl. Innov. Eng. Manag. 2 (11), 168–175.
Ochoa, Daniel, Cevallos, Juan, Vergas, German, Criollo, Ronald, Romero, Dennis, Castro,
Rodrigo, Bayona, Oswaldo, 2016. Hyperspectral imaging system for disease scanning
on banana plants. Proc. SPIE 9864, Sensing for Agriculture and Food Quality and
Safety VIII, 98640M.
Oerke, E.-C., Steiner, Dehne H.-W., Lindenthal, M., 2006. Thermal imaging of cucumber
leaves affected by downy mildew and environmental conditions. J. Exp. Bot. 57 (9),
2121–2132. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erj170 June 2006.
Okamoto, Hiroshi, Murata, Tetsuro, Kataoka, Takashi, Hata, Shun-Ichi, 2007. Plant Classi-
ﬁcation for Weed Detection using Hyperspectral Imaging with Wavelet Analysis.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1445-6664.2006.00234.x.
Padol, Pranjali B., Yadav, Anjali A., 2016. SVM classiﬁer based grape leaf disease detection.
Conference on Advances in Signal Processing (CASP).
Patil, Sanjay B., Bodhe, Shrikant K., 2011. Leaf disease severity measurement using image
processing. Int. J. Eng. Technol. 3 (5), 297–301.
Pawar, Rashmi, Jadhav, Ambaji, 2017. Pomogranite disease detection and classiﬁcation.
IEEE International Conference on Power, Control, Signals and Instrumentation Engi-
neering (ICPCSI).
Pérez-Bueno, M.L., Pineda, M., Cabeza, F.M., Barón, M., 2016. Multicolor ﬂuorescence im-
aging as a candidate for disease detection in plant Phenotyping. Front. Plant Sci. 7,
1790. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2016.01790.
Pound, M.P., Atkinson, J.A., Townsend, A.J., Wilson, M.H., Grifﬁths, M., Jackson, A.S., Bulat,
A., Tzimiropoulos, G., Wells, D.M., Murchie, E.H., 2017. Deep machine learning pro-
vides state-of-the-art performance in image-based plant phenotyping. Gigascience
6, gix083.
Qin, J., Burks, T.F., Ritenour, M.A., Bonn, W.G., 2009. Detection of Citrus Canker Using
Hyperspectral Reﬂectance Imaging with Spectral Information Divergence.
Ray, Shibendu Shankar, Jain, Namrata, Arora, R.K., Chavan, S., Panigrahy, Sushma, 2011.
Utility of hyperspectral data for potato late blight disease detection. J. Indian Soc. Re-
mote Sens. (June 2011) 39 (2), 161.
Raza, S.-A., Prince, G., Clarkson, J.P., Rajpoot, N.M., et al., 2015b. Automatic detection of dis-
eased tomato plants using thermal and stereo visible light images. PLoS One 10,
e0123262. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0123262.
Raza, Shan-e-Ahmed, Prince, Gillian, Clarkson, John P., Rajpoot, Nasir M., 2015a. Auto-
matic detection of diseased tomato plants using thermal and stereo visible light im-
ages. PLoS One https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0123262.
Raza, Shan-e-Ahmed, Sanchez, Victor, Prince, Gillian, Clarkson, John P., Rajpoot, Nasir M.,
2015c. Registration of Thermal and Visible Light Images of Diseased Plants Using Silhou-
ette Extraction in the Wavelet Domain. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2015.01.027.
Revathi, P., Hemalatha, M., 2012. Homogenous segmentation based edge detection tech-
niques for proﬁcient identiﬁcation of the cotton leaf spot diseases. Int. J. Comput.
Appl. 47 (2) (0975 – 888). June 2012.
Römer, Christoph, Bürling, Kathrin, Hunsche, Mauricio, Rumpf, Till, Noga, Georg, Plümer,
Lutz, 2011. Robust ﬁtting of ﬂuorescence spectra for pre-symptomatic wheat leaf rust
detection with Support Vector Machines. Comput. Electron. Agric. 79 (2), 180–188
November 2011.
Rumf, T., Mahlein, A.K., Steiner, U., Oerte, E.-C., Dehne, H.-W., Plumer, L., 2010. Early detec-
tion and classiﬁcation of plant disease with support vector machine based on
hyperspectral reﬂectance. Comput. Electron. Agric. 74 (2010), 91–99.
Sankaran, Sindhuja, Mishra, Ashish, Ehsani, Reza, Davis, Cristina, 2010. A review of ad-
vance techniques for detecting plant diseases. Comput. Electron. Agric. 72 (1), 1–13.
Sankaran, Sindhuja, Maja, Joe Mari, Buchanon, Sherrie, Ehsani, Reza, 2013. Huanglongbing
(Citrus Greening) Detection Using Visible, Near Infrared and Thermal Imaging Tech-
niques. ISSN 1424-8220. www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors.
Sannakki, S.S., Rajpurohit, V.S., Nargund, V.B., Arun Kumar, R., Yallur, P.S., 2011. A hybrid
intelligent system for automated pomegranate disease detection and grading. Int.
J. Mach. Intell. 3 (2), 36–44 ISSN: 0975–2927 & E-ISSN: 0975–9166.
Singh, A., Ganapathysubramanian, B., Singh, A.K., Sarkar, S., 2015. Machine learning for
highthroughput stress phenotyping in plants. Trends Plant Sci. 21, 110–124.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2015.10.015.
Sinha, Shekhawat, R.S., 2020. Review of image processing approaches for detecting plant
diseases in. IET Image Process. 14 (8), 1427–1439 196. https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-
ipr.2018.6210.
Sladojevic, Srdjan, Arsenovic, Marko, Anderla, Andras, Culibrk, Dubravko, Stefanovic,
Darko, 2016. Deep neural networks based recognition of plant diseases by leaf
image classiﬁcation. Comput. Intell. Neurosci. 2016, 3289801.
Sun, J., Yang, Y., He, X., Wu, X., 2020. Northern maize leaf blight detection under complex
ﬁeld environment based on deep learning. IEEE Access 8, 33679–33688 2020. https://
doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2973658.
Tian, Yuan, Zhao, Chunjiang, Lu, Shenglian, Guo, Xinyu, 2010. SVM-based multiple classi-
ﬁer system for recognition of wheat leaf diseases. Proceedings of 2010 Conference on
Dependable Computing (CDC’2010), Yichang, China.
Ubbens, J., Cieslak, M., Prusinkiewicz, P., Stavness, I., 2018. The use of plant models in deep
learning: an application to leaf counting in rosette plants. Plant Methods 14, 6.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13007-018-0273.
Underwood, J., Calleija, M., Nieto, J., Sukkarieh, S., 2013. A robot amongst the herd: remote
detection and tracking of cows. In: Ingram, L., Cronin, G., Sutton, L. (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 4th Australian and New Zealand Spatially Enabled Livestock Management
Symposium. The University of Sydney, Camden, Australia, p. 52.
Vadivambal, R., Digvir, Jayas, 2011. Applications of thermal imaging in agriculture and
food industry—a review. Food Bioprocess Technol. 4, 186–199. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11947-010-0333-5.
Vaishnnave, M.P., Suganya, Devi K., Srinivasan, P., ArutPerum, Jothi G., 2019. Detection
and classiﬁcation of groundnut leaf diseases using KNN classiﬁer. IEEE International
Conference on System, Computation, Automation and Networking (ICSCAN).
Vázquez-Arellano, M., Griepentrog, H.W., Reiser, D., Paraforos, D.S., 2016. 3-D imaging
systems for agricultural applications-a review. Sensors (Basel, Switzerland) 16 (5),
618. https://doi.org/10.3390/s16050618.
Wang, Min, Xiong, Yinfeng, Ling, Ning, Feng, Xumeng, Zhong, Zengtao, Shen, Qirong, Guo,
Shiwei, 2013. Detection of the Dynamic Response of Cucumber Leaves to Fusaric Acid
Using Thermal Imaging. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2013.02.004.
Wu, D., Feng, L., Zhang, C., He, Y., 2008. Early detection of Botrytis cinerea on eggplant
leaves based on near and infrared spectroscopy. Trans. ASABE 51 (3), 1133–1139.
Xu, Huirong, Zhu, Shengpan, Ying, Yibin, Jiang, Huanyu, 2006. Early detection of plant dis-
ease using infrared thermal imaging. Proc. SPIE 6381, 638110.
V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229–242
241
Yang, Ning, Yuan, Minfeng, Pan, Wang, Zhang, Rongbiao, Suna, Jun, Mao, Hanping, 2019.
Tea Diseases Detection Based on Fast Infrared Thermal Image Processing Technology,
(wileyonlinelibrary.com). https://doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.9564.
Zhang, Jing-Cheng, Pu, Rui-Liang, Wang, JI-Hua, Huang, Wen-Jiang, Yuan, Lin, Luo, Ju-Hua,
2012. Detecting powdery mildew of winter wheat using leaf level hyperspectral mea-
surements. Comput. Electron. Agric. 85, 13–23.
Zhang, Yan Cheng, Mao, Han Ping, Hu, Bo, Xili, Ming, 2007. Features selection of Cotton
disease leaves image based on fuzzy feature selection techniques. IEEE Proceedings
of the 2007 International Conference on Wavelet Analysis and Pattern Recognition,
Beijing, China, 2–4 Nov.
Zhao, Yan-Ru, Li, Xiaoli, Yu, Ke-Qiang, Cheng, Fan, He, Yong, 2016. Hyperspectral imaging
for determining pigment contents in cucumber leaves in response to angular Leasf
spot disease. Sci. Rep. 6, 27790 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/srep27790.
V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229–242
242
