Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100030 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ailsci 
Editorial 
AI in Life Science Research – The Road Ahead 
Jürgen Bajorath ∗ 
Department of Life Science Informatics and Data Science, B-IT, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität, Friedrich-Hirzebruch-Allee 5/6, D-53115 Bonn, Germany 
This Editorial introduces Volume 2 of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the 
Life Sciences (AILSCI). 
Year One in Review 
With 27 publications comprising Volume 1, the editors and publisher 
of AILSCI are pleased with the Journal’s ﬁrst year. Importantly, with an 
acceptance rate of ∼33% the bar for publication in AILSCI has been 
high and this will continue going forward. Striving for high scientiﬁc 
quality is a core value of AILSCI . Furthermore, we have been able to keep 
average review and publication times well below competitor journals, 
thanks to extra eﬀorts by editors and reviewers and a -for the most part- 
quick turnaround by production. 
Editorial Board 
Interacting with our international Editorial Board (EB) has been an- 
other highlight in year one and we are pleased that our current EB will 
continue to support the scientiﬁc development of AILSCI . In 2022, we 
welcome several additional members of the EB, and these new appoint- 
ments will be announced in due course. 
Article Categories 
A minor adjustment has been made to AILSCI’s article portfolio. Since 
there were no qualifying Controversial Views submissions in 2021, this 
manuscript type has been combined with Opinion articles to the new 
Viewpoint type, which is expected to be broader in its scope than the 
two original types of articles. Apart from this minor change, our article 
categories remain unchanged (for further details, please, see the Guide 
for Authors). 
Ease of Submission 
Initial experiences with the “Your Paper Your Way ” policy for au- 
thors and the production of the ﬁnal manuscripts have been very pos- 
itive. AILSCI will continue to alleviate formatting constraints for sub- 
mission, which makes the process much easier for authors (of course, 
manuscripts need to be submitted in a format adhering to generally ac- 
cepted scientiﬁc standards). 
∗ Corresponding author. Tel: + 49-228-7369-100, Fax: + 49-228-7369-101 
E-mail address: bajorath@bit.uni-bonn.de 
Themed Article Collections 
In early 2022, we will launch several Themed Article Collections 
( TACs ), corresponding to special issues in other journals. These TACs 
focus on, for example, female investigators in AI, investigators in indus- 
trial settings, or AI investigators and their contributions from selected 
geographical regions such as Latin America or Asia. These initiatives 
will be spearheaded by EB members, other guest editors, and the edi- 
tors of AILSCI . It is hoped that the newly introduced TACs will spark the 
interest of many prospective authors in AI R&D with relevance to the 
life sciences. 
Reusable Reviews 
As a part of AILSCI’s dedication to open science and a transparent 
scientiﬁc dialogue, beginning in 2022, we also oﬀer the option to con- 
sider reviews from other reputable journals on a case-by-case basis. For 
example, it frequently happens that scientiﬁcally sound manuscripts are 
rejected on the basis of reviews questioning the novelty of the work, its 
general interest, or practical relevance. While such assessments are not 
unreasonable per se –and also depend on a journal’s standards and publi- 
cation culture– for authors, this can be a frustrating experience. Hence, 
authors facing priority-based reviews and decisions by other journals 
are invited to re-submit their manuscript in its current format to AILSCI 
together with the reviews and an explanatory cover letter. In such cases, 
the editors will reserve the option to make a decision on the submission 
based upon available reviews as well as their own assessment of the 
manuscript, without another round of peer review. Going forward, this 
option is termed “Reusable Reviews ” and interested authors are invited 
to make use of it beginning this year. As is the case for any submission, 
external reviews accompanying a manuscript submitted to AILSCI are 
subject to the conﬁdentiality of the editorial process. 
Article Processing Charges 
Last but not least, it is also noted that there will be no Article Pro- 
cessing Charges (APCs) for AILSCI in 2022. 
We wish to thank all contributors to Volume 1 of AILSCI and look 
forward to receiving many interesting submissions in 2022! 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ailsci.2022.100030 
Received 19 January 2022; Accepted 19 January 2022 
Available online 22 January 2022 
2667-3185/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ) 
J. Bajorath 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100030 
Declaration of interests 
The author declares that he has no known competing ﬁnancial inter- 
ests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the 
work reported in this paper. 
2 
