 AASRI Procedia  5 ( 2013 )  9 – 14 
2212-6716 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
doi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2013.10.052 
ScienceDirect
2013 AASRI Conference on Parallel and Distributed Computing and Systems 
An Efficient Distributed Anomaly Detection Model for Wireless 
Sensor Networks 
Murad A. Rassam*a,b, Anazida Zainala, Mohd Aizaini Maarof a 
aFaculty of Computing, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, 81310 Skudai, Johor, Malaysia 
bFaculty of Engineering and Information Technology, Taiz University, Taiz, Yemen 
 
Abstract 
Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) are important platforms for collecting environmental data and monitoring phenomena. 
Anomalies caused by hardware and software errors, unusual events, and malicious attacks affect the integrity of data 
gathered by such networks. Therefore, anomaly detection process is a necessary step in building sensor network systems 
to assure data quality for right decision making. This paper presents a new distributed online anomaly detection model that 
measures the dissimilarity of sensor observations in principal component space. The new model distributes the detection 
process over the network to minimize energy consumption while ensuring high detection effectiveness. The detection 
effectiveness and efficiency of the new model are proved through experiments on real world dataset from Sensorscope 
system project. Experimental results reveal that the model achieved high detection rate with relatively few false positive 
rates compared to an existing model.  
 
© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute 
 
Keywords:Wireless Sensor Networks; Anomaly Detection; Distributed Processing; Principal Component Analysis; Principal Component 
Classifier. 
 
 
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +60-17-3681303; fax: +607 55 38829. 
E-mail address: murad.utm@gmail.com. 
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
10  
 Murad A. Rassam et al. /  AASRI Procedia  5 ( 2013 )  9 – 14 
1. Introduction 
Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) are composed of small-sized, cheap, energy-limited, and multifunctional 
devices called sensors that are deployed to collect data from an environment or monitor a phenomenon[1]. 
The limited resources such as processing capabilities and energy increase the possibility of these networks to 
be susceptible to variety of misbehaviors or anomalies. Data anomaly is defined in [2] as, “an observation that 
appears to be inconsistent with the reminder of a dataset”. Hardware and software faults, observations errors, 
unusual events, or intrusions are possible causes for sensor data anomalies. Therefore, to assure the integrity 
of sensor observations and identify important interested events in the monitored phenomena, detection of 
anomalies should be considered for the design of any sensor network system. 
Distribution of anomaly detection process over nodes in WSN has been proposed as a solution to reduce 
the computational load of detection methods in nodes. However, another factor should be considered when 
designing any distributed detection model which is the communication overhead caused by transmitting large 
amounts of data between nodes. Some distributed anomaly detection models have been designed to consider 
the communication overhead such as [3-6]. The concept of distribution in these works relies on that each node 
implements the anomaly detection method by its own resources and then transmits only a summary of local 
detection model to the central location such as cluster head or base station in order to construct a global 
detection model. The global model is then returned to the nodes for using it in anomaly detection of 
subsequent observations.  
A distributed deviation detection model in WSN was described in [4] to avoid the unnecessary 
communication and computational effort. This model was designed based on a non-parametric statistical 
technique called kernel density estimator. The hierarchical structure which is always used to implement any 
distributed solution was not adopted for this model. Instead, the hierarchical structure was emulated by 
assigning each group of low capacity sensors to one of some limited more powerful sensors based on spatial 
proximity. An In-network outlier detection algorithm was proposed in [5] and aimed at reducing the 
communication overhead results from massive data transmission in WSN. This algorithm was based on 
distance similarity to find the global anomalies in WSN. In this model, each node applies the distance 
similarity measure to find the anomalies and broadcast its result to its neighbours. Other nodes perform the 
same task until all nodes agree on a common decision on anomalies. Broadcast communication lead to high 
energy consumption. The problem is worsen when deal with large scale WSN. 
A Quarter Sphere Support Vector Machine (QSSVM) based distributed anomaly detection model was 
proposed in [6] to identify the anomalous observations in sensors. The procedure of applying this model was 
as the following: 
 
Every sensor runs the QSSVM on its own data to find the local anomalous observations and the 
parameter Rj  of the QSSVM that separate normal observations from anomalous.  
 
Every sensor sends the local parameter Rj to the parent node in the structure. 
 
The parent node collects the radii of the children nodes and constructs the global radius Rm.  
 
The parent returns the global radius parameter Rm to its children nodes to detect anomalies in their data 
using this radius. 
 
 
Variety of distributed models was designed based on the QSSVM [3, 7-10]; however, the common 
limitation of these models is the prohibited computational cost of applying the QSSVM on the limited sensor 
resources. Moreover, the dependency of SVM on some parameters substantially affects the detection 
effectiveness. These parameters need to be chosen for each WSN application and therefore affect the 
practicality of the solution. The authors of [15] proposed statistical based outlier detection methods based on 
11
 Murad A. Rassam et al. /  AASRI Procedia  5 ( 2013 )  9 – 14 
temporal and spatial correlations of sensor data. The performance of these methods is highly depending on 
some statistical parameters that affect the usability of these methods for online detection. 
In this paper, a new distributed online anomaly detection model is designed using the one-class principal 
component classifier (OCPCC) previously proposed in [11] to detect anomalies as they occurred. The 
difference between the model proposed in this paper and the model in [11] is the selection of detection 
threshold and the variant of PCA algorithm used. In [11], the threshold was selected by clustering the 
dissimilarity vector of training data using automated clustering threshold procedure which has high 
computational cost to be used for online detection.  In addition, the called candid-covariance free incremental 
principal component analysis (CCIPCA) algorithm which was originally proposed in [12] and utilized for data 
reduction for WSN in [13] was used as a core for the design of the proposed model in this paper. Data 
samples chosen from sensorscope GSB[14] dataset were used to validate the detection effectiveness of the 
model in terms of detection rate and false alarm rate. A comparison with an existing distributed model in [15] 
was conducted to show the advantages of the proposed model. 
The rest of paper is structured as the following: section 2 details out the design of the proposed model. 
Section 3 provides the experimental results and discussion. Section 4 concludes the paper and suggests some 
future research directions. 
2. The proposed model 
Two main stages are involved in the design of the proposed model which are training stage and detection 
stages. Details of each stage are given in the following sections. 
2.1. Training stage 
In this stage, the normal observations are gathered at every sensor to find out the local normal model 
(LNM) and send it to the cluster head (CH) for constructing the global normal model (GNM). The procedure 
of building the LNM is as follows: the training normal observations STrain are standardized by the mean value 
(μ) and the standard deviation value ( ) of training observations. The eigenvector (Vi), and eigenvalues ( i ) 
matrices are then calculated  from the standardized observations. The projection of training observations on 
the principal component space Yi is then computed by Eq. (1): 
( )
( )
V i
i
S
Y
Train
i
                                                                                                                                  (1) 
The number of principal component which depends on the application is determined and the Dtrain  
dissimilarity measure is computed for training observations using Eq. (2). 
i
i
train
y
D
                                                                                                                                           (2) 
In this paper, the detection threshold that represents the local normal model (LNM) is chosen to be the 
maximum MaxDiss and minimum MinDiss bounds of the dissimilarity vector Dtrain . The LNM parameters are 
then sent to CH to construct the GNM. Different strategies are used to build the GNM at CH; however, the 
details of such strategies are not the subject of this paper. 
12  
 Murad A. Rassam et al. /  AASRI Procedia  5 ( 2013 )  9 – 14 
2.2. Detection stage 
In this stage, each node tests every observation using the GNM built in training stage. Some other 
parameters which include the mean (μ) and standard deviation ( ) parameters, eigenvector (Vi) and 
eigenvalues ( i) matrices, are also used in this stage. The GNM model is composed of (MaxDiss, MinDiss) 
values calculated globally at CH. Each observation is identified as either normal or anomalous by comparing 
its projection on the space with the detection thresholds specified in the GNM model. The score of projecting 
every new observation on the principal component space is computed using the parameters of the normal 
profile that were obtained from training stage as in Eq. (3): 
               
V
S
Y
Test
i
                                                                                                                                          (3) 
The measure of dissimilarity (Dtest) for every new observation is computed using Eq. (4). 
y2
Dtest
                                                                                                                                            (4) 
At the end, the value of Dtest parameter is compared against the GNM values to classify each observation as 
normal or anomalous using the following criterion: 
Normal
else
Anomalous
MinDiss)
MaxDiss)Or(Dtest
test
(D
 
3. Experimental results and evaluation 
In this section, the experimental results of the model proposed in this paper on real world data set are 
presented and evaluated by comparing it to a recent existing anomaly detection model from the literature. 
3.1. Datasets  
Grand St. Bernard (GSB) [14] is one of sensorscope project deployment dataset was gathered using WSN 
deployment at the Grand St. Bernard pass that is located between Italy and Switzerland. The network is 
formed of 23 sensors that record metrological environmental data that include; (ambient and surface) 
temperature, and humidity. 2 clusters were formed in this deployment in which the small cluster has 5 sensors 
and the big cluster has 18 sensors. The observations of the small cluster which have 5 sensors namely, Node-
25, Node-28, Node-29, Node-31 and Node-32 were used to evaluate the proposed model.  In our experiments, 
the ambient temperature observations in the period 6am-14pm of data recorded on 5th March 2007 were used. 
The observations are labeled  using the Mahalanobis    distance measure as used in [15]. 
3.2. Results and discussion 
We have tested our proposed model on dataset samples extracted from nodes 25,28,29,31 and 32. The 
hierarchical WSN structure was adopted in which one of the above nodes act as CH that receives the LNM 
from other nodes in the cluster and constructs the GNM that is used by other cluster nodes for detection. The 
13
 Murad A. Rassam et al. /  AASRI Procedia  5 ( 2013 )  9 – 14 
detection rate (DR) and false alarm rates (FPR) which represent detection effectiveness are reported in Table 
1. 
Table 1. Detection rate and false alarm rate of the proposed model 
 
Nodes 
 
 
N25 
N28 
N29 
N31 
N32 
Average 
DR (%) 
100 
91 
100 
89 
100 
96 
FPR (%) 
16 
0 
2 
0 
0 
7.2 
 
Table 1 reports the results of the proposed model for each node. The results show that an average of 96% 
detection rate was achieved by the model while 7.2% false positives were produced from misclassification of 
some normal observations as anomalies. A comparison with the statistical  temporal-based outlier detection 
(TOD) model proposed in [15] using the same data samples and same data labeling approach is shown in 
Table 2.  
Table 2. A comparison with the TOD model proposed in [15] 
 
SW=15 
SW=30 
SW=48
SW=60 
Our model  
 
DR (%) 
82.86 
82.86 
82.86 
82.86 
96 
 
FPR (%) 
13.3 
13.48 
11.67 
10.13 
7.2 
 
 
Table 2 reports the results of the TOD model with different smoothing windows values. It is clearly shown 
that our proposed model outperforms the TOD model in terms of detection rate and false positive rate. To 
evaluate the efficiency of the model, the computational complexity and communication overhead are 
considered.  The computational complexity incurred by our model is O(N) where N is the number of observed 
variable in the phenomenon. This complexity is the computational complexity of CCIPCA algorithm. The 
additional calculations involved in the model are fixed. Since the LNM sent by each node has a fixed size, the 
communication overhead is a function of the number of nodes K in each cluster; therefore, the communication 
overhead is O(K). For the TOD model, there is no communication overhead as the method is implemented 
locally but the computation cost is O(c. d .p) where d is the number of variables, c is the number of original 
observations to be modeled, and p is the fitting parameter of the AR model used by the TOD. 
4. Conclusion 
This paper introduces the preliminaries and initial experimental results of new distributed anomaly 
detection model for WSNs. The model was designed based on the calculation of the dissimilarity between 
sensor observations in the principal component space.  Experimental results and comparison with recent 
existing work indicate that the new model is promising in terms of achieving high detection effectiveness 
while efficiently utilizing the limited network resources. Further experiments are needed to investigate the 
performance of the model with multivariate data and additional real world datasets.  
14  
 Murad A. Rassam et al. /  AASRI Procedia  5 ( 2013 )  9 – 14 
Acknowledgements 
This study was supported by Research Management Center (RMC) at Universiti Teknologi Malaysia 
(UTM) under the RUG grant (VOTE NO. 08J95).  
References 
[1] Akyildiz I.F, Su W, Sankarasubramaniam Y , Cayirci E. Wireless sensor networks: a survey. Computer 
Networks 2002. 38(4); 393-422. 
[2] Hodge V, Austin J.  A Survey of Outlier Detection Methodologies. Artif. Intell. Rev 2004. 22(2); 85-126. 
[3] Zhang Y, Meratnia N, Havinga P. An online outlier detection technique for wireless sensor networks using 
unsupervised quarter-sphere support vector machine. In International Conference on Intelligent Sensors, 
Sensor Networks and Information Processing, 2008.  
[4] Palpanas T, Papadopoulos D, Kalogeraki V, Gunopulos D. Distributed deviation detection in sensor 
networks. SIGMOD Rec., 2003. 32(4);77-82. 
[5] Branch J, Szymanski B, Giannella C, Wolff  R,Kargupta H. In-Network Outlier Detection in Wireless 
Sensor Networks. In 26th IEEE International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, 2006.  
[6] Rajasegarar S, Leckie C, Palaniswami M, Bezdek  J. Quarter Sphere Based Distributed Anomaly 
Detection in Wireless Sensor Networks. in IEEE International Conference on Communications,  ICC '07. 
2007. 
[7] Shahid N, Naqvi I.H, Qaisar S.B. Quarter-Sphere SVM: Attribute and Spatio-Temporal correlations based 
Outlier & Event Detection in wireless sensor networks. In 2012 IEEE Wireless Communications and 
Networking Conference (WCNC),2012. 
[8] Takianngam S, Usaha W. Discrete Wavelet Transform and One-Class Support Vector Machines for 
anomaly detection in wireless sensor networks. In 2011 International Symposium on Intelligent Signal 
Processing and Communications Systems (ISPACS), 2011. 
[9] Rajasegarar S, Leckie C, Bezdek, J.C, Palaniswami M. Centered Hyperspherical and Hyperellipsoidal 
One-Class Support Vector Machines for Anomaly Detection in Sensor Networks. IEEE Transactions on 
Information Forensics and Security, 2010. 5(3); 518-533. 
[10] Zhang Y, Meratnia N,  Havinga P.J. Ensuring high sensor data quality through use of online outlier 
detection techniques. International Journal of Sensor Networks, 2010. 7(3); 141-151. 
[11] Rassam M.A, Zainal A, Maarof M.A. One-Class Principal Component Classifier for Anomaly Detection 
in Wireless Sensor Network. In 2012 Fourth International Conference on Computational Aspects of Social 
Networks (CASoN), 2012; 271-276. 
[12] Juyang W, Yilu Z, Wey-Shiuan, H. Candid covariance-free incremental principal component analysis. 
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2003. 25(8); 1034-1040. 
[13] Rassam M.A, Zainal A, and Maarof M.A. An Adaptive and Efficient Dimension Reduction Model for 
Multivariate Wireless Sensor Networks Applications. Applied Soft Computing, 2013. 13 (4): 1878-1996. 
[14] GSB, Grand-St-Bernard (GSB) dataset. http://lcav.epfl.ch/cms/lang/en/pid/86035. 2007. 
[15] Zhang Y, Hamm N, Meratnia N, Havinga P. Statistics-based outlier detection for wireless sensor 
networks. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 2012. 26(8);1373-1392. 
 
 
