BIOGRAPHIES OF CONTRIBUTORS
Professor Majed Abdullah Al-Mashari Al-Saud is the Chair-
man of the Saudi Computer Society and Editor of the Saudi
Computer Journal, the Business Process Management Journal
(BPMJ) and a member of the editorial advisory board of sev-
eral international, refereed journals in the ﬁeld of eGovern-
ment, eCommerce, ERP, BPR and IT management. He
served on the international scientiﬁc committees of more than
14 IT conferences in the US and Europe, has also acted as a
referee for more than 50 papers and has been published widely in internation-
ally-recognized IT journals and conferences. The recipient of several awards
and certiﬁcates of recognition ; among these are 3 EMERALD Citation of Ex-
cellence Awards for Outstanding Contribution to Knowledge for 3 of his journal
articles and one ANBAR Citation of Excellence Award for Outstanding Contri-
bution to Knowledge for another journal article. Served as the chairman of the
eGovernment Team of the National IT Plan and as a member of the eBusiness
Consulting Team of the Ministry of Commerce. Professor of Electronic Govern-
ment at the College of the Computer and Information Sciences of King Saud
University and the Chairman of the Computer and Information Sciences De-
partment of Prince Sultan University. He was the Chief Conference Chair for
the 18th National Computer Conference in Riyadh 2006. Has a wide range of
consulting experience for several government and private organizations in the
areas of eCommerce, eGovernment, Internet deployment, Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP), Customer Relationship Management (CRM), Business Process
Re-engineering (BPR), and IT management and strategic planning, among
others. E-mail: malmashari@aci.org.sa
Peer
review
under
responsibility
of
King
Saud
University.
Production and hosting by Elsevier
Applied Computing and Informatics (2011) 9, xiii–xvi
King Saud University
Applied Computing and Informatics
www.ksu.edu.sa
www.sciencedirect.com
Sid-Ahmed Selouani received his B.Eng. degree in 1987 and his
M.S. degree in 1991 both in electronic engineering from the
Algiers University of Technology (U.S.T.H.B). He joined the
Communication Langagie` re et Interaction Personne-Syste` me
(CLIPS) Laboratory of Universite´ Joseph Fourier of Greno-
ble. He got a Docteur d’E´ tat degree in the ﬁeld of signal pro-
cessing and artiﬁcial intelligence in 2000. He is currently
Associate Professor and Chair of the Human-Machine Inter-
action Laboratory at the Universite´ de Moncton, Campus de Shippagan. His
main areas of research include new models in E-Commerce, mobile communica-
tions, ubiquitous systems, assistive technologies, and E-learning solutions. Dr
Selouani is actually the representative of Universite´ de Moncton, Shippagan
campus, in the Alliance to Promote Fair Trade and Sustainable Development.
Dr. Selouani received numerous grants from national and international institu-
tions for his research projects. Dr. Selouani co-authored more than 50 peer-re-
viewed scientiﬁc publications. His papers have been cited in numerous papers in
the scientiﬁc literature. E-mail: selouani@umcs.ca
Dr. Yousef Ajami Alotaibi received his B.Sc. degree in compu-
ter engineering from King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia in 1988. After that he received his M.Sc. degree and
Ph.D. degree in computer engineering from Florida Institute
of Technology, Florida, USA, in 1994 and 1997, respectively.
From 1988 till 1992 and from 1998 till 1999 he joined Al-ELM
Research and Development Corporation, The National Infor-
mation Center (NIC) Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, as research engi-
neer. During his work at NIC he worked and participated in designing and
implementing encryption and communication systems for the NIC and for the
private sectors. From 1999 till now he joined Computer Engineering Depart-
ment, College of computer and information sciences, King Saud University as
an assistant professor, His research interests are digital speech processing speci-
ﬁcally speech recognition and Arabic language and speech processing. Also he is
currently working on Arabic speech recognition projects with King Abdulaziz
City for Science and Technology (KACST). E-mail: yalotaibi@ccis.ksu.edu.sa
Emad Abuelrub is an associate professor and dean of the Fa-
culty of Science and Information Technology at Zarqa Private
University, Jordan. He received his Bachelor degrees in com-
puter engineering and computer science from Oklahoma State
University, USA, in 1984 and 1985, respectively. He then
joined the Alabama A&M University, USA, where he ob-
tained his MSc degree in computer science in 1987. He com-
pleted his PhD degree in computer science from Louisiana
xiv
Biographies
State University, USA, in 1993. He is the Editor-in-Chief of the International
Arab Journal of Information Technology (IAJIT) and the Secretary General
of the Colleges of Computing and Information Society, Association of Arab
Universities. He is involved in the organization of many international confer-
ences in computing and information technology. His areas of interest include
parallel and distributed systems, interconnection networks, fault-tolerance com-
puting, parallel algorithms, parallel architectures, and e-commerce. He is a
member of the IEEE, ACM, and JEA. E-mail: abuelrub@zpu.edu.jo
Layla Hasan is an instructor at the Department of Manage-
ment Information Systems, Zarqa Private University, Jordan.
She received her Bachelor degree in computer science and an
MBA from the University of Jordan, in 1996 and 2004, respec-
tively. Currently, she is pursuing her PhD in information sys-
tems at Loughborourgh University, UK. Prior of joining
Zarqa Private University, she worked as a manager for the
computer center at the Association of Arab Universities, Jor-
dan. Her research interests include e-commerce, user-usability, and quality of
websites. E-mail: l.hassan@zpu.edu.jo
Khlood Alserehi Alharbi is a PhD candidate at the University
of Leicester, UK, Her research focuses on the use of web-
based systems to enhance education and investigating the fac-
tors contributing to a better use and adoption of e-learning
systems by the Saudi students at the university level. She
had MA in Applied Linguistics and TESOL (2001) from the
University of Leicester, UK, and BA in English Literature
and Linguistics (1998) from King Abdul Aziz University.
E-mail: ka41@le.ac.uk
Said S. Al-Gahtani is a professor of computer information sys-
tems in the Department of management information systems
at King Khalid University, Abha, Saudi Arabia. He earned
a B.Sc. in Systems Engineering from King Fahad University
of Petroleum & Minerals, M.Sc. in Computer Sciences from
Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia, and a PhD in Computer-
Based Information Systems from Lougborough University,
Loughborough, UK. His research interests include the user
acceptance of information technologies, the modeling of IT acceptance, end-user
computing, and organizational cross-cultural research. He has published journal
research articles in the Journal of Global Information Management, Information
& Management, Information Technology & People, Journal of Global Information
Management, Journal of Global Information Technology Management, Informa-
Biographies
xv
tion Technology for Development, Information Resources Management Journal,
and the Behaviour & Information Technology. E-mail: ssalgahtani@kku.edu.sa
Basit Qureshi received his Master of Science degree in Compu-
ter Science from [Florida Atlantic University] in 2002 and his
Bachelor of Science degree in Computer Science from [Ohio
University], OH USA in 2000.
He is currently working at
Prince Sultan University as a faculty member in the College
of Computer and Information Sciences. He has taught numer-
ous Computer Science Courses at the undergraduate level. His
research interests include performance evaluation of wireless
network protocols, Wireless Networks Security and implementation of applica-
tions for Mobile Ad Hoc wireless Networks. To date he has published in various
reputable international journals and conferences. He received the best faculty
teaching award from PSU in 2008/9. E-mail: qureshi@psu.edu.sa
xvi
Biographies
