Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 84–94
Available online 30 May 2023
2666-5441/© 2023 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC
BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences
journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-geosciences
Original research articles
Blockly earthquake transformer: A deep learning platform for custom phase
picking
Hao Mai a,∗, Pascal Audet a, H.K. Claire Perry b, S. Mostafa Mousavi c, Quan Zhang a
a Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada, K1N 6N5
b Canadian Hazards Information Service, Natural Resources Canada, Ottawa, Canada, K1A 0E7
c Department of Geophysics, Stanford University, Stanford, 94305, USA
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Keywords:
Earthquake detection
Seismic phase identification
Deep learning
Seismology
A B S T R A C T
Deep-learning (DL) algorithms are increasingly used for routine seismic data processing tasks, including seismic
event detection and phase arrival picking. Despite many examples of the remarkable performance of existing
(i.e., pre-trained) deep-learning detector/picker models, there are still some cases where the direct applications
of such models do not generalize well. In such cases, substantial effort is required to improve the performance
by either developing a new model or fine-tuning an existing one. To address this challenge, we present
Blockly Earthquake Transformer(BET), a deep-learning platform for efficient customization of deep-learning
phase pickers. BET implements Earthquake Transformer as its baseline model, and offers transfer learning and
fine-tuning extensions. BET provides an interactive dashboard to customize a model based on a particular
dataset. Once the parameters are specified, BET executes the corresponding phase-picking task without direct
user interaction with the base code. Within the transfer-learning module, BET extends the application of a
deep-learning P and S phase picker to more specific phases (e.g., Pn, Pg, Sn and Sg phases). In the fine-tuning
module, the model performance is enhanced by customizing the model architecture. This no-code platform
is designed to quickly deploy reusable workflows, build customized models, visualize training processes, and
produce publishable figures in a lightweight, interactive, and open-source Python toolbox.
1. Introduction
In the last five years, the global seismological community has wit-
nessed the emergence of deep-learning (DL) as a promising candidate
for undertaking large-scale seismic processing and modeling tasks in
modern seismology (Mousavi and Beroza, 2022a). Among many other
seismological applications, DL algorithms for earthquake signal detec-
tion and seismic phase picking have had huge success, thanks to the
existence of large-scale and publicly-available archived waveforms and
phase labels (Mousavi and Beroza, 2022b). DL models are designed to
learn intricate patterns concealed in seismic waveforms, identify seis-
mic signals and their relations with desired targets such as seismic wave
arrival times (i.e., P-arrival, S-arrival, etc.) without human interven-
tion. One obvious application of DL phase pickers is in the automation
of seismic data processing in near real-time earthquake monitoring
workflows that are routinely operated by regional, national and inter-
national network operators to improve the accuracy and completeness
of earthquake and seismic event catalogues (Yeck et al., 2021). In
addition to improving magnitude-frequency distributions, which are
critical for seismic hazard assessment and forecasting (Beroza et al.,
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: hmai090@uottawa.ca (H. Mai).
2021), DL phase pickers may have utility in verification seismology,
specifically in the identification of P- and S-phases of very low-yield
(e.g., 10−4 −10−1 kT), low-magnitude (e.g., 𝑚𝑏1−3) nuclear explosions.
Such events are best recorded at local distances (<150–200 km) by
regional seismic network operators (Koper, 2019). Algorithms based on
DL phase pickers like the ones presented here can expedite the creation
of reliable earthquake catalogs. Recent reviews of the state-of-the-art
applications show that DL-based models outperform classical character-
istic function-based models in many scenarios, such as fast detection of
P and S arrivals in a global benchmark dataset, and for finding S-waves
that are obscured by the coda of earlier phases (Mousavi et al., 2019a;
Woollam et al., 2022; Münchmeyer et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2020, 2023).
Although DL applications have shown promising performance and
resulted in interesting outcomes, the path to developing more effective
DL models is not always clear and efforts have been uneven. The
model development procedure is often fraught with difficulties with
the consequence that any new DL project requires the investment of
massive amounts of labor and research resources. DL-based approaches
for seismic data processing face similar issues, but most of the steps
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiig.2023.05.003
Received 14 March 2023; Received in revised form 12 May 2023; Accepted 26 May 2023
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 84–94
85
H. Mai et al.
have unique prerequisites that cannot be migrated from previous work.
Standard DL workflows can be summarized in four steps:
1. Pre-processing: This step prepares the training and validation
data, and includes data collection, cleaning, and labeling. Bench-
mark seismic datasets such as STEAD (Mousavi et al., 2019a),
INSTANCE (Michelini et al., 2021), and DiTing (Zhao et al.,
2022) provide high-quality labeled data for training and model
building. However, the number of these benchmark datasets
and their applications is limited. Alternatively, applying a cus-
tom seismic sample toolbox such as QuakeLabeler (Mai and
Audet, 2022) can generate labeled datasets for training based
on users’ demands. The quality and distribution of the training
data ingested by the DL algorithm have a large impact on the
performance of the resulting model. Good training data should
have qualities such as relevance, minimal labeling errors, wide
distribution representing various real-world classes, few missing
or repeated values, etc.
2. Training: In the training step, the pre-processed seismic data are
passed to a specific DL architecture to find patterns within the
seismic signals and learn to pick seismic phase arrival times.
Many DL models have been proposed recently, including U-Net
models such as BasicPhaseAE and PhaseNet (Woollam et al.,
2019; Zhu and Beroza, 2019). Convolutional and Recurrent Neu-
ral Network (CNN and RNN, respectively) earthquake event
detectors include CRED and DeepPhasePick (Mousavi et al.,
2019; Soto and Schurr, 2021), as well as more complex architec-
tures like Earthquake Transformer (EqT) that adds self-attention
layers (Mousavi et al., 2020).
3. Validation: Before building a final phase picker model, the val-
idation process allows testing the model against data that have
not been used for training. In general, 20% of the entire dataset
are retained and excluded from the training dataset. The perfor-
mance of the model on this validation set represents how likely
the model is to succeed in correctly predicting phases in the face
of independent seismic data. A trained model could either be
approved (i.e., deemed satisfactory), tuned, or rejected based on
the validation results (Livieris et al., 2020). The validation stage
should not be time-intensive; however, if the model is rejected,
the project returns to the training stage to revise the architecture
and parameters. This training and validation loop continues until
a model is approved.
4. Deployment: The approved DL picker moves on to the model
development stage and is then applied to different target re-
gions/datasets, or at various scales ranging from local and re-
gional scales to global scales, depending on the prescribed ar-
chitecture. It is common that a performing DL model fails to
yield satisfactory results using a new benchmark dataset or a
new target region (e.g.,
Woollam et al., 2022), meaning the
model has weak generalization. This may be due to different
data distributions between the training dataset and the data
collected from the regions of interest; DL models cannot guar-
antee performance if the new dataset is not statistically similar
to the training dataset. Such generalization issues almost always
arise, and there is always a limit for the performance of a DL
model (Münchmeyer et al., 2022).
To shorten the development cycle of DL phase pickers, transfer
learning (TL) has been shown to be an effective solution for efficient re-
producibility. TL builds new DL picker models from pre-trained models
using partially or fully pre-trained hyper-parameters (weights) and net-
work architectures to reduce the training time. This is a rapidly growing
field in DL research, which reduces the massive computation require-
ments and time resources, and improves upon data-deficient tasks. A
few early attempts have proven the success of TL, especially benefiting
research projects with too few data to train a full-scale model (Lapins
et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2022). For instance, TL was utilized in Italy
to enhance the earthquake ground shaking predictions using only a
limited amount of training events (a few hundreds) (Jozinović et al.,
2022). Another example is the Phase-Net model that was re-trained
using TL to augment the accuracy of mesoscale monitoring systems
in seismic phase picking (Chai et al., 2020). Nevertheless, in seismic
phase picking applications, TL only addresses specific situations, such
as extending the model’s application to other regions or seismic phase
types (Zhu et al., 2022). On the other hand, if a need arises to re-train
and deploy new models for specific data/regions, users need to consider
all steps of the model-building cycle and their technical requirements,
as outlined above. Although TL is an effective and flexible approach, its
implementation is often not straightforward. Seismologists who are not
familiar with neural networks and/or common programming languages
used in machine learning (e.g. Python) often find it time-consuming and
cumbersome to apply TL.
In other research fields that face similar challenges, the solution is
often to use professional interactive platforms to design, train, and de-
velop industry-level AI applications (Huang et al., 2017; Gibson et al.,
2018; Ma et al., 2019). Interactive DL platforms accelerate related
research, and reduce the number of repeated steps and duplicated
efforts among different research groups. For instance, in natural lan-
guage processing, notable projects include NVIDIA Transfer Learning
Toolkit (Gopalakrishnan et al., 2017) and EasyTransfer (Wang et al.,
2019). These platforms allow users to load existing models from built-
in libraries, configure training settings, and perform training, validation
and deployment with minimal programming operations. To the best
of our knowledge, no such platform exists in the seismological com-
munity. The only python toolkit with similar functions is Seisbench,
which implements previously published models that can be loaded to
reproduce the built-in models and datasets (Woollam et al., 2022).
However, if users want to use Seisbench to create new models or apply
them to new data, code rewriting becomes an unavoidable part of the
process; i.e., users need to learn the Seisbench API to write custom
codes with similar PyTorch syntax as Seisbench’s examples (Woollam
et al., 2022).
To address these challenges and accelerate the adoption and de-
velopment of DL pickers in seismology, we propose an easy-to-use,
no-code, interactive platform – the Blockly Earthquake Transformer
(BET) – for customizing DL pickers. BET uses Earthquake Transformer
(Mousavi et al., 2020) as its base model. It provides a user-friendly
interface to create new models and perform TF and fine-tuning using
an interactive approach. BET’s high flexibility and simplicity make it
possible for users with a wide range of background knowledge and
expertise to design and adjust DL models without in-depth DL knowl-
edge. Blockly Earthquake Transformer is open source and is released
under the MIT License. In the following section, we present the BET
infrastructure and its possible configurations. Next, we provide three
demos demonstrating BET’s efficiency, effectiveness, and scalability.
Finally, some potential applications of BET are discussed.
2. Methods
BET is entirely written in Python, combining Jupyter interactive
widgets and Voilà to render a stand-alone web application (Sila-
parasetty, 2020). The graphical interface of BET is shown in Fig. 1. The
BET dashboard allows users to design, analyze, and deploy industry-
level phase-picking projects with little to no prior experience in Python
or machine learning. For advanced users, built-in models and functions
are easy to extend or rewrite through revisable APIs that can be found
in the underlying Jupyter notebook.
Essentially, BET executes a tight pipeline of modules, which in-
cludes uploading datasets and pre-trained models (optional), setting up
model configurations, training, validating and deploying. Additionally,
built-in modules support automatic pre-processing of datasets, monitor-
ing training performance, and saving the training history (which can be
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 84–94
86
H. Mai et al.
Fig. 1. Screen capture of the blockly earthquake transformer dashboard. BET provides a complete interactive workflow. Users can run BET’s modules by defining their parameters
interactively.
reloaded to continue training or to restore a previous model version)
and diagnostic figures. Based on these utilities, users can either launch
and apply pre-trained models to new datasets or design new DL or TL
models in a short time frame.
2.1. Data management
Preparing a good quality dataset for neural network training and
model building is a challenging and labor-intensive task. It is often
complicated to set up a robust quality control procedure to eliminate
erroneous labels and make the distribution of training data as diverse
as possible. The BET data management module allows users to upload
seismograms, which will be saved in a single Hierarchical Data Format
version 5 (HDF5) archive file. The related information (metadata)
should be supplied in a comma-separated values (CSV) file. If the file
format of the uploaded dataset is compatible with STEAD (Mousavi
et al., 2019a), BET can automatically parse it. However, if there are
any complications, it is recommended to use QuakeLabeler (Mai and
Audet, 2022) first to convert the dataset into the STEAD format. If
the configuration of the uploaded data (e.g., sample length, input
channel size) conflicts with the model configuration requested, BET’s
data management module will initialize the built-in pre-processing
functions to attempt to fit the dataset into the model’s prerequisites,
if possible. For instance, if the length of raw seismic traces is less than
the model’s pre-defined channel length, the data augmentation module
will be activated to adaptively duplicate a fragment of the trace away
from the seismic signals to pad to the required sample length (see an
example in Fig. 2); if the length of raw seismic traces is non-uniform
and beyond the required input shape, a trimming method is applied to
crop the trace where seismic signals exist (Fig. 2).
2.2. Model setup
Two types of model installation options are available in BET: (1)
load a pre-trained model, and (2) create a new model. The first option
will initialize a DL model based on the selected pre-trained network
structure and hyper-parameters. The advantage of this option is that
training data size can be minimal since the common seismic signal
characteristics have been previously understood by the pre-trained
models. Later, users can apply transfer learning, fine-tuning, and/or
new model methods to customize models using a ‘‘warm start’’ (i.e., an
optimal solution to a simpler optimization problem that sets initial
values based on parameter information gained from a previous training
dataset). The option to create new models is targeted to advanced users
who wish to explore new architectures in addressing more complex
tasks, for which current DL pickers face obstacles. In either case, users
can use the BET dashboard to create model architectures without any
coding involved (Fig. 3).
2.2.1. Transfer learning and fine-tuning
Transfer learning and fine-tuning options help users to optimize the
performance of a pre-trained model to a new dataset (i.e., a new target
region, new epicentral distance ranges, or phase types) with minimum
effort. They minimize the model’s revision procedures, but often pro-
duce high-quality models that result in performance enhancement. In
transfer learning and fine-tuning, most of the hidden layers are set as
frozen layers, which means that their hyper-parameters will not be up-
dated during training; frozen layers will not cost further training time.
Therefore, most of the computation resources are instead dedicated to
the learning of new unique features representing a particular task or
dataset at the very bottom hidden layer (where more high-resolution
features are extracted from the data).
Note that the transfer learning and fine-tuning modes request users
to select one of BET’s supported pre-trained models (hyper-parameters
combined) in the model setup dashboard. This is the most convenient
way to start a new seismic signal detection/picker project when data
and/or computation resources are limited. The default transfer learning
mode is the easiest way to start a new project because it only requests
users to design input/output (I/O) channels and set training strategies.
If the transfer learning mode cannot capture the user’s performance
requirements, BET offers the fine-tuning mode to activate more frozen
layers and make small and precise adjustments of the model’s hyper-
parameters. This results in improved models but at the cost of an
increase in training time.
2.2.2. Creating new models
BET allows designing new DL models based on Earthquake Trans-
former(EqT)’s network architecture (Mousavi et al., 2020), which has
been one of the most successful deep learning approaches, both for
seismic signal detection and phase-picking tasks. In recent years, many
transfer learning applications have shown that EqT is well suited for
the migration to different phase-picking tasks after re-training or light-
weight model revisions (Xiao et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022; Jiang
et al., 2021). Fig. 4 shows the general EqT framework, which is used by
default by BET. Users can revise the framework by specifying different
arguments via this interactive form, e.g., numbers of filters, kernel
size, padding function, activation method, amount of 1D convolutional
neural network (CNN) blocks and bi-directional and uni-directional
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 84–94
87
H. Mai et al.
Fig. 2. Example of trimming and data augmentation. In 2a, the model’s input size requires 2500 sample points, but the raw data has 4500 sample points per trace. The BET
trimming module adaptively trims 2000 non-signal sample points from both ends of the raw trace. 2b is the trimmed trace which fits the input size. In 2c, another model’s input
size requires 4800 sample points, but the raw trace only has 2500 sample points per trace. The BET data augmentation module automatically adaptively duplicates 2300 non-signal
sample points that are pre-appended to the raw trace. 2d shows the trace after data augmentation.
Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of BET’s model setup framework. BET provides a visual interface for building and training neural networks. By default, the ’Create a New Model’
module allows users to select the number of layers, the number of units in each layer, etc., to fully design a new model. ’Transfer Learning’ and ’Fine Tuning’ modules can load
pre-trained model architectures and weights, then select to re-train part of the layers to improve the model’s accuracy in a short time.
long-short-term memory blocks. These arguments control the frame-
work of the newly created DL model, which will generate an EqT-like
DL picker. This customization can be done via the BET dashboard,
which means that no programming is required. Furthermore, BET also
provides the complete API hidden in its Jupyter notebook, giving
advanced users the possibility to rewrite or extend the other parts of the
network architecture, e.g., adding new types of neural network units.
2.3. Training configuration
Designing a training configuration is the last step before training
a DL model, and can be done interactively through the BET dash-
board (‘‘Training Configs’’; see Fig. 5). Most of these arguments are
straightforward, and their descriptions are shown in Table 1. The
most important part of the training configuration is the designing of
input/output (I/O) channels. Here we give a brief overview to help
users understand the mechanism of I/O channels in a DL picker.
2.3.1. Input channel
In a DL project, prepared datasets must be compatible with I/O
channels of the pre-trained model, e.g., the EqT model receives 3-
component seismic traces with 6000 sample points each (6000 ∗ 3).
If the new datasets do not satisfy the model’s input shape, errors will
be raised during training unless the data have been correctly trimmed
or augmented (Mousavi et al., 2020). This always hinders the quick
application of pre-trained DL models to new data; fortunately, BET
allows users to customize the input data shape. For instance, a single
trace input (e.g., 5000 ∗ 1) or multiple input channels (e.g., 6000 ∗ 5)
are allowed. Once users complete the parameter input form, BET will
automatically rewrite the input data format. To offer more flexibility,
BET will also check the compatibility between the training data and
the model’s input shape, and (if possible) automatically pre-process the
training data to ensure compatibility. Various input data sampling rates
are acceptable, making it possible to utilize a variety of datasets in the
DL models.
2.3.2. Output channel
The output channels represent the prediction probabilities of each
identified seismic signal or phase existing at each sample point. BET
defines output channels from a pre-defined list of phase types (or labels)
shown in Fig. 5. Based on the supported labels, various output combi-
nations can be formed. As a default, BET offers three major categories
of output channels: seismic signal detector, P-phase picker and S-phase
picker. Seismic signal detector distinguishes between seismic signals
and noise. Note that, in contrast to the original EqT model output that
annotates the full length of the seismic signal on the seismograms, the
seismic signal detector channel in BET annotates a very limited time
window (about 1–2 s), which is similar to the phase picker channels.
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 84–94
88
H. Mai et al.
Fig. 4. Screen capture of BET’s model setup dashboard, with the ‘‘Create New Model’’ tab activated. Users can customize the model architecture via this dashboard to build new
models at different scales.
Fig. 5. Screen capture of BET’s training configuration dashboard. In this dashboard, users can select different training options, i.e., TL, fine-tuning or training a new model, and
other training related arguments.
Table 1
Training configuration.
Argument name
Description
Train–Test Split Ratio
Retained data used to test model performance.
Drop Rate
Dropping out rates (to avoid over-fitting).
Batch Size
Amount of training examples utilized in one iteration.
Epoch
One training iteration.
Patience
The number of epochs to wait before an early stop if
there is no progress.
Output Name
Folder name of the generated DL/TL model.
Experimental results showed that, in this way, convergence of the
model is faster during training. For the phase picker channels, users
can select the default P and S pickers, or additional channel identifiers,
i.e., P, Pg, Pn, S, Sg, Sn, etc, if those labels are available in the training
metadata (i.e., catalog picks). BET will automatically rewrite the output
channels based on these selections. Alternatively, users can use the
default P and S labels as surrogate for other binary labels, for example,
blasts and natural earthquakes, to start training a new model for the
discrimination of anthropogenic and natural events.
2.4. From performance to deployment
2.4.1. Training performance
BET has a built-in visualization tool to display the training perfor-
mance and monitor the loss function of all defined phase types. The
loss function is a method to evaluate the difference between predicted
seismic arrival times and the ground truth labels (authentic phase
labels), where loss is proportional to error rate (Christoffersen and
Jacobs, 2004). For example, in Fig. 6, the loss function decreases to
a very low rate and remains stable, which means a successful training
procedure is complete and the trained model has a very low probability
of making an erroneous prediction in arrival time. We note that not all
training procedures will be successful and generate ideal loss functions
like the ones shown in Fig. 6. For a well-trained dataset, generally 25
training iterations (epochs) or greater are required to minimize loss for
P- and S-wave pickers and detectors. It is common to encounter loss
functions that remain high or fluctuate. In these cases, users need to
consider redesigning the network architecture and retraining it.
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 84–94
89
H. Mai et al.
Fig. 6. Screen capture of training performance. The loss function for each output channel and the overall loss decrease linearly with epoch until they reach a stable value, where
loss no longer decreases.
2.4.2. Validation and deployment
Validating the newly trained DL model is essential to ensure its
performance and accuracy (Eelbode et al., 2021). During validation,
a sufficient quantity of samples in proportion to the overall size of
the dataset, but not considered in the training set, is used to validate
the model’s performance. These samples are preserved from the split
dataset. If the validation results are as good as in the training dataset,
the model has not been over-fitted and the new picker is ready to be
deployed. Although there are no standards for evaluating a model, BET
provides three types of supporting files to help users evaluate their
trained models. In the specified output folder, users can find detailed
test results to evaluate the model’s performance, i.e., a summary table
(*.CSV) containing all the picked results, a text file (*.TXT) reporting
the configuration parameters for prediction and model performance,
and a figure folder containing the picked arrivals (default: 10 exam-
ples of picks). BET also offers a deployment dashboard to quickly
apply newly trained pickers to large-scale datasets (see Fig. 7). When
the deployment is complete, BET exports several sample graphs and
human-readable documents to help users visualize and understand the
model predictions (see Fig. 13). These extensions provide ways to
visualize and understand model predictions, avoid repetitive labor and
let users focus on analyzing performance.
3. Prospective applications
In this section, we present three examples that cater to novice, in-
termediate and advanced users, respectively, to illustrate the flexibility
and applicability of BET for phase-picking projects. For novice users,
BET provides a convenient way to understand how deep learning mod-
els can be deployed in earthquake detection and phase-picking projects.
For intermediate users, BET can be used to train new deep learning
and/or transfer learning models to address specialized phase-picking
tasks. For advanced users, they can fully customize deep-learning mod-
els to create novel deep-learning pickers. The focus of this section is
to give users a quick overview of BET’s capabilities, rather than to
showcase the accuracy of any particular trained model. We will focus
on various case studies in future work.
3.1. Deploying pre-trained models for earthquake detection and phase pick-
ing
Using a pre-trained model can be a good way to get started with
deep learning, especially for novice users with little experience in DL
model training. To deploy a pre-trained EqT model on a new dataset,
the user may skip the training and validation steps, and start with
the deployment module. BET provides built-in, pre-trained models and
associated files, such as weights. Alternatively, users can download
pre-trained models, obtained from other transfer learning applications
using the EqT framework. The user then defines the model’s file path
on the BET deployment interface (see Fig. 8), and BET will load
the model, the associated weights and the configuration. Other than
choosing a pre-trained model, users only need to pass the new dataset
through the model and use the probability output to make predictions.
On the user’s end, BET requires the prepared dataset directory be
defined (see Fig. 8). The input dataset should be similar to the STEAD
dataset (Mousavi et al., 2019a) to avoid running into errors. Building
a dataset for deep learning may be challenging for novice users. To
remediate this, BET provides a tutorial notebook to convert seismic
data to a STEAD-like dataset. Alternatively, users can use QuakeLabeler
to generate a dataset that matches the STEAD format (Mai and Audet,
2022). As described previously, BET has an auto-preprocessing module
to adjust the input dataset (e.g., reshape the input size, drop data with
insufficient information, etc.) to avoid errors during deployment.
Here we use a built-in dataset in STEAD format to showcase how
to use the pre-trained EqT model to pick events. This dataset is the
same example dataset as the original Earthquake Transformer pack-
age (Mousavi et al., 2020); it contains 99 human-reviewed local earth-
quake events. To try this example, users can skip to the deployment
interface and press the ‘Predict’ button. BET will then load the pre-
trained EqT model automatically (see Fig. 8). Typically, it takes 1–
2 min to load the pre-trained model in the backend, depending on the
available computational resources. In the second step, BET will auto-
extract waveforms from the user input dataset directory’s HDF5 file and
send them to the model’s input channel. The pre-trained EqT model
predicts the probabilities of the P-phase and S-phase at each data point.
In the final step, all detected events are saved in a CSV file with some
example visuals stored in a separate folder.
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 84–94
90
H. Mai et al.
Fig. 7. Screen capture of validation and deployment dashboard. When the user finishes a training process, the validation and/or deployment dashboard can be activated based
on training results, e.g., input training output folder and other user-defined arguments.
Fig. 8. Screenshot of using a pre-trained model to detect and pick earthquake events. Users can use BET’s built-in pre-trained models (and weights) to predict earthquake events.
Following the procedure outlined in this paper, the user defines the file path and selects the ‘Predict’ button. BET automatically detects the earthquake events in the dataset and
generates results and example visuals in the output folder. The deployment stage generally takes a few minutes, depending on the size of the dataset and computational resources.
3.2. Training models on new datasets
Deploying an AI picker in a new scenario (e.g., different input
channel requirements, specific regions with no prior training data, etc.)
may require the laborious adaptation of previously published DL or TL
models. BET is designed to facilitate the training of new deep-learning
models on user-defined datasets. The first step for training a new model
is dataset preparation in the STEAD format. We illustrate the training
functionality in BET by collecting training data waveforms from the
Canadian National Seismograph Network, CNSN (Natural Resources
Canada, 1975) and events from the National Earthquake DataBase,
NEDB (Natural Resources Canada, 1985) for Cascadia Subduction Zone
seismicity between 2015-2019 (see Data and Resources). For the train-
ing dataset, a subset of 726 earthquakes, including 27,219 manual picks
of magnitude ≥ 2 (see Fig. 9) are extracted from the NEDB between
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 84–94
91
H. Mai et al.
Fig. 9. Geographic data distribution of earthquakes of magnitude M ≥ 2, from the training dataset extracted from the NEDB catalog (Natural Resources Canada, 1985) from
2015-01-01 to 2019-12-31. Blue triangles represent the seismic stations. Circles represent earthquakes, with size and color scaled to event magnitudes. The NEDB dataset contains
single trace P- and S-labeled, manually-picked phases and is used in this study as a training dataset to introduce BET’s training module.
2015-01-01 and 2019-12-31. A magnitude threshold of 2 was chosen
based on previous studies (Yeck et al., 2021). We first use this dataset
to evaluate the pre-trained EqT model for this new region (Cascadia)
and use transfer learning to improve the model.
The second step is to define the architecture of the model. Here
we select the ’Transfer Learning’ function for illustration. In the new
dataset, each sample uses one channel of input trace; the vertical
component for P arrivals and one horizontal component for S arrivals.
This input structure differs from most published DL models, making
direct application of the pre-trained EqT model challenging. However,
for transfer learning on the EqT model, the user needs only to specify
that the input shape is that of the original EqT model (i.e., 6000 ∗ 3)
and set up other arguments as shown in Table 2. The new dataset will
be automatically formatted as the EqT model, and fed into training
in BET’s backend. In this case, EqT pre-trained model weights are
acceptable as a warm start to accelerate model convergence.
The transfer learning and fine-tuning options are suitable for users
who do not have access to arrays of GPUs for computation. A single
desktop-level GPU (e.g., GTX 1080I) or workstation with CPU cores
(e.g., 8 cores of Intel i7) can complete a training step in a few hours.
When training is complete, the next step is to test the accuracy of
the trained picker in the validation dashboard. We use the validation
dataset (2721 samples), which gets automatically split when loading
the dataset, to test BET’s prediction accuracy. Performance comparison
of the original EQTransformer (V1.59) model and the BET newly-
trained transfer-learning model (Table 3), demonstrates that the new
picker has improved detection ability. The original EqT model’s low
accuracy suggests that the NEDB data distribution differs from the
STEAD dataset. Fig. 10 shows a predicted result from the newly trained
Table 2
Model configuration for Cascadia picker.
Model configuration
Input Dimension
(6000, 3)
Train–Test Spilt Ratio
0.8
Training Mode
Transfer learning
Drop Rate
0.2
Phase Types
P, S
Batch Size
100
Epochs
100
Patience
20
Table 3
Model performance on the CNSN/NEDB validation dataset.
Model
P-phase accuracy
S-phase accuracy
EQTransformer (V1.59)
73.9%
66.6%
BET New Trained Picker
92.3%
88.6%
picker. This example illustrates a promising method for improving
picking in a region where the DL model has never been applied.
3.3. Beyond P- and S-phase picking
Here we present a case where BET is used to train a comprehensive
AI phase picker to extend the detectability of P and S phase arrivals and
further include direct crustal phases (Pg and Sg) and/or Moho refracted
phases (Pn and Sn). We use BET’s fine-tuning mode to create the
model. In this example, we select all phase types in the configuration
dashboard (i.e., P, Pg, Pn, S, Sg, Sn), define the input channel as
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 84–94
92
H. Mai et al.
Fig. 10. Representative predicted P and S arrival in Cascadia test dataset. The trained picker correctly identifies P and S phase from a N-component seismic trace. The human-
reviewed P and S arrival times are taken from the NEDB catalog at station CN.BTB for a magnitude 2.0 event on 2015-01-02 at an epicentral distance of 78 km. The picker
predicts a high probability (>0.6) at the correct sample position.
Fig. 11. Geographic data distribution of the USGS dataset (Cole and Yeck, 2022) used
in this application. The blue triangles represent the available seismic stations. The
circles represent earthquakes color-coded by magnitude. The USGS dataset contains
human-reviewed P, Pn, Pg, S, Sn and Sg labeled samples, and is used here as a training
dataset to test BET’s applicability.
6000 ∗ 3 and use default values for all training settings. We download
three months (i.e., from June to September 2013) of data from the U.S.
Geological Survey (USGS) machine learning dataset (Cole and Yeck,
2022) and convert it into STEAD format. This USGS dataset is publicly
available and contains a wide range of human-reviewed samples of
the above 6 phase types. In this project, we set 0.8 as the training-
test-split ratio to produce 31,254 training samples and 7814 validation
samples (the data distribution map is shown in Fig. 11). In the USGS
dataset, each phase is centered in the trace, i.e., the original waveform
is sampled at 40 Hz with a start time 60 seconds before the first P-wave
arrival, so the arrival time is at the 2400 sample point. Therefore, the
original ground truth labels are fixed at a static position, which will
cause problems for the model in understanding the spatial features of
the picking tasks. However, once the data loading function is activated,
BET will automatically pre-process the dataset in its backend, augment
sample length to the input shape and randomize arrival positions to
avoid biased training.
In this example, training reaches its best performance after only
7 epochs, at which point the training is stopped automatically (after
2 h 20 min of training time). The pre-trained model (EqT version 1.59
Table 4
Transfer learning performance in USGS dataset.
Phase type
Last value of loss function
Accuracy in validation
P
0.0032257
99.5%
Pg
0.0100786
97.8%
Pn
0.0058863
98.2%
S
0.0113646
93.6%
Sg
0.0269472
94.5%
Sn
0.0420855
92.4%
model) provides the basic network structure and a warm start. In this
training solution, the total number of hyper-parameters is 378,667,
but there are only 4871 trainable hyper-parameters. The 373,796 non-
trainable hyper-parameters are frozen layer units. This significantly
reduces the training time and required data size. The training is mainly
limited to fine-tuning the new TL model to capture the characteristics
of new seismic phases (i.e., Pg, Pn, Sg, and Sn) by updating the learned
features at the final layers of the EqT baseline model, enabling the
model to distinguish between these phases. According to Table 4, the
last three epochs of loss value are relatively low (below 0.0420855),
indicating a successful training despite a low number of iterations and
training samples. The accuracy in the validation set also indicates that
this newly trained phase picker can correctly detect P, Pg, Pn, S, Sg, Sn
phases in the new data in a similar way as the usual P and S phases. The
output probability channel predicts relatively high values (i.e., Pn, Pg
channel > 0.8; Sn, Sg channel > 0.6) at the location of seismic arrivals
for the correct phase output channels (see Fig. 12), with other channels
correctly predicting very low probabilities (see Fig. 13).
4. Extensibility
BET allows users to customize various types of DL pickers. Based
on different types of datasets, BET can train models that encompass
regional to teleseismic events and identify signal types such as natural
earthquakes, explosions, volcanic or even vehicle tremors. In phase-
picking tasks, phase types are no longer limited to only P and S phases,
and can be extended to P, Pg, Pn, S, Sg, and Sn. Furthermore, advanced
users can implement other phase types (i.e., to distinguish between
natural earthquakes and blasts) by expanding BET’s output channels
at the scripting level. BET’s Jupyter notebook can be used to replace
the P and S types with Natural Earthquakes and Blasts, respectively.
Then, by running voila (Silaparasetty, 2020) to reinitialize BET, these 2
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 84–94
93
H. Mai et al.
Fig. 12. Representative predicted Pn and Sn arrivals in the USGS dataset (Cole and Yeck, 2022).The fine-tuned picker successfully detects a Pn-arrival and a Sn-arrival at station
AK.RC01 from the USGS validation dataset. This event is human-reviewed with a magnitude of 2.9 recorded at a distance of 161 km from the epicenter.
Fig. 13. Representative predicted Pg and Sg arrivals in the USGS dataset (Cole and Yeck, 2022).The custom BET picker successfully detects a Pg-arrival and a Sg-arrival at station
AK.EYAK from the USGS validation dataset. This event is human-reviewed with a magnitude of 2.9 recorded at a distance of 65 km from the epicenter.
new channels can be utilized for training. More complex extensions are
also allowable in BET’s scripting level and outlined in the user manual.
5. Conclusion
The application and development of DL models are steadily growing
in seismology. BET provides a user-friendly platform for engaging
a broader range of users, including those without machine learning
or coding experience. BET allows researchers to explore DL pickers
without having to worry about in-house computational power and
other technical concerns. BET will prove useful in improving model
performance and lowering the magnitude of completeness of exist-
ing seismic catalogues. Similar packages can be developed for other
seismological tasks, including those in exploration seismology, where
fine-tuning pre-trained models by synthetic data is even more common
due to the scarcity of large-scale labeled training datasets. Other appli-
cations of BET are in the discrimination between natural earthquakes
and anthropogenic events, where separate training datasets may be
developed for each event types. This package will be both practical
for students to understand deep learning applications and convenient
for research groups to deploy large-scale phase-picking tasks. The BET
package is available as a GitHub repository at https://github.com/
maihao14/BlocklyEQTransformer. We encourage users to contribute
trained models to enrich the library of BET models.
6. Data and resources
The (Canadian) National Earthquake Database may be found at ht
tps://www.earthquakescanada.nrcan.gc.ca/stndon/NEDB-BNDS/bullet
in-en.php (last accessed June 2023). At this time, the online database
is searchable from 1985 to present and returns only the solutions.
Solutions and phase information for older earthquakes may be obtained
by contacting http://nrcan.earthquakeinfo-infoseisme.rncan@canada.
ca. Waveform data and/or station metadata from the CNSN, may be
retrieved via FDSN dataselect webservice https://earthquakescanada.n
rcan.gc.ca/fdsnws/dataselect/1/, via FDSN station webservice https://
earthquakescanada.nrcan.gc.ca/fdsnws/station/1/, or via Station Book
https://earthquakescanada.nrcan.gc.ca/stndon/CNSN-RNSC/stnbook-c
ahierstn/index-en.php.
The Global Earthquake Machine Learning Dataset: Machine Learn-
ing Asset Aggregation of the PDE (MLAAPDE) from USGS may be
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 84–94
94
H. Mai et al.
found at https://www.sciencebase.gov/catalog/item/6127b30fd34e40
dd9c05094c (last accessed December 2022). USGS dataset provides 6
types of human-reviewed phases, i.e., P, Pg, Pn, S, Sg, Sn.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This research was funded by a Discovery Grant (RGPIN-2018-
03752) from the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council
of Canada (PA). The authors thank Stephen Crane, Laurel Sinclair,
two anonymous reviewers and the editor for their reviews of this
manuscript. This is NRCan publication number 20220610.
References
Beroza, G.C., Segou, M., Mostafa Mousavi, S., 2021. Machine learning and earthquake
forecasting—next steps. Nature Commun. 12 (1), 1–3.
Chai, C., Maceira, M., Santos-Villalobos, H.J., Venkatakrishnan, S.V., Schoenball, M.,
Zhu, W., Beroza, G.C., Thurber, C., Team, E.C., 2020. Using a deep neural network
and transfer learning to bridge scales for seismic phase picking. Geophys. Res. Lett.
47 (16), e2020GL088651.
Christoffersen, P., Jacobs, K., 2004. The importance of the loss function in option
valuation. J. Financ. Econ. 72 (2), 291–318.
Cole, H., Yeck, W.L., 2022. Global Earthquake Machine Learning Dataset: Machine
Learning Asset Aggregation of the PDE (MLAAPDE). US Geological Survey, URL
https://www.sciencebase.gov/catalog/item/6127b30fd34e40dd9c05094c.
Eelbode, T., Sinonquel, P., Maes, F., Bisschops, R., 2021. Pitfalls in training and
validation of deep learning systems. Best Pract. Res. Clin. Gastroenterol. 52,
101712.
Gibson, E., Li, W., Sudre, C., Fidon, L., Shakir, D.I., Wang, G., Eaton-Rosen, Z., Gray, R.,
Doel, T., Hu, Y., et al., 2018. NiftyNet: a deep-learning platform for medical
imaging. Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 158, 113–122.
Gopalakrishnan, K., Khaitan, S.K., Choudhary, A., Agrawal, A., 2017. Deep convolu-
tional neural networks with transfer learning for computer vision-based data-driven
pavement distress detection. Constr. Build. Mater. 157, 322–330.
Huang, L., Dong, X., Clee, T.E., 2017. A scalable deep learning platform for identifying
geologic features from seismic attributes. Lead. Edge 36 (3), 249–256.
Jiang, C., Fang, L., Fan, L., Li, B., 2021. Comparison of the earthquake detection abilities
of PhaseNet and EQTransformer with the Yangbi and Maduo earthquakes. Earthq.
Sci. 34 (5), 425–435.
Jozinović, D., Lomax, A., Štajduhar, I., Michelini, A., 2022. Transfer learning: Improving
neural network based prediction of earthquake ground shaking for an area with
insufficient training data. Geophys. J. Int. 229 (1), 704–718.
Koper, K.D., 2019. The importance of regional seismic networks in monitoring nuclear
test-ban treaties. In: AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts. Vol. 2019. pp. S14B–05.
Lapins, S., Goitom, B., Kendall, J.-M., Werner, M.J., Cashman, K.V., Hammond, J.O.,
2021. A little data goes a long way: Automating seismic phase arrival picking
at Nabro volcano with transfer learning. J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 126 (7),
e2021JB021910.
Livieris, I.E., Stavroyiannis, S., Pintelas, E., Pintelas, P., 2020. A novel validation
framework to enhance deep learning models in time-series forecasting. Neural
Comput. Appl. 32 (23), 17149–17167.
Ma, Y., Cao, S., Rector, J.W., Zhang, Z., 2020. Automated arrival-time picking using a
pixel-level network. Geophysics 85 (5), V415–V423.
Ma, Y., Eaton, D., Igonin, N., Wang, C., 2023. Machine learning-assisted processing
workflow for multi-fiber DAS microseismic data. Front. Earth Sci. 11.
Ma, Y., Yu, D., Wu, T., Wang, H., 2019. PaddlePaddle: An open-source deep learning
platform from industrial practice. Front. Data Domput. 1 (1), 105–115.
Mai, H., Audet, P., 2022. QuakeLabeler: A fast seismic data set creation and annotation
toolbox for AI applications. Seismol. Soc. Am. 93 (2A), 997–1010.
Michelini, A., Cianetti, S., Gaviano, S., Giunchi, C., Jozinovic, D., Lauciani, V., 2021.
INSTANCE–the Italian seismic dataset for machine learning. Earth Syst. Sci. Data
Discuss. 1–47.
Mousavi, S.M., Beroza, G.C., 2022a. Deep-learning seismology. Science 377 (6607),
eabm4470.
Mousavi, S.M., Beroza, G.C., 2022b. Machine learning in earthquake seismology. Ann.
Rev. Earth Planet. Sci. 51, 2023.
Mousavi, S.M., Ellsworth, W.L., Zhu, W., Chuang, L.Y., Beroza, G.C., 2020. Earth-
quake transformer—an attentive deep-learning model for simultaneous earthquake
detection and phase picking. Nature Commun. 11 (1), 1–12.
Mousavi, S.M., Sheng, Y., Zhu, W., Beroza, G.C., 2019a. Stanford earthquake dataset
(STEAD): A global data set of seismic signals for AI. IEEE Access 7, 179464–179476.
Mousavi, S.M., Zhu, W., Sheng, Y., Beroza, G.C., 2019. CRED: A deep residual network
of convolutional and recurrent units for earthquake signal detection. Sci. Rep. 9
(1), 1–14.
Münchmeyer, J., Woollam, J., Rietbrock, A., Tilmann, F., Lange, D., Bornstein, T.,
Diehl, T., Giunchi, C., Haslinger, F., Jozinović, D., et al., 2022. Which picker fits my
data? A quantitative evaluation of deep learning based seismic pickers. J. Geophys.
Res. Solid Earth 127 (1), e2021JB023499.
Natural Resources Canada, 1975. Canadian National Seismograph Network [dataset].
Int. Fed. Digit. Seismogr. Netw. http://dx.doi.org/10.7914/SN/CN.
Natural Resources Canada, 1985. Canadian National Earthquake Database [dataset].
Can. Hazards Inf. Serv. http://dx.doi.org/10.17616/R3TD24.
Silaparasetty, N., 2020. Introduction to jupyter notebook. In: Machine Learning
Concepts with Python and the Jupyter Notebook Environment. Springer, pp.
91–118.
Soto, H., Schurr, B., 2021. DeepPhasePick: a method for detecting and picking seismic
phases from local earthquakes based on highly optimized convolutional and
recurrent deep neural networks. Geophys. J. Int. 227 (2), 1268–1294.
Wang, J., Chen, Y., Yu, H., Huang, M., Yang, Q., 2019. Easy transfer learning by
exploiting intra-domain structures. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on
Multimedia and Expo. ICME, IEEE, pp. 1210–1215.
Woollam, J., Münchmeyer, J., Tilmann, F., Rietbrock, A., Lange, D., Bornstein, T.,
Diehl, T., Giunchi, C., Haslinger, F., Jozinović, D., et al., 2022. SeisBench—A
toolbox for machine learning in seismology. Seismol. Soc. Am. 93 (3), 1695–1709.
Woollam, J., Rietbrock, A., Bueno, A., De Angelis, S., 2019. Convolutional neural
network for seismic phase classification, performance demonstration over a local
seismic network. Seismol. Res. Lett. 90 (2A), 491–502.
Xiao, Z., Wang, J., Liu, C., Li, J., Zhao, L., Yao, Z., 2021. Siamese earthquake
transformer: A pair-input deep-learning model for earthquake detection and phase
picking on a seismic array. J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 126 (5), e2020JB021444.
Yeck, W.L., Patton, J.M., Ross, Z.E., Hayes, G.P., Guy, M.R., Ambruz, N.B., Shelly, D.R.,
Benz, H.M., Earle, P.S., 2021. Leveraging deep learning in global 24/7 real-time
earthquake monitoring at the National Earthquake Information Center. Seismol.
Soc. Am. 92 (1), 469–480.
Zhang, M., Liu, M., Feng, T., Wang, R., Zhu, W., 2022. LOC-FLOW: An end-to-end
machine learning-based high-precision earthquake location workflow. Seismol. Soc.
Am. 93 (5), 2426–2438.
Zhao, M., Xiao, Z., Chen, S., Fang, L., 2022. DiTing: A large-scale Chinese seismic
benchmark dataset for artificial intelligence in seismology. Earthq. Sci. 35, 1–11.
Zhu,
W.,
Beroza,
G.C.,
2019.
PhaseNet:
a
deep-neural-network-based
seismic
arrival-time picking method. Geophys. J. Int. 216 (1), 261–273.
Zhu, J., Fang, L., Miao, F., Fan, L., Zhang, J., Li, Z., 2022. Deep learning and transfer
learning of earthquake and quarry-blast discrimination: Applications to southern
California and eastern Kentucky.
