BOOK REVIEWS
Review of books in the area of User Interface Design
User interface design or user interface engineering is the design of computers,
mobile communication devices, software applications, websites with the focus
on the user’s experience and interaction. The goal of user interface design is to im-
prove users experience with simplicity and efﬁciency while keeping the design ergo-
nomically sound. In literature this phenomenon is known as ‘‘User Centered
Design’’. The term user friendly is often used as a synonym for usability which de-
notes the ease with which people can employ a particular tool or other human-
made object in order to achieve a particular goal.
The key beneﬁts of usability are increased user efﬁciency and productivity,
reduced development costs and most importantly increased customer satisfaction.
The improved interface would also tend to lower the time needed to perform nec-
essary tasks. Usability is now recognized as an important software quality attri-
bute, earning its place among more traditional attributes such as performance
and robustness. Indeed, various academic programs in Information technology
and software development around the globe focus on usability design and
engineering.
Here we review recently published popular books in the area of User Interface
Design.
Helen Sharp, Yvonne Rogers and Jenny Preece, Interaction Design: Beyond
Human-Computer Interaction, Publisher: Wiley; 2 edition (March 23, 2007),
ISBN-13: 978-0470018668
Beyond Interaction Design is an important book for designing effective and
capable interfaces to software applications. The book provides a comprehensive
Peer
review
under
responsibility
of
King
Saud
University.
doi:10.1016/j.aci.2010.12.001
Production and hosting by Elsevier
Applied Computing and Informatics (2011) 9, 79–82
King Saud University
Applied Computing and Informatics
www.ksu.edu.sa
www.sciencedirect.com
look at the entire set of requirements involved with design. The authors show that
there is much more to systems design than end-user requirements and CGI scripts.
Effective HCI is a multi-disciplinary area including psychology, sociology, anthro-
pology, information systems, and computer science. The book notes that there has
never been a greater need for interactions designers and usability engineers to de-
velop current and next-generation interaction technologies. To be successful in the
interface design game, programmers need a mixed set of skills, which is not an easy
task.
Interaction Design comprises 15 densely packed chapters that integrate all of
the various cognitive, social, and other issues that are germane to interaction de-
sign. Chapter 1 provides an overview of what makes for good and bad designs.
Chapter 3 gets into the psychological aspect of HCI and looks at cognition and
how users interact with the systems they implement. None of the books makes
for easy reading, as the topics at hand are often multifaceted and complex.
Chapter 6 deals with the process of interaction design and for the most part ends
the psychological approach, while Chapters 7 through 10 deal with the actual
design of the system. The book has a number of real-world case studies, and also
includes interviews with various authorities on HCI.
Ben Shneiderman, Catherine Plaisant, Maxine Cohen, Steven Jacobs, Designing
the User Interface: Strategies for Eﬀective Human-Computer Interaction - 5th
edition, Publisher: Pearson /Addison Wesley 5th edition (2009), ISBN: 0-321-
26978-0
Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human-Computer
Interaction provides a comprehensive introduction to the dynamic ﬁeld of
human-computer interaction (HCI). An expanded author team brings unparal-
leled industry and academic experience to this latest edition. Practical techniques,
research-supported design guidelines, and a multitude of current examples and
ﬁgures illustrate good design principles and practices, effectively guiding readers
through their ﬁrst HCI design projects.
Covering just about every major HCI topic, from basic usability and design
processes to design for mobile and social environments, this book offers a very
broad summary of the ﬁeld. It also introduces more advanced topics, such as
search interfaces and information visualization among others giving readers entry
points into important trends.
Steven Heim, The Resonant Interface: HCI Foundations for Interaction Design,
Publisher: Pearson /Addison Wesley (January 1, 2008), ISBN: 978-0-321-37596-4
In an age of ubiquitous computing it is essential that Interaction Design be
based on the rich foundation of HCI research and knowledge. The Resonant
Interface does that and more. It moves beyond the traditional scope of human-
computer interaction (HCI) and is based on the concept of active learning that
80
Basit Qureshi
integrates theory and practice. The author reasons for using design standards and
the detailed consequences of poor design are backed up by research. He gives
speciﬁc recommendations for standards, such as typefaces, point size, label and
caption styles. He explains and uses good short hand throughout the book for
items as ‘‘signal’’ versus ‘‘noise.’’ This is handy to quickly distinguish between
things that are good/favorable/communicative/useful compared to things that
are interfering/obstructive/not useful. This is an excellent book for anyone want-
ing to understand the ‘‘why’’ of good screen design and then learn the ‘‘what.’’
Laura Leventhal, Julie Barnes, Usability Engineering: Process, Products &
Examples, Publisher: Prentice Hall; 1 edition (May 3, 2007), ISBN-13: 978-
0131570085
This comprehensive introduction to usability engineering takes a project-based
approach to the development process. The book provides detailed coverage of the
fundamentals without unnecessary depth or breadth, focusing readers on under-
standing the goals and processes of usability engineering. It also covers the entire
usability engineering lifecycle, emphasizing select techniques and methodologies;
illustrates the user interface development process with examples from a med-
ium-scale development example.
Each chapter’s introduction describes key design concepts that are often misun-
derstood, such as affordances, visual hierarchy, navigational distance, and the use
of color. These give a deeper understanding of why the patterns work, and how to
apply them with more insight.
Matt Jones, Gary Marsden, Mobile Interaction Design, Publisher: Wiley
(February 10, 2006), ISBN-13: 978-0470090893
Mobile Interaction Design concentrates on developing interfaces and devices
with a great deal of sensitivity to human needs, desires and capabilities. The book
presents key interaction design ideas and successes in an accessible, relevant way.
It provides ideals and techniques which will enable designers to create the next
generation of effective mobile applications. Critiques current mobile interaction
design (bloopers) to help designers avoid pitfalls. Design challenges and worked
examples are given to reinforce ideas. Also it discusses the new applications and
gadgets requiring knowledgeable and inspired thinking about usability and design.
The book has informal case studies of actual product design methods used by
Nokia, HP and other companies.
Barbara Ballard, Designing the Mobile User Experience, Publisher: Wiley (April
16, 2007), ISBN-13: 978-0470033616
Designing the Mobile User Experience provides the experienced product devel-
opment professional with an understanding of the users, technologies, devices,
BOOK REVIEWS
81
design principles, techniques and industry players unique to the mobile and wire-
less space. The author describes the different components affecting the user expe-
rience and principles applicable to the mobile environment, enabling the reader to
choose effective technologies, platforms, and devices, plan appropriate application
features, apply pervasive design patterns, and choose and apply appropriate
research techniques. This book also provides WAP design advice and detailed ad-
vice for FlashLite, UIOne, SVG, tat, Java, and other environments.
Basit Qureshi
College of Computer and Information Systems, Prince Sultan University, Saudi Arabia
E-mail address: qureshi@psu.edu.sa
Available online 16 December 2010
82
Basit Qureshi
