EDITORIAL
This issue of Saudi Journal for Applied Computing and Informatics is the sec-
ond issue of the eighth volume for the year 2010.
This issue contains four articles of scientiﬁc research in the area of Informa-
tion Technology that serves the business sector, which is in accordance with the
policies of this journal. These articles are:
1. ‘‘Experiments on Adaptation of foreign accented speakers in native Arabic
ASR systems’’ by Sid-Ahmed Selouania, Yousef Ajami Alotaibib
a LARIHS Lab. Universite´ de Moncton, Campus de Shippagan, Canada
E-mail: selouani@umcs.ca
b Computer Engineering Department, King Saud University, Saudi Arabia
E-mail: yalotaibi@ccis.ksu.edu.sa
In this paper the authors addressed the adaptation of Arabic speech recogni-
tion systems to foreign accented speakers. This adaptation is accomplished by
using the adaptation techniques; namely, the Maximum Likelihood Linear Re-
gression (MLLR), the Maximum a posteriori (MAP), and the combination of
MLLR and MAP. The LDC-WestPoint Modern Standard Arabic corpus and
HTK toolkit were used throughout all experiments. The authors evaluated the
systems and presented interesting results that provide higher improvements
while using a combination of MLLR and MAP.
2. ‘‘Assessing the Quality of Web Sites’’ by Layla Hasana, Emad Abuelrubb
a Department of MIS, Zarqa Private University, Jordan
b Department of Computer Science, Zarqa Private University, Jordan
The authors presented a new review of the most recent evaluation criteria
methods which were used in diﬀerent e-business services. Furthermore, they pro-
Applied Computing and Informatics (2011) 9, vi–viii
King Saud University
Applied Computing and Informatics
www.ksu.edu.sa
www.sciencedirect.com
Peer
review
under
responsibility
of
King
Saud
University.
doi:10.1016/S2210-8327(11)00014-7
Production and hosting by Elsevier
posed new general criteria for evaluating the quality of any website regardless of
the type of service that it oﬀers. The dimensions of the criteria are content qual-
ity, design quality, organization quality, and user-friendly quality. The authors
showed that these dimensions together with their comprehensive indicators and
check list can be used by web designers and developers to create quality websites
to improve the electronic service and then the image of any organization on the
Internet.
3. ‘‘E-learning in the Saudi Tertiary Education: Potential and Challenges’’ by
Khlood Al-Siraihi Al-Harbi, University of Leicester, UK E-mail: ka41@le.ac.uk
The paper addresses the factors that inﬂuence e-learning in Saudi higher edu-
cation through analyzing the perceptions and attitudes of Saudi university stu-
dents. The author reports the results of a survey conducted to investigate the
acceptance of e-learning in a Saudi higher education institution as perceived
by university students. The author demonstrated that attitudes toward e-learn-
ing, subjective norms, perceived behavioral control as well as e-learning systems
attributes were critical determinants of students’ behavioral intention to use e-
learning.
4. ‘‘Modeling the electronic transactions acceptance using an extended technol-
ogy acceptance model’’ By Said S. Al-Gahtani, Administrative Sciences Depart-
ment, King Khalid University, P.O. Box 1183, Abha, Saudi Arabia
The author attempts to integrate the well-established technology acceptance
model (TAM) with three parameters; namely trust, credibility and risk, which
are of paramount importance in predicting individual acceptance of on-line
transactions. This study seeks empirical support for an extended TAM with
three constructs related to e-transactions in Saudi Arabia. The author shows
that each of trust, credibility and risk plays an important role toward the accep-
tance of online transactions in the Saudi settings.
In addition to these four articles, this issue includes one book review:
Book Review ‘‘User Interface Design Book Review’’ By Basit Qureshi, Prince
Sultan University, Saudi Arabia E-mail: Qureshi@cis.psu.edu.sa
This review discussed diﬀerent new books that focus on the development of
the user interfaces. The key beneﬁts of usability are increased user eﬃciency
and productivity, reduced development costs and most importantly increased
customer satisfaction. User interface design or user interface engineering is the
design of computers, mobile communication devices, software applications,
websites with the focus on the user’s experience and interaction. The goal of user
interface design is to improve users experience with simplicity and eﬃciency
while keeping the design ergonomically sound. In literature this phenomenon
Editorial
vii
is known as ‘‘User Centered Design’’. The author reviewed a set of recently pub-
lished popular books in the area of User Interface Design.
I hope that this issue will contribute in increasing the reader’s knowledge in
the ﬁeld of Communications and Information Technology and take us closer
to ICT best practice.
Professor Majed Abdullah Al-Mashari Al-Saud
viii
Editorial
