Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100047 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ailsci 
Research Article 
Modeling bioconcentration factors in ﬁsh with explainable deep learning 
Linlin Zhao a , Floriane Montanari b , Henry Heberle a , Sebastian Schmidt c , ∗ 
a Bayer AG, Crop Science Division, Field Solutions, Monheim 40789, Germany 
b Bayer AG, Pharmaceuticals Division, Machine Learning Research, Berlin 13353, Germany 
c Bayer AG, Crop Science Division, Regulatory Science, Monheim 40789, Germany 
a r t i c l e 
i n f o 
Keywords: 
Bioaccumulation 
Bioconcentration factor 
BCF 
QSAR 
Multitask learning 
Explainable AI 
Environmental safety 
a b s t r a c t 
The Bioconcentration Factor (BCF) is an important parameter in the environmental risk assessment of chemicals, 
relevant for industrial and academic research as well as required in many regulatory contexts. It represents the 
potential of a substance to accumulate in organic tissues or whole animals and is most frequently measured in 
ﬁsh. However, animal welfare reasons, throughput limitations, and costs push the need for alternative methods 
that allow accurate and reliable estimations of BCF in silico. We present a new deep learning model to predict BCF 
values from chemical structures, that outperforms currently available models ( 𝑅 2 of 0.68 and RMSE of 0.59 log 
units on an external test set; 𝑅 2 of 0.70 and RMSE of 0.74 log units in a demanding cluster split validation). The 
model is based on molecular representations encoded as CDDD descriptors and exploits a large in-house dataset 
with measured logD values as an auxiliary task. 
Additionally, we developed a post-hoc explainability method based on SMILES character substitutions to ac- 
company our predictions with atom-level interpretations. These sensitivity scores highlight the most inﬂuential 
moieties in the molecule and can help to understand the predictions better and design new molecules. 
1. Introduction 
The bioconcentration factor (BCF) represents the tendency of a 
chemical to accumulate in organic tissues or living animals - typically 
ﬁsh. It is deﬁned as the ratio between the concentration in the organism 
and the concentration in the surrounding water phase at steady-state 
conditions in the laboratory [1] . Oftentimes, this ratio is normalized to 
a ﬁxed lipid content (5%) of the test organism. Common test species are 
fathead minnow, bluegill sunﬁsh, or rainbow trout. 
BCF values are required for environmental hazard and risk assess- 
ments around the globe and used as optimization criterion to select or 
design new chemicals with more benign environmental proﬁles. How- 
ever, for a BCF study according to OECD Guideline 305 [1] and fulﬁlling 
global regulatory requirements, more than 200 test animals are needed 
per test molecule. Even screening-level studies still require around 30 
test animals to be reliable. Obviously, there is a strong desire to min- 
imize vertebrate testing, and many stakeholders are joining forces. A 
prominent example is the 3R strategy followed by the European Com- 
mission [2] and US Environmental Protection Agency [3] to reduce, re- 
ﬁne, and replace animal tests. In silico models are a fundamental build- 
ing block in these endeavors, but they need to be accurate, reliable, 
and ideally provide mechanistic insights and indicate their limitations 
or uncertainties. 
∗ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: sebastian.schmidt1@bayer.com (S. Schmidt) . 
Multiple quantitative structure-property/activity relationships 
(QSAR models) have already been developed for predicting BCF from 
molecular structures (see two recent comparative studies [4,5] ). Many 
of these models rely on the water-octanol partition coeﬃcient (Kow) 
and additional features of the molecular structures with varying 
complexity. One of the most well-known models is the BCF model by 
Meylan [6] as implemented in the US-EPA’s EPISuite [7] , which is 
among the best performers and applicable to a relatively broad range 
of chemicals [4,5] . It is a linear regression model based on logKow and 
a list of correction factors for several molecular substructures. 
The Kow has been demonstrated to be a good substitute for the parti- 
tioning of the substance between water and lipids of the organisms [8] , 
but this approach also has some limitations, especially for hydrogen- 
bond donors, polar, or ionic compounds, which have stronger inter- 
actions with membrane lipids compared to storage lipids or octanol 
[4,8,9] . Thus, additional descriptors are required to cover these interac- 
tions. Besides the water-lipid partitioning, other processes like kinetic 
restrictions of uptake or elimination, metabolism, and speciﬁc interac- 
tions like binding to proteins are important for a complete mechanistic 
understanding and better predictions of bioaccumulation [4] . 
Besides mechanistic aspects, the predictivity of BCF models is gen- 
erally limited by the small amount of experimental studies, the varying 
reliability and heterogeneity of the data, and imbalances in coverage of 
the chemical space and BCF ranges. In addition, trade-oﬀs often have 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ailsci.2022.100047 
Received 28 September 2022; Received in revised form 2 November 2022; Accepted 16 November 2022 
Available online 2 December 2022 
2667-3185/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ) 
L. Zhao, F. Montanari, H. Heberle et al. 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100047 
to be made between predictive performance and interpretability. The 
former is often achieved with more complex models, while the latter is 
easier for less complex models. Evaluating the reliability of individual 
predictions of complex “black box ” models is a challenge. 
In recent years, Deep Learning models have been successfully em- 
ployed for diﬀerent molecular property predictions [10,11] . Com- 
mon modeling strategies involve fully connected networks from 
pre-computed molecular ﬁngerprints [12] or latent representations 
[13] and, when enough training data is available, end-to-end training 
with graph convolutional networks (GCNs) [14,15] . In low data regimes, 
as is often the case in toxicology, unsupervised pretraining on molecular 
representations like SMILES or InChI codes can provide powerful repre- 
sentations that can be ﬁne-tuned on the available labeled data [16,17] . 
The complexity of Deep Learning models for QSAR has increased the 
need for equally powerful interpretability methods [18–20] . These are 
crucial to gain trust in the model, understand its limitations, and support 
the user’s knowledge and intuition in the process of property optimiza- 
tion and molecular design. Explanations for QSAR models can take the 
form of atomic attributions [21,22] (particularly for GCNs [23,24] ), fea- 
ture importances [25] (using packages such as SHAP [26] ), or substruc- 
ture importances [27] . Counterfactuals [28] and activity cliﬀ [29] ap- 
proaches have also been proposed, which explain a particular predic- 
tion by selecting other examples with similar structure but diﬀerent out- 
come. 
In this work, we present a new model for predicting BCF, which ad- 
dresses some of the diﬃculties mentioned above. In particular, we make 
use of recent advances in the ﬁelds of deep learning and explainability. 
The model is built on the CDDD descriptors [13] , which are a learned 
representation of an autoencoder model for the translation of molecular 
structures in SMILES format. This provides a continuous representation 
of the chemical space and avoids the manual deﬁnition of molecular 
features or substructures. We use a multitask learning approach to pre- 
dict simultaneously logBCF and logKow. This approach addresses the 
small size of available BCF datasets by exploiting large available logKow 
datasets as an auxiliary task. The choice of logKow as auxiliary task is 
based on data availability, known correlation with BCF, and previous 
work in the literature demonstrating BCF prediction improvement upon 
transfer learning of logKow [30] . 
To overcome the mentioned trade-oﬀ between predictivity and inter- 
pretability, we developed an explainability module on top of our deep 
learning model. It is based on SMILES string substitutions and is partic- 
ularly suitable for models built on CDDD descriptors, regardless of the 
machine learning algorithm used. The output quantiﬁes the inﬂuence of 
each character in the input SMILES on the predicted BCF or Kow val- 
ues. We name the resulting character scores sensitivity scores in the rest 
of the work. We explore the agreement between the sensitivity scores for 
Kow predictions with basic chemistry knowledge and check the robust- 
ness of the scores for symmetric molecules. We compare the sensitivity 
scores summed up over entire functional groups with known correction 
factors for lipophilicity from the literature. We show that our model is 
able to recognize the molecular context, which is a signiﬁcant advantage 
over classical group contribution methods that employ a ﬁxed contribu- 
tion for given functional groups in all molecules. Finally, by comparing 
explanations for the Kow and BCF endpoints, we can retrieve known 
mechanistic eﬀects such as metabolism. 
2. Methods 
2.1. Data 
Experimental BCF data for model training was taken from Grisoni 
et al. [4] . They compiled BCF values for 1056 compounds by merging 
three datasets, which had been used for the development of BCF QSAR 
models, and 45 compounds with special metabolism or known Kow- 
BCF relationships (e.g., pyrethroids, organophosphorus compounds, 
perﬂuorinated and polychlorinated compounds). In terms of chemi- 
cal space, this set covers a broad range of chemical classes, including 
aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons, alcohols, amines, esters, amides, 
ethers, phenols, anilines, heteroaromatics, nitroaromatics, organochlo- 
rines, organophosphates, sulfonic acids, and thiols. In terms of use 
classes, this set contains industrial chemicals, agrochemicals, pharma- 
ceuticals, plant secondary metabolites, and pollutants. All BCF values 
refer to the wet weight of the whole ﬁsh and were not normalized on 
lipid content, which is the most frequent form in scientiﬁc literature 
and the basis for calibration of most available QSAR models. The set 
contains two duplicate entries for glyphosate and 2,2-dichloropropionic 
acid. The logBCF values for the latter were very similar and we kept the 
average. However, the BCF values for glyphosate diﬀered signiﬁcantly. 
We therefore kept only the entry which agreed with the value given in 
the Pesticide Properties DataBase (PPDB [31] ). 
To build the external test set, we searched for BCF values in the 
PPDB [31] (as of 08-03-2022) that were neither part of our training 
dataset nor part of the Meylan model [6,7] training set. Only entries 
with an assigned quality level of 4 or 5 were kept, which means the 
endpoints have been reviewed and curated by the PPDB providers and 
were used for regulatory purposes in the majority of the cases. To main- 
tain feasibility with our modelling approach, we excluded molecules 
containing metal atoms and stereoisomers with more than 0.8 log units 
diﬀerence in BCF between the isomers. Furthermore, we cross-checked 
the reliability of the data based on original study reports or public list 
of endpoints. This led to the correction of ﬂufenoxuron, spirodiclofen, 
metaﬂumizone, camphechlor and removal of aldicarb, vinclozolin, 1- 
dodecanol, and acrylonitrile from the set. However, we could not check 
ca. one third of the molecules because the data origin was not referenced 
precisely. In total, the ﬁnal curated test set contains 80 molecules. 
Experimental data for water-octanol distribution coeﬃcients (logD) 
of 63,127 compounds at neutral pH was taken from an in-house dataset, 
based on HPLC screening methods. In contrast to logP or logKow, which 
refer to the neutral molecule, logD refers to the total sum of the neutral 
molecule and all (de-)protonated species. Therefore, it is directly appli- 
cable also to molecules with acidic or basic properties. 36 molecules of 
the logD dataset overlap with the BCF dataset. Missing logD values for 
the remaining compounds from the BCF dataset were imputed with an 
in-house model for logD values at neutral pH (RMSE = 0.3, for a detailed 
description of the methodology see Montanari et al. [32] ). 
2.2. Molecular structures and descriptors 
All molecular structures were normalized with routine workﬂows 
that standardize charges, keep only the largest fragment (strip oﬀ salt 
counter ions), clear the stereo information, deprotonate bases, proto- 
nate acids, and canonicalize tautomers. Finally, canonical non-isomeric 
SMILES codes were generated as structure representation for each 
molecule. 
All canonical SMILES strings were encoded by the CDDD encoder 
[13] to 512 dimensional descriptors without any further pre-processing 
by CDDD. Note that this circumvents the applicability domain restric- 
tions imposed by the CDDD pipeline (logP -5 to 7; molecular weight 
12 to 600 g/mol; 3 to 50 heavy atoms) and aﬀected around 3% of the 
molecules from our datasets. For a discussion of the impact of this de- 
cision, see subsection Applicability Domain. Nine molecules had to be 
excluded from the training set at this stage, because they contain Sn, 
which is not part of the CDDD vocabulary. 
Additionally, we generated ten randomized SMILES strings for each 
molecule using RDKit [33] and calculated the CDDD descriptors the 
same way as described above for the canonical SMILES. 
2.3. Training, validation and external test sets 
To avoid potential information leakage or biases towards subsets 
during model training, the compounds from the combined BCF and logD 
2 
L. Zhao, F. Montanari, H. Heberle et al. 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100047 
Table 1 
Cluster splits: number of compounds from each task in each cluster. 
Cluster 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
#compounds (BCF task) 
118 
19 
63 
61 
105 
280 
399 
#compounds (logD task) 8687 5376 21,359 2710 10,662 8255 6078 
datasets were clustered by similarity. For this, circular ﬁngerprints of ra- 
dius 6, folded to a 2048 vector length were calculated, and k-means clus- 
tering was applied with k = 10. Smaller clusters were merged to ensure 
that enough compounds with a BCF label are present in each cluster. 
The resulting partition is shown in Table 1 . The smallest cluster with 
19 BCF compounds comprising polyﬂuorinated molecules with high 
weights ( > 400 g/mol) was considered an outlier and excluded from our 
cross-validation processes. 
All our cross-validation routines were conducted on these cluster 
splits, for both single-task and multitask models. For training processes 
involving both hyperparameter optimizations and model selections, 
nested cross-validation [34] was employed to avoid optimistic biases 
when evaluating model performances. Nested cross-validation uses the 
data eﬀectively to create a series of data splitting (training, validation 
and test). Simple leave-one-cluster-out cross-validation was used when 
only tuning hyperparameters for ﬁxed model structures. 
The external test set containing 80 molecules from PPDB (see Data 
section) was compiled and used only after the model training had been 
completed. Both BCF datasets are made available as supplementary in- 
formation. 
2.4. Modeling approaches 
2.4.1. Single task models 
Support vector regressor (SVR), random forest (RF), and XGBoost 
were trained on the BCF data using the CDDD embeddings as input fea- 
tures. Nested cluster cross-validation was employed to perform hyper- 
parameter optimizations and model selection. Our cross-validated train- 
ing results showed that the CDDD descriptors work best in combination 
with SVR, as previously reported [13] . The optimal SVR has radial basis 
function as kernel, where the kernel coeﬃcient is 1/512, 𝜖 is 0.05, and 
the optimal regularization strength is 1. 
In addition, a simple linear regression model (ordinary least squares 
with default settings from scikit-learn) with in-house logD values as the 
only independent variable, and a null model taking the mean logBCF 
value as prediction were built on the BCF dataset. These two models are 
very simple baselines to benchmark the improvement of more sophisti- 
cated approaches. 
2.4.2. Multitask learning model 
Because logD is known to be tightly related to BCF (Pearson’s correla- 
tion coeﬃcient of 0.752 in our data), and we have a large logD dataset 
internally available, we developed a multitask model combining both 
endpoints. This model is built upon CDDD embeddings and is referred 
to as xBCF in the remaining text. The model architecture was kept very 
simple, with two fully-connected hidden layers of dimensions 600 and 
50 (see Fig. 1 ) predicting logD and logBCF values simultaneously. Recti- 
ﬁed Linear Units (ReLU) are used in the dense layers as nonlinear trans- 
form functions. 
A simple coeﬃcient weighting strategy was used to balance the in- 
dividual task losses in the loss function which can be formulated as 
 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 = 𝛼 𝑏 + (1 − 𝛼)  𝑑 , 
(1) 
where  𝑏 = ∑( ̂𝑦 𝑏 − 𝑦 𝑏 ) 2 ∕ 𝑛 𝑏 and  𝑑 are the mean squared errors (MSE) 
of logBCF and logD, respectively; 𝛼 ∈ (0 , 1) is the weighting coeﬃcient 
for the loss from logBCF to balance the learning between two tasks. 
Moreover, dropout regularization was applied to both 512-dimensional 
descriptors (optimal rate 0.2) and the ﬁrst hidden layer (optimal rate 
Fig. 1. Model structure of the xBCF multitask model based on CDDD descrip- 
tors. 
0.4). The BCF dataset was given higher weight by sampling with re- 
placement to match the logD dataset size. The loss weighting coeﬃ- 
cient 𝛼 was optimized during hyperparameter search looking only at 
logBCF performance; the ﬁnal optimal value was 0.01. The downstream 
network was optimized with leave-one-cluster-out cross validation by 
stochastic gradient descent with momentum of 0.9 and learning rate of 
0.005. In addition, early stopping was employed to avoid overﬁtting, 
where the patience and epoch number are ﬁnetuned during optimiza- 
tion. All hyperparameter values speciﬁed in the text were obtained by 
optimizing the loss function on an extensive hyperparameter grid. The 
training scripts and all optimal hyperparameters can be found in the 
supporting information. 
2.4.3. Literature models 
For comparison, we employed several publicly available and well- 
known BCF QSAR models. The Meylan [6] and Arnot-Gobas [35] mod- 
els were run using the BCFBAF module from the EPI Suite [7] in batch 
mode. In this setup the Meylan model estimates the logKow internally 
with the KOWWIN module [36] for use in its regression-based ap- 
proach with correction terms depending on the functional groups of 
the molecule. The Arnot-Gobas model is a physiology-based model that 
uses the same logKow estimation from KOWWIN and includes biotran- 
formation estimates based on functional groups, logKow, and molecular 
weight. We used the parameterization for the upper trophic level. In 
addition, the CAESAR [37,38] model (version 2.1.15) and KNN-Read- 
Across model (version 1.1.1) from the VEGA in silico platform [39] were 
used. CAESAR is a consensus model combining two radial basis function 
neural networks based on 2D structural and physicochemical descrip- 
tors. The KNN-Read-Across model calculates a similarity index [40] and 
selects the three most similar molecules from the training set. The ﬁ- 
nal BCF prediction is a weighted average of the selected molecules. 
Molecules for which VEGA reported low reliability were considered out- 
side the applicability domain of the model. OPERA [41] (v2.8) is a QSAR 
model suite for physico-chemical and environmental fate properties. We 
used its weighted k-nearest-neighbour model for logBCF (LogBCFv2.6, 
QMRF:Q17-24a-0023) including the internal structure standardization 
pre-processing steps. Additional recent articles [42,43] report results but 
do not share their models and therefore could not be compared with our 
approaches. 
2.5. Performance metrics 
Coeﬃcient of determination ( 𝑅 2 ) and root mean squared error 
(RMSE) were used as goodness-of-ﬁt metrics for evaluating model per- 
formances. In combination with Leave-One-Cluster-Out cross validation, 
𝑅 2 and 𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 were calculated on the entire BCF and logD datasets. For 
instance, when cluster 𝑖 was chosen as validation set, the model trained 
on the rest of the clusters predicted compounds in cluster 𝑖 . This proce- 
3 
L. Zhao, F. Montanari, H. Heberle et al. 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100047 
Fig. 2. Illustrating the character substitution method. 
dure was repeated for each cluster until all compounds were predicted 
once, then the metrics were calculated on the predictions of all clusters. 
2.6. Explanation methods 
To explain our BCF model, we borrowed ideas from post-hoc pertur- 
bation methods, feature ablation and occlusion [44,45] . The aim is to 
establish a gradient-free method for assessing the importance of indi- 
vidual SMILES characters. In general, such methods replace the original 
input features with a baseline value to create a perturbed input. It is 
expected that the more important a feature is, the greater the change in 
prediction its replacement will lead to. To put it formally in the context 
of BCF modeling, let 𝑓 ∶ ℝ 𝑣 ×𝑛 → ℝ 2 be the model that maps the one- 
hot encoded SMILES strings (vocabulary size of 𝑣 and length of 𝑛 ) to the 
two target endpoints (here logBCF and logD). Supposing ̃𝑥 𝑖 ∈ ℝ 𝑣 ×𝑛 is the 
perturbed version of 𝑥 with the 𝑖 th character replaced with a baseline 
character, the attribution (or sensitivity score) 𝐴 𝑗 
𝑖 of the character in 
target 𝑗 can be written as 
𝐴 𝑗 
𝑖 = 𝑓 𝑗 ( 𝑥 ) − 𝑓 𝑗 ( ̃𝑥 𝑖 ) , 𝑖 ∈ {0 , 1 , … , 𝑛 − 1} , 𝑗 ∈ {0 , 1} . 
(2) 
Positive 𝐴 𝑖 values indicate a drop in predicted values when character 𝑖 
is replaced with the baseline; negative 𝐴 𝑖 values indicate an increase in 
predicted value when character 𝑖 is replaced with the baseline. Because 
it is not immediately obvious what a good baseline character would be, 
we tested and compared two distinct approaches. 
Character deletion In analogy to the black images commonly used 
as reference in attribution methods for natural images [46] , we look 
at the eﬀect of deleting a particular input character. In practice, we 
replace each character in turn with a dummy character “A ” that is not 
part of the allowed vocabulary for CDDD. The CDDD feature encoding 
pipeline ignores such unsupported characters and eﬀectively removes 
the character of interest from the input SMILES. 
Character substitution Alternatively, we propose to deﬁne the 
character-wise sensitivity score of the input SMILES as the expectation 
of predictions when a particular position is occupied by any character 
in the vocabulary (see Fig. 2 ). Formally, for a character at position 𝑖 
of a given SMILES 𝑥 of length 𝑛 , its attribution to predicting target 𝑗 is 
deﬁned by 
𝐴 𝑗 
𝑖 = 𝑓 𝑗 ( 𝑥 ) − 1 
∣ 𝜈 ∣
∑
𝑘 ∈𝜈
𝑓 𝑗 ( ̃𝑥 𝑘 
𝑖 ) , 𝑖 ∈ {0 , 1 , … , 𝑛 } , 𝑗 ∈ {0 , 1} 
(3) 
with 𝜈 the vocabulary set. ̃𝑥 𝑘 
𝑖 is the perturbed SMILES with position 𝑖 
replaced by character 𝑘 . 
2.7. Visualizations 
The raw output of the explainability method is a sensitivity score 
per SMILES character. To facilitate visualization and result analysis, 
we used XSMILES [47] , which has been developed in parallel with this 
work. XSMILES is an interactive visualization library that combines 2D 
molecular depictions with bar charts. The two are interactively con- 
nected, allowing a user to make the link between a particular SMILES 
character (and associated score) with a particular atom or substruc- 
ture of the molecule. Figures were created using XSMILES v0.6.3 with 
the following settings for logBCF, logD, and Diﬀ, respectively: color 
palettes BayerBlRd9/RdBu_9_reverse/PuOr_9_reverse, color domains [- 
0.7, 0, 0.7]/[-1, 0, 1]/[-0.7, 0, 0.7], thresholds [0.25, 0.5, 0.75], high- 
light true. 
3. Results and discussion 
3.1. BCF prediction models 
In this section, we evaluate our new xBCF multitask model and 
demonstrate its increased predictive power in predicting logBCF com- 
pared to baseline models, single task models and widely used models 
from the literature. We evaluated our models with leave-one-cluster- 
out cross-validation (LOCO), where clusters of molecules are predicted 
by models trained on the remaining subset of the training set. With this 
approach, predictions are not inﬂuenced by very similar molecules in 
the training set. Hence, we can measure the model’s ability to generalize 
(extrapolate). LOCO usually leads to less optimistic performance metrics 
compared to random split or leave-one-out cross-validation techniques. 
Performance results on the training set are summarized in Table 2 . As 
expected, the null model performs poorly, but can provide a baseline ref- 
erence point. A linear regression on logD as sole descriptor can already 
provide a reasonable estimation of logBCF, with an RMSE of 0.911 log 
units. Among the simple machine learning methods we tested, SVR in 
combination with CDDDs showed the best performance in nested cross- 
validation experiments and is the one kept here as our best single-task 
model. Both SVR and the new xBCF model outperform the baseline 
models by a comfortable margin. Data augmentation with randomized 
SMILES for xBCF did not lead to improved predictivity (xBCF randSML 
in Table 2 ). xBCF additionally achieves an impressive predictivity on 
logD ( 𝑅 2 score of 0.908) and its goodness-of-ﬁt, as evaluated on the 
entire training data, is very high ( 𝑅 2 scores of 0.958 and 0.993 for log- 
BCF and logD, respectively, see also Fig. 3 ). It is worth mentioning that 
molecular representations from Transformer models [21,48] and pre- 
4 
L. Zhao, F. Montanari, H. Heberle et al. 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100047 
Table 2 
Performance metrics evaluated on the BCF training set. 
Model 
Evaluation 
#mol 
R 2 logBCF 
RMSE logBCF 
R 2 logD 
RMSE logD 
Null model (mean) 
LOCO 
1026 
-0.093 
1.413 
-0.066 
1.884 
Linear (LogD) 
LOCO 
1026 
0.546 
0.911 
- 
- 
SVR 
LOCO 
1026 
0.701 
0.739 
- 
- 
xBCF 
ﬁtted on entire set a 
1045 
0.956 
0.276 
0.993 
0.147 
xBCF 
LOCO 
1026 
0.703 
0.736 
0.908 
0.554 
xBCF randSML 
LOCO 
1026 
0.691 
0.751 
0.908 
0.550 
Meylan 
entire BCF training set 
1026 
0.735 
0.695 
- 
- 
Meylan 
excl. Meylan training set 
535 
0.662 
0.829 
- 
- 
Arnot-Gobas 
entire BCF training set 
1026 
0.448 
1.005 
- 
- 
Vega Read-across 
entire BCF training set b 
1018 
0.928 
0.362 
- 
- 
Vega Read-across 
excl. Vega training set 
184 
0.704 
0.784 
- 
- 
Vega Read-across 
inside AD c 
102 
0.718 
0.680 
- 
- 
CAESAR 
entire BCF training set 
1026 
0.589 
0.867 
- 
- 
CAESAR 
excl. training set 
656 
0.455 
1.001 
- 
- 
CAESAR 
inside AD c 
162 
0.727 
0.795 
- 
- 
OPERA 
entire BCF training set 
1026 
0.783 
0.630 
- 
- 
OPERA 
excl. training set 
576 
0.672 
0.800 
- 
- 
OPERA 
inside AD c 
523 
0.704 
0.747 
- 
- 
a model was trained on the entire data set including cluster 1 with 19 polyﬂuorinated molecules. 
b model did not predict 8 molecules. 
c excluding molecules outside the applicability domain (AD) or present in the training set of the model. 
Fig. 3. Correlation between xBCF predictions and experimental values (left: goodness-of-ﬁt on training set, middle: cross-validated training set, right: external test 
set). Triangles represent a subset of polychlorinated biphenyls for which xBCF underestimates logBCF in the LOCO setting. 
trained graph neural nets [23] did not perform as well as CDDD de- 
scriptors in our experiments. 
For comparison, we employed various publicly available models on 
our BCF training set. Note that we cannot retrain those models and we 
do not necessarily know the composition of their original training sets. 
Where possible, we provide the performance metrics on the subset of 
molecules from our BCF training set that were not part of the origi- 
nal training sets of the employed models. If information on the appli- 
cability domain is provided with the predictions, we additionally tested 
the eﬀect of excluding predictions outside the applicability domain or 
marked with low reliability. In general, we observed that a good propor- 
tion of our dataset was used to train those models. This is not surprising 
since experimental BCF data is scarce and we took a dataset from the 
literature that had already been used for model development. As ex- 
pected, all models tested performed signiﬁcantly better on the entire set 
compared to the subset of molecules that were new to the respective 
models. An extreme example is the Vega Read-across model with more 
than 80% of the molecules being part of the training set. Moreover, this 
model simply takes the experimental value as prediction output leading 
to seemingly excellent performance (RMSE of 0.36). However, perfor- 
mance drops drastically for new molecules (RMSE of 0.78). Restricting 
evaluation to molecules inside the applicability domain can increase 
performance and is usually recommended. Indeed, the Vega Read-across 
and CAESAR models perform better on molecules with medium or high 
reliability. 
From the models tested, only Vega Read-across was able to outper- 
form our xBCF model, but only when considering molecules inside the 
applicability domain, i.e. when very similar molecules exist in the train- 
ing set. This restricted the applicability to 102 out of 184 molecules. 
Our xBCF model on the other hand, was evaluated on the full set of 
molecules. Moreover, the LOCO evaluation process involves a certain 
degree of extrapolation, which means the model is useful even for new 
chemical classes. 
We also compared the performance of xBCF, trained on the entire 
training data, with the other models on an external test set ( Table 3 
and Fig. 3 ). There is almost no overlap with the training sets of the 
models, which allows direct comparison. An interactive plot showing 
individual predictions on the test set for diﬀerent models is available in 
the Supplementary Information. 
On the test set, xBCF outperforms all other models. The performance 
metrics ( 𝑅 2 of 0.68 and RMSE of 0.59) are even better compared to 
the cross-validation results due to higher similarity to the training set. 
For the other models, the external test set is a more demanding task 
compared to the training data and many models fail to properly predict 
these molecules. Some of the models even struggle to outperform the 
linear logD model, which might indicate overﬁtting. The generally infe- 
rior performance can have several reasons. First, the data we collected, 
although carefully checked, might have undergone a less rigorous cura- 
tion than the training set, which had been checked and used in multiple 
works already. Therefore the experimental BCF values might be slightly 
5 
L. Zhao, F. Montanari, H. Heberle et al. 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100047 
Table 3 
Performance metrics on the independent logBCF test set with 80 compounds. 
Models 
#mol 
R 2 
RMSE 
Null model (mean) 
80 
-1.457 
1.632 
Linear (LogD) 
80 
0.500 
0.736 
SVR 
80 
0.539 
0.707 
xBCF 
80 
0.676 
0.593 
Meylan 
80 
0.312 
0.864 
Arnot-Gobas 
80 
-0.036 
1.060 
Vega Read-across a 
79 
0.325 
0.850 
Vega Read-across (inside AD) 
29 
0.248 
0.773 
CAESAR b 
80 
-0.523 
1.285 
CAESAR (inside AD) 
7 
0.723 
0.636 
OPERA b 
80 
0.221 
0.919 
OPERA (inside AD) 
66 
0.272 
0.916 
a 2 molecules present in the training set; 1 molecule could not be predicted. 
b 1 molecule present in the training set. 
more noisy. Second, the more recently tested molecules are less similar 
to the molecules in the training sets of the models. Third, the molecules 
in the test set are larger and, we can assume, more diﬃcult to predict. 
We expect that models that can generalize well will perform reasonably 
well on this set. In this case, the multitask approach used in xBCF brings 
an edge over other models, since its training set contains more diverse 
molecules and since multitask learning usually helps with generalization 
[49,50] . 
Figure 3 , panel 2 displays a group of molecules with very high ex- 
perimental logBCF values, which our CV model underestimates by 1–2 
log units. This group consists exclusively of polychlorinated biphenyls 
(PCB) with 6 to 9 chlorine atoms. Other PCBs with fewer chlorine atoms 
are only slightly underestimated by our model, within the expected error 
range. Other polychlorinated molecules that are not biphenyls are well 
predicted, too. The data for these PCBs is originating from a study by 
Fox et al. [51] , who reported only the kinetic BCF determined from the 
uptake and depuration rates, and unfortunately not the steady-state BCF 
like the majority of our dataset. Therefore, we cannot conclude whether 
this behaviour is indeed a special feature of these PCBs or an issue with 
the adequacy of that data. A general search for PCBs in the EPA-ECOTOX 
[52] database and the OECD QSAR Toolbox [53] revealed that the ma- 
jority of PCBs have logBCF values between 3 and 5 (and not between 
5 and 6), which would be more in line with our model predictions. It 
is also interesting to note that the underestimation almost disappears 
in the ﬁnal model (where PCBs are included in the training set), which 
indicates that the model architecture is ﬂexible enough to account for 
such complex features. 
3.2. Applicability domain of the xBCF model 
Our model’s applicability domain is mainly deﬁned by CDDD [13] , 
which can operate on nearly all organic molecules consisting of the 
elements H, B, C, N, O, F, P, S, Cl, Br, and I. Stereoinformation can- 
not be taken into account and is removed during the pre-processing 
step. CDDD was originally designed for a molecular weight range up 
to 600 g/mol, but our model predicted logBCF for molecules with a 
weight of up to 886 g/mol without notable decrease in accuracy. The 
logBCF values in the training set range from -1.7 to 6.1. In our dataset, 
we have not identiﬁed any particular type of molecule for which our 
model fails or performs signiﬁcantly worse. Our checks include ionic, 
large, lipophilic, and molecules with multiple hydrogen bond donor or 
acceptor moieties. Thus, we assume that xBCF’s applicability domain 
covers the whole space of organic molecules with a molecular weight 
up to 900 g/mol. Note that xBCF’s applicability domain beneﬁts from 
the additional 60k molecules for which we have logD measurements in- 
house. In case of doubt, the xBCF prediction of logD can be compared to 
experimental data to cross-check that the model captured the lipophilic- 
ity of the molecule correctly. 
3.3. Uncertainty of the xBCF model 
The expected prediction error for new molecules can be derived 
from the performance metrics on the external test set and the cross- 
validation results. While the RMSE of 0.59 log units on the test set can 
be seen indicative for represented organic molecules, the cluster-split 
cross-validated RMSE of 0.74 log units is representative for new types 
of organic chemistry that were not in the training set of the xBCF model. 
Additionally, we provide conﬁrmatory checks that can detect model 
failures and thus increase the reliability of the successful predictions. 
We trained another version of xBCF on the augmented BCF set, where 
each compound was represented by 10 diﬀerent randomized SMILES 
generated by RDKit. The resulting xBCF randSML model showed simi- 
lar performance as the original xBCF model during cross validation (see 
Table 2 ). We computed the standard deviation of predictions from the 
ten SMILES of each compound and identiﬁed a slight correlation with 
prediction error (see Supporting Information). We conclude that a high 
spread in predictions from randomized SMILES indicates increased un- 
certainty. This can be due to uncertainty in the CDDD encoder or the 
downstream BCF prediction model. 
As second conﬁrmatory check, we can compare the predicted logD 
value to the experimental logD value. In case of high discrepancy (e.g. 
> 2 log units), there is probably a problem with the CDDD encoder for 
that molecule. However, no strong correlation between logD and logBCF 
prediction errors was observed (see Supporting Information). 
Finally, the sensitivity scores (see below) for logD and logBCF can 
be compared to expert expectations. 
3.4. SMILES character sensitivity scores as a local explanation method 
Our aim with the new predictive model for BCF is two-fold: ﬁrst, we 
want to build the best possible model that generalizes well in chemi- 
cal space and can be used in research projects to prioritize ideas and 
discover potential problems with chemical series. Second, we want to 
provide reliable alternatives to costly animal studies for environmental 
risk assessments. For this, good predictions are critical, but additional 
supporting information might be needed to increase the trust in our 
method. We therefore propose to accompany the predictions with local 
explanations that provide a qualitative or semi-quantitative interpreta- 
tion of the predicted logD and logBCF values and help identify the most 
inﬂuential moieties and features in the molecules. Such sensitivity scores 
displayed onto the input chemical structures have several advantages. 
They can be seen as a plausibility check for the model’s behavior, there- 
fore allowing users to gain trust in the model or identify potential ﬂaws 
and biases. When used in a more exploratory fashion, explanations can 
help discover unsuspected mechanistic eﬀects or can guide the rational 
design of new molecules. 
With these goals in mind, we introduce two input perturbation meth- 
ods to obtain signed atom-level sensitivity scores. Together with smart 
visualizations, these methods allow inspecting the model predictions 
for each input molecule of interest. Because they are gradient-free, the 
methods can be widely applied, independently of the downstream mod- 
eling algorithm used. 
Our explainability method is conceptually inspired by the one pro- 
posed by Sheridan [18] in 2019. In his approach, atoms in the query 
molecule are in turn replaced by the atom “Na ” (which typically does 
not occur with covalent bonds in an organic molecule), and the atom 
importance is obtained by subtracting the predicted activity in presence 
of the Na atom to the predicted activity in presence of the original atom. 
Instead of replacing an atom in a molecular structure, we work on 
the input SMILES strings and either remove each character (character 
deletion method) or replace it by each possible SMILES token included 
in the CDDD vocabulary (substitution method), and then calculate the 
diﬀerence in prediction to the original input SMILES. In contrast to 
atom-based methods, our approach allows to extract information for 
non-atom characters in the SMILES string, like ring openings/closings 
6 
L. Zhao, F. Montanari, H. Heberle et al. 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100047 
Fig. 4. LogD sensitivity score visualizations for small molecules with single-character, single-atom or single-group changes. 
or branching points. On the other hand, this might make interpretation 
more diﬃcult. For example, a high sensitivity score might actually hint 
to the non-impact of an absent atom, that would be in that position in 
the string if present. It is important to note that these methods always 
reﬂect changes in the input string and do not represent absolute contri- 
butions to the desired property. We therefore prefer to call the resulting 
numeric values sensitivity scores , because they represent the degree of 
sensitivity of the predicted value with respect to changes of one partic- 
ular character in a given molecule. 
One immediate concern of applying character substitution or dele- 
tion approaches, is the chemical meaning of such modiﬁcations for the 
input molecule (note that this concern also applies to Sheridan’s ap- 
proach). Replacing characters (or atoms) by others will often lead to 
syntactically invalid SMILES or unstable molecules. Nevertheless, the 
CDDD encoder is able to generate continuous embeddings even for in- 
valid perturbed input SMILES. These embeddings can then be used to 
generate similar (valid) molecules via the CDDD decoder. Although arti- 
ﬁcial from a chemical point of view, these small perturbations allow us 
to probe for the local behavior of the model around points that are very 
close to the original input, a concept that is also used in the well-known 
LIME approach [54] . 
The resulting sensitivity scores are context-dependent, as opposed to 
rule-based systems which would assign the same meaning to a particular 
substructure in all molecules, regardless of the context. The context of 
course refers to the input SMILES, such that diﬀerent SMILES notations 
lead to small variations in the sensitivity scores. We provide examples 
based on randomized SMILES in the Supporting Information that show 
the qualitative stability of the explanations. 
3.5. Interpretation of character sensitivity scores 
A major diﬃculty we faced during development of our methods was 
the lack of a ground truth for the sensitivity scores. Although it is pos- 
sible to calculate (and measure) the diﬀerences in logD or BCF between 
distinct molecules, it is not possible to map these diﬀerences to atoms 
or characters. They are not real physical entities and can neither be 
7 
L. Zhao, F. Montanari, H. Heberle et al. 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100047 
Fig. 5. LogD sensitivity visualizations for symmetric molecules. Left: character substitution method. Right: character deletion method. 
measured nor be strictly derived from theoretical concepts. This par- 
ticularly applies to SMILES characters but is also true for atomic input 
features or ﬁngerprints, unless a synthetic atom-based additive ground 
truth like molecular weight or Crippen’s logP [20] are modeled. How- 
ever, in our case we are interested in a real physico-chemical property 
in a biological system. Therefore, in our analysis we rely mainly on ex- 
pectations of chemistry experts and qualitative models from the ﬁeld of 
physical organic chemistry [55] , which have proven useful in explaining 
reactivity and chemical properties during the last decades. Additionally, 
we provide exemplary guidelines to help users interpret the sensitivity 
scores. We note that a more rigorous development of these explainability 
concepts is an important and promising endeavor for future research. 
3.5.1. Comparison of explanations methods 
As a ﬁrst step, we provide examples that the explanations are in line 
with the general ( common sense ) expectations of trained physical-organic 
chemists and highlight some perks that can guide the interpretation. We 
focus on logD because the prediction model performs better on this task 
and the thermodynamics underlying the octanol-water distribution are 
well-understood and less complex compared to BCF. 
We start by changing single atoms in small organic molecules 
( Fig. 4 ). The two methods (deletion and substitution) provide qualita- 
tively similar explanations, in line with expert expectations. However, 
they show some notable diﬀerences due to their diﬀerent design. In gen- 
eral, the score from the substitution method represents the change in 
the prediction upon change of a particular character, while the deletion 
method reﬂects removal of that character. An illustrative example is 
toluene: The substitution method assigns a medium sensitivity score to 
the aliphatic carbon (CH 3 group, character “C ”) because a replacement 
of this character would lead among others to phenol, which has a sig- 
niﬁcantly lower logD. On the other hand, the deletion method assigns 
a value of almost zero because removal of the C character leads to a 
benzene molecule, which has an almost identical predicted logD value. 
Another outcome from the depicted examples is that carbon atoms 
typically lead to positive sensitivity scores, while oxygen atoms lead to 
negative scores. We attribute this to their ability to form hydrogen bonds 
which strongly increase hydrophilicity. An even stronger eﬀect can be 
observed for carboxylic acids, which are negatively charged at neutral 
pH, leading to very low logD values. For benzoic acid, the sensitivity 
scores for the characters encoding the COOH group have large negative 
values, including the non-atom characters like the equal sign and the 
parentheses. The sensitivity scores for the carbon atoms of the benzene 
ring are in this case very small because their inﬂuence on logD is minor 
in this molecule. 
To explore the robustness of the approach and the ability of our 
model to correctly recognize patterns, i.e., functional groups, we per- 
formed tests for symmetric molecules. Figure 5 displays some of the re- 
sulting sensitivities. These molecules contain symmetry-equivalent func- 
tional groups, which share identical surroundings in the molecule and 
therefore should have identical properties. However, the input SMILES 
strings do not reﬂect the symmetry, and therefore our model has to in- 
fer this knowledge from its own internal representation. Overall, the 
symmetry of these molecules is qualitatively reﬂected in the attribu- 
tion values, which means that the model is able to recognize functional 
groups and their molecular surroundings independent of their repre- 
sentation as characters in the SMILES string. The character substitu- 
tion method seems more robust in this test compared to the character 
deletion method. Interestingly, the character deletion method attributed 
8 
L. Zhao, F. Montanari, H. Heberle et al. 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100047 
very high values to several terminal atoms with a double bond and clos- 
ing brackets, which appear in non-terminal positions in the SMILES 
string (see e.g., triallylamine example). Removal of these characters 
would lead to the formal introduction of new bonds between remote 
parts of the molecule, and thus a more drastic change to the molecule 
than removal of a single atom. 
Overall, we consider the character substitution method slightly more 
useful for users who want to focus on the visualization of the molecu- 
lar structures, because of its robustness with respect to symmetry. The 
character deletion method can provide additional insights for terminal 
atoms, brackets, or other characters that have pronounced importance 
due to their particular position in the SMILES string. In the following 
sections, we focus on the character substitution method. 
3.5.2. Functional group analysis 
By training, many organic chemists are used to think in terms of func- 
tional groups to derive conceptual models and explain molecular proper- 
ties. Not surprisingly, there is a large variety of QSAR approaches in the 
literature building on functional groups or substructure contributions, 
e.g., classical group contribution methods, atom-centered fragments, 
ﬁngerprints, and many more [56] . An ideal explainable AI framework 
for molecular property prediction would assign attributions to both in- 
dividual atoms and larger substructures. We were curious whether our 
data-driven approach could be used to explore eﬀects of functional 
groups, keeping in mind that our sensitivity scores are conceptually 
diﬀerent from additive contributions. For this analysis, we summed up 
the sensitivity scores for a set of common functional groups (including 
bracket and bond characters) for the molecules in our BCF training set. 
We compare these group sensitivity scores to the correction factors 
of the KOWWIN model [7,36] as a typical representative for group con- 
tribution models. KOWWIN predicts logKow as a linear combination of 
group contributions, i.e., ﬁtted parameters for a set of pre-deﬁned atoms 
and functional groups. Additionally, we compared the QSARpy modula- 
tors [57] that were derived from diﬀerences in measured logKow upon 
addition or removal of molecular fragments. When multiple modulators 
matched the KOWWIN description we selected only the most general 
deﬁnition. 
Figure 6 illustrates the comparison for several inﬂuential functional 
groups. Overall, the three approaches are in qualitative agreement, i.e. 
lipophilic functional groups like halogen atoms have small positive val- 
ues whereas hydrophilic groups like ring heteroatoms, hydroxy groups 
or carboxylic acids have negative values. This indicates that our sensi- 
tivity scores can be used intuitively to interpret the eﬀect of functional 
group changes on lipophilicity. However, there are notable diﬀerences 
between these metrics. Our sensitivity scores display a much broader 
spread and can be diﬀerent for each individual molecule and even in- 
dividual atoms/groups within the same molecule. In other words, they 
depend on the molecular context. 
In the case of carboxylic acids, the sensitivity scores can span ex- 
treme ranges from around zero to -8. We investigated these molecules 
in more detail. Generally, carboxylic acids are acidic and therefore neg- 
atively charged under neutral pH conditions, resulting in very high hy- 
drophilicity and low logD values. Molecules with an extreme group sen- 
sitivity score of around -8 are relatively small and contain several func- 
tional groups that usually lead to hydrophobic molecules. However, due 
to the negative charge, they become hydrophilic. Therefore, removal of 
the COOH group (charge) would drastically increase the logD value. In 
contrast, molecules with a group sensitivity score of around -3 are typi- 
cally large lipophilic molecules where the carboxylic acid (charge) has 
only a minor eﬀect. Molecules with sensitivity scores around zero con- 
tain a second acidic group. That means that the removal of one acidic 
group would not change the fact that these molecules are charged and 
therefore has only a minor eﬀect. This eﬀect is further illustrated in 
the molecule series benzene - benzoic acid - terephtalic acid ( Fig. 7 ). 
Benzene is not charged and relatively lipophilic with a logD value of 
2.13. Going to benzoic acid, the logD value is signiﬁcantly decreased due 
Fig. 6. Distribution of group sensitivity scores (blue for single and grey for mul- 
tiple occurrences in a single molecule) together with the corresponding contri- 
bution factors from KOWWIN (orange) and QSARpy modulators (purple). (For 
interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is re- 
ferred to the web version of this article.) 
to the negative charge. However, introducing the second COOH group 
leaves the logD mostly unchanged. This fact has been recognized before, 
e.g., by the introduction of an expert rule in the KOWWIN model that 
diminishes the eﬀect of additional COOH groups to half of its original 
value [36] . Such rules were designed by experts and apply only to very 
few selected functional groups. Our model can correctly account for this 
eﬀect and demonstrates that it is able to recognize the molecular con- 
text, which is a signiﬁcant advantage over classical group contribution 
methods that employ a ﬁxed contribution for all molecules. This also 
means that our prediction model seems more suitable for larger and 
more complex molecules, which are typically diﬃcult for group con- 
tribution methods because of the many eﬀects these functional groups 
can exert on each other [58] . The example of terephthalic acid also 
clearly demonstrates how not to interpret the sensitivity scores: These 
values are not linear contribution values that sum up to the prediction 
for the whole molecule. Instead, they highlight the eﬀect of changes in 
the molecule. In general, the concept of linear additivity of functional 
groups seems not to hold. The molecular context is critical and interac- 
tions between functional groups can play an important role. 
9 
L. Zhao, F. Montanari, H. Heberle et al. 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100047 
Fig. 7. Comparison of logD predictions and 
sensitivity scores for the series benzene - ben- 
zoic acid - terephtalic acid. a) calculated as 
sodium salt, b) KOWWIN employs a speciﬁc ex- 
pert rule for carboxylic acids to reduce the cor- 
rection term for each additional COOH group. 
Fig. 8. Sensitivity scores for a PCB molecule. 
Looking for more complex structural patterns, we revisited the PCBs. 
When included in the training set, our model has learned to correctly 
predict PCBs with more than 5 chlorine atoms. Figure 8 illustrates 
such an example. The whole biphenyl moiety and the chlorine atoms 
receive high scores for logBCF but not for logD, demonstrating that 
our model indeed recognizes this complex pattern. The two chlorine 
atoms in the left ring show higher scores because substitution of those 
atoms would result in a phenyl ring with very low degree of chlori- 
nation and presumably lower BCF. Chlorinated phenyl and biphenyl 
moieties have also been proposed as structural alerts for bioaccumu- 
lation by Valsecchi et al. [59] , which conﬁrms the relevance of this pat- 
tern. Another structural alert we were able to conﬁrm are CF 3 groups 
(see below). 
Whether our group sensitivity scores can be interpreted quantita- 
tively, requires further analysis. However, we conclude that the group 
sensitivity scores can provide a ﬁrst qualitative interpretation of moi- 
eties with high inﬂuence. We recommend these scores as starting points 
for a deeper analysis of the model and its predictions. 
Additional insights can be gained from the relationship between logD 
and logBCF. Frequently, a linear relationship is assumed [4,5] , which 
holds for the majority of molecules, typically with a ﬁtted coeﬃcient 
around 0.6 for logD plus correction terms for deﬁned functional groups. 
We are particularly interested in these corrections and the deviation 
from the linear relationship because these deviations can give valuable 
insights into mechanistic processes. Since we have a multitask model 
that predicts both logBCF and logD simultaneously, we can exploit this 
relationship and calculate sensitivity scores for the deviation, i.e. 
𝐴 𝐷𝑖𝑓𝑓 
𝑖 
= 𝐴 𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝐵 𝐶𝐹 
𝑖 
− 0 . 6 ∗ 𝐴 𝑙𝑜𝑔𝐷 
𝑖 
(4) 
These values correspond to sensitivities for the part of the BCF pre- 
diction that cannot be explained by lipophilicity alone. Please note that 
although we calculate quantitative metrics, their derivation is mostly 
empirical and they should only be interpreted qualitatively. 
We plotted the sensitivity diﬀerences for various functional groups 
in Fig. 9 . For many functional groups, the diﬀerences are indeed close 
to zero, as expected. However, for several functional groups, we see 
signiﬁcant deviation from the linear relationship. On the negative side, 
functional groups like disulﬁdes, esters, amides, and ketones reduce the 
BCF. These are known to be readily metabolized in ﬁsh and other or- 
ganisms. On the contrary, carboxylic acids and triﬂuoromethyl (CF 3 ) 
have positive sensitivity diﬀerences. The latter is often deliberately in- 
troduced in active ingredients to block metabolism in a speciﬁc position. 
It is a remarkable observation that our data-driven approach can high- 
light such mechanistic insights. This does not mean that our model can 
predict metabolism, but it can provide hypotheses based on the parts of 
the molecule that change the deviation from the expected logD-logBCF 
relationship. Many physiology-based BCF prediction models, e.g., the 
Arnot-Gobas model [35] , explicitly model metabolization as an impor- 
tant depuration and detoxiﬁcation mechanism. The Arnot-Gobas model 
predicts the biotransformation rate constant from functional group co- 
eﬃcients. For the highlighted groups mentioned above the Arnot-Gobas 
model employs high biotransformation coeﬃcients (see Supplementary 
Information), which are in qualitative agreement with our observations 
(with the exception of disulﬁdes, which are not covered in the Arnot- 
Gobas model). 
10 
L. Zhao, F. Montanari, H. Heberle et al. 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100047 
Fig. 9. Sensitivity Diﬀerence between logBCF and logD for selected functional groups. 
Fig. 10. Sensitivity scores and diﬀerences for example molecules known to be readily metabolized. 
Figure 10 highlights examples with high logD and low BCF values 
due to rapid metabolization. Disulﬁdes show high reactivity and are 
generally known to be rapidly metabolized by a wide range of organ- 
isms. Our data-driven model clearly identiﬁed the two sulfur atoms. The 
second example is Spirodiclofen, which is known to be rapidly metabo- 
lized with a depuration half-life of 1–2 days [60] . The main metabolic 
routes are ester hydrolysis to the enol and subsequently hydroxylation 
in the 4-, and 3-position of the cyclohexyl ring. Our model highlights 
both of these moieties. We are currently exploring more examples in a 
more systematic way. 
4. Conclusion 
In this work, we propose a new model to predict the bioconcen- 
tration factor of small organic molecules. We use a multitask learning 
approach, where both lipophilicity (logD) and BCF are predicted simul- 
taneously. Based on a rigorous evaluation, we show that our model is 
more accurate than previously published models, and generalizes well 
on unknown regions of the chemical space. It is purely data-driven and 
therefore independent from expert-crafted rules or the deﬁnition of 
functional groups. More importantly, we provide SMILES token sensitiv- 
ity scores which serve as local explanations for each prediction. This new 
explanation method relies on SMILES token substitutions or deletions, 
and can be applied to downstream models based on CDDD descriptors 
or other string-based models learning directly from SMILES strings. We 
hope that together with a robust prediction model, the explainability 
layer will increase the value and trustworthiness of the predictions. It 
allows users to poke inside the inner workings of the model and could 
help with molecular design and mechanistic understanding of processes 
involved in bioaccumulation. We discussed various examples to spot- 
11 
L. Zhao, F. Montanari, H. Heberle et al. 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100047 
light important perks of the explanation methods, and to give guidance 
for their interpretation. We could show that the two methods highlight, 
how the prediction changes upon changing (substitution approach) 
or removing (deletion approach) a character from the input SMILES. 
We emphasize that this approach provides useful means to understand 
the predictions of the model based on its internal representation. How- 
ever, the sensitivity scores should not be confused with incremental 
contribution factors that sum up to the total prediction for the molecule. 
Overall, with its accuracy (RMSE = 0.59 log units), the broad ap- 
plicability, its ability to generalize, and the explainability aspects, our 
model satisﬁes the criteria for many use cases and could be considered 
an alternative for animal testing. 
5. Data and model availability 
We share the logBCF training and test sets along with the associated 
logD values (measured or predicted), cluster splits, and BCF predictions. 
The logD training set is a proprietary in-house dataset and cannot be 
shared. We provide the sensitivity scores as a JSON ﬁle that can be used 
with XSMILES. The python code repository to calculate sensitivity scores 
is available via https://github.com/Bayer-Group/xBCF . 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare the following ﬁnancial interests/personal rela- 
tionships which may be considered as potential competing interests: 
The authors are employees of Bayer AG, a manufacturer of pharma- 
ceuticals, agricultural, and consumer health chemicals. The funders had 
no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or inter- 
pretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results. 
Data availability 
Data will be made available on request. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors acknowledge funding from the Bayer AG Life Sci- 
ence Collaboration (Explainable AI). The authors want to thank Marco 
Bertolini, Julian Heinrich, Ryan Henderson, Jacopo Negroni, Robin Win- 
ter for valuable discussions, contributions, and support in the context of 
this project. 
Supplementary material 
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in 
the online version, at doi: 10.1016/j.ailsci.2022.100047 . 
References 
[1] OECD. Test No. 305: bioaccumulation in ﬁsh: aqueous and dietary exposure. 2012. 
10.1787/9789264185296-en 
[2] Halder M, Kienzler A, Whelan M, Worth A. EURL ECVAM strategy to replace, reduce 
and reﬁne the use of ﬁsh in aquatic toxicity and bioaccumulation testing. Publica- 
tions Oﬃce; 2014 . 
[3] U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Oﬃce of Chemical Safety and Pollution Pre- 
vention. Strategic plan to promote the development and implementation of alterna- 
tive test methods within the TSCA program. Washington, DC2018;. 
[4] Grisoni F, Consonni V, Villa S, Vighi M, Todeschini R. QSAR models for biocon- 
centration: is the increase in the complexity justiﬁed by more accurate predictions? 
Chemosphere 2015;127:171–9. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2015.01.047 . 
[5] Gissi A, Lombardo A, Roncaglioni A, Gadaleta D, Mangiatordi GF, Nicolotti O, 
et al. Evaluation and comparison of benchmark QSAR models to predict a relevant 
reach endpoint: the bioconcentration factor (bcf). Environ Res 2015;137:398–409. 
doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2014.12.019 . 
[6] Meylan WM, Howard PH, Boethling RS, Aronson D, Printup H, Gouchie S. 
Improved method for estimating bioconcentration/bioaccumulation factor from 
octanol/water partition coeﬃcient. Environ Toxicol Chem 1999;18(4):664–72. 
doi: 10.1002/etc.5620180412 . 
[7] United States Environmental Protection Agency. Epi suite (estimation programs in- 
terface suite), version 4.11 (november 2012), the software can be obtained free 
of charge from https://www.epa.gov/tsca-screening-tools/download-epi-suitetm- 
estimation-program-interface-v411 . 2012. 
[8] Hermens JL, de Bruijn JH, Brooke DN. The octanol-water partition coef- 
ﬁcient: strengths and limitations. Environ Toxicol Chem 2013;32(4):732–3. 
doi: 10.1002/etc.2141 . 
[9] Endo S, Escher BI, Goss K-U. Capacities of membrane lipids to accumu- 
late neutral organic chemicals. Environ Sci Technol 2011;45(14):5912–21. 
doi: 10.1021/es200855w . 
[10] Yang K, Swanson K, Jin W, Coley C, Eiden P, Gao H, et al. Analyzing learned molecu- 
lar representations for property prediction. J Chem Inf Model 2019;59(8):3370–88 . 
[11] Wu Z, Ramsundar B, Feinberg EN, Gomes J, Geniesse C, Pappu AS, et al. Molecu- 
leNet: a benchmark for molecular machine learning. Chem Sci 2018;9(2):513–30 . 
[12] Rogers D, Hahn M. Extended-connectivity ﬁngerprints. J Chem Inf Model 
2010;50(5):742–54 . 
[13] Winter R, Montanari F, No F, Clevert D-A. Learning continuous and data-driven 
molecular descriptors by translating equivalent chemical representations. Chem Sci 
2019;10:1692–701. doi: 10.1039/C8SC04175J . 
[14] Montanari F, Kuhnke L, Ter Laak A, Clevert D-A. Modeling physico-chemical ADMET 
endpoints with multitask graph convolutional networks. Molecules 2019;25(1):44 . 
[15] Duvenaud DK, Maclaurin D, Iparraguirre J, Bombarell R, Hirzel T, Aspuru-Guzik A, 
et al. Convolutional networks on graphs for learning molecular ﬁngerprints. Adv 
Neural Inf Process Syst 2015;28 . 
[16] Bouhedjar K, Boukelia A, Khorief Nacereddine A, Boucheham A, Belaidi A, Djer- 
ourou A. A natural language processing approach based on embedding deep learn- 
ing from heterogeneous compounds for quantitative structure–activity relationship 
modeling. Chem Biol Drug Des 2020;96(3):961–72. doi: 10.1111/cbdd.13742 . 
[17] Chithrananda S., Grand G., Ramsundar B.. ChemBERTa: large-scale self-supervised 
pretraining for molecular property prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:201009885 2020. 
10.48550/ARXIV.2010.09885 
[18] Sheridan RP. Interpretation of QSAR models by coloring atoms according to changes 
in predicted activity: how robust is it? J Chem Inf Model 2019;59:1324–37. 
doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.8b00825 . 
[19] Matveieva M, Polishchuk P. Benchmarks for interpretation of QSAR models. J Chem- 
inform 2021;13:41. doi: 10.1186/s13321-021-00519-x . 
[20] Rasmussen M.H., Christensen D.S., Jensen J.H.. Do machines dream of atoms? A 
quantitative molecular benchmark for explainable ai heatmaps. ChemRxiv preprint 
2022-gnq3w2022. 10.26434/chemrxiv-2022-gnq3w 
[21] Karpov P, Godin G, Tetko IV. Transformer-CNN: Swiss knife for QSAR modeling and 
interpretation. J Cheminform 2020;12(1):1–12 . 
[22] McCloskey K, Taly A, Monti F, Brenner MP, Colwell LJ. Using attribution to decode 
binding mechanism in neural network models for chemistry. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
2019;116(24):11624–9. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1820657116 . 
[23] Henderson R, Clevert D-A, Montanari F. Improving molecular graph neural network 
explainability with orthonormalization and induced sparsity. In: International con- 
ference on machine learning. PMLR; 2021. p. 4203–13 . 
[24] Xie S., Lu M.. Interpreting and understanding graph convolutional neural network 
using gradient-based attribution method. arXiv preprint arXiv:190303768 2019;. 
[25] Rodríguez-Pérez R, Bajorath J. Interpretation of machine learning mod- 
els using shapley values: application to compound potency and multi- 
target activity predictions. J Comput Aided Mol Des 2020;34(10):1013–26. 
doi: 10.1007/s10822-020-00314-0 . 
[26] Lundberg SM, Lee S-I. A uniﬁed approach to interpreting model predictions. Adv 
Neural Inf Process Syst 2017;30 . 
[27] Preuer K., Klambauer G., Rippmann F., Hochreiter S., Unterthiner T.. Interpretable 
deep learning in drug discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:190302788 2019. 
[28] Wellawatte GP, Seshadri A, White AD. Model agnostic generation of 
counterfactual explanations for molecules. Chem Sci 2022;13:3697–705. 
doi: 10.1039/D1SC05259D . 
[29] Jimnez-Luna J, Skalic M, Weskamp N. Benchmarking molecular feature attribution 
methods with activity cliﬀs. J Chem Inf Model 2022;62:274–83 . 
[30] Karpov K, Mitrofanov A, Korolev V, Tkachenko V. Size doesn’t matter: predicting 
physico- or biochemical properties based on dozens of molecules. J Phys Chem Lett 
2021;12(38):9213–19. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpclett.1c02477 . 
[31] Lewis KA, Tzilivakis J, Warner DJ, Green A. An international database for pesticide 
risk assessments and management. Hum Ecol Risk AssessInt J 2016;22(4):1050–64. 
doi: 10.1080/10807039.2015.1133242 . 
[32] Montanari F, Kuhnke L, Ter Laak A, Clevert D-A. Modeling physico-chemical ad- 
met endpoints with multitask graph convolutional networks. Molecules 2020;25(1). 
doi: 10.3390/molecules25010044 . 
[33] Rdkit: Open-source cheminformatics; http://www.rdkit.org . 2021. 
[34] Cawley GC, Talbot NL. On over-ﬁtting in model selection and subsequent selection 
bias in performance evaluation. J Mach Learn Res 2010;11:2079–107 . 
[35] Arnot J, Gobas F. A generic QSAR for assessing the bioaccumulation potential 
of organic chemicals in aquatic food webs. QSAR Comb Sci 2003;22(3):337–45. 
doi: 10.1002/qsar.200390023 . 
[36] Meylan WM, Howard PH. Atom/fragment contribution method for esti- 
mating octanol–water partition coeﬃcients. J Pharm Sci 1995;84(1):83–92. 
doi: 10.1002/jps.2600840120 . 
[37] Lombardo A, Roncaglioni A, Boriani E, Milan C, Benfenati E. Assessment and valida- 
tion of the caesar predictive model for bioconcentration factor (BCF) in ﬁsh. Chem 
Cent J 2010;4:S1. doi: 10.1186/1752-153X-4-S1-S1 . 
[38] Zhao C, Boriani E, Chana A, Roncaglioni A, Benfenati E. A new hybrid sys- 
tem of QSAR models for predicting bioconcentration factors (BCF). Chemosphere 
2008;73:1701–7. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2008.09.033 . 
12 
L. Zhao, F. Montanari, H. Heberle et al. 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100047 
[39] Vega in silico platform, version 1.2.0, available from www.vega-qsar.eu . 2021. 
[40] Floris M, Manganaro A, Nicolotti O, Medda R, Mangiatordi GF, Benfenati E. A gener- 
alizable deﬁnition of chemical similarity for read-across. J Cheminform 2014;6:39. 
doi: 10.1186/s13321-014-0039-1 . 
[41] Mansouri K, Grulke CM, Judson RS, Williams AJ. Opera models for predicting physic- 
ochemical properties and environmental fate endpoints. J Cheminform 2018;10:10. 
doi: 10.1186/s13321-018-0263-1 . 
[42] Miller TH, Gallidabino MD, MacRae JI, Owen SF, Bury NR, Barron LP. 
Prediction of bioconcentration factors in ﬁsh and invertebrates using ma- 
chine learning. Sci Total Environ 2019;648:80–9. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018. 
08.122 . 
[43] Kobayashi Y, Yoshida K. Development of QSAR models for prediction of 
ﬁsh bioconcentration factors using physicochemical properties and molecular 
descriptors with machine learning algorithms. Ecol Inform 2021;63:101285. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ecoinf.2021.101285 . 
[44] Zeiler MD, Fergus R. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In: Eu- 
ropean conference on computer vision. Springer; 2014. p. 818–33 . 
[45] Ivanovs M, Kadikis R, Ozols K. Perturbation-based methods for explain- 
ing deep neural networks: a survey. Pattern Recognit Lett 2021;150:228–34. 
doi: 10.1016/j.patrec.2021.06.030 . 
[46] Ancona M., Ceolini E., Öztireli C., Gross M.. Towards better understanding of 
gradient-based attribution methods for deep neural networks. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:171106104 2017;. 
[47] Heberle H, Zhao L, Schmidt S, Wolf T, Heinrich J. XSMILES: interactive visual- 
ization for molecules, SMILES and XAI scores. Research Square preprint; 2022. 
doi: 1021203/rs3rs-2121152/v1 . 
[48] Honda S., Shi S., Ueda H.R.. Smiles transformer: pre-trained molecular ﬁngerprint 
for low data drug discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:191104738 2019;. 
[49] Caruana R. Multitask learning. Mach Learn 1997;28(1):41–75 . 
[50] Ruder S.. An overview of multi-task learning in deep neural networks. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:170605098 2017;. 
[51] Fox K, Zauke GP, Butte W. Kinetics of bioconcentration and clearance of 28 poly- 
chlorinated biphenyl congeners in zebraﬁsh (Brachydanio rerio). Ecotoxicol Environ 
Saf 1994;28:99–109. doi: 10.1006/eesa.1994.1038 . 
[52] Olker JH, Elonen CM, Pilli A, Anderson A, Kinziger B, Erickson S, et al. The 
ecotoxicology knowledgebase: a curated database of ecologically relevant toxicity 
tests to support environmental research and risk assessment. Environ Toxicol Chem 
2022;41:1520–39. doi: 10.1002/etc.5324 . 
[53] Dimitrov SD, Diderich R, Sobanski T, Pavlov TS, Chankov GV, Chapkanov AS, 
et al. QSAR toolbox – workﬂow and major functionalities. SAR QSAR Environ Res 
2016;27:203–19. doi: 10.1080/1062936X.2015.1136680 . 
[54] Ribeiro MT, Singh S, Guestrin C. “Why should i trust you? ”: explaining the 
predictions of any classiﬁer. In: KDD ’16: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM 
SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining. 
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery; 2016. p. 1135–44. 
doi: 10.1145/2939672.2939778 . ISBN 9781450342322 
[55] Anslyn EV, Dougherty DA. Modern physical organic chemistry. University Science 
Books; 2006 . ISBN 9781891389313 
[56] Todeschini R, Consonni V. Molecular descriptors for chemoinformatics, vol 41. 
Wiley-VCH; 2009. doi: 101002/9783527628766 . ISBN 9783527318520 
[57] Ferrari T, Lombardo A, Benfenati E. QSARpy: a new ﬂexible algorithm to generate 
QSAR models based on dissimilarities. the log Kow case study. Sci Total Environ 
2018;637–638:1158–65. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.05.072 . 
[58] Schneider N, Klein R, Lange G, Rarey M. Nearly no scoring function without a 
hansch-analysis. Mol Inform 2012;31(6–7):503–7. doi: 10.1002/minf.201200022 . 
[59] Valsecchi C, Grisoni F, Consonni V, Ballabio D. Structural alerts for the identiﬁca- 
tion of bioaccumulative compounds. Integr Environ Assess Manag 2019;15:19–28. 
doi: 10.1002/ieam.4085 . 
[60] . [14c]-baj2740-bioconcentration in bluegill (lepomis macrochirus) under ﬂow- 
through conditionsGLP study report. Bayer AG; 2000 . Full study report avail- 
able upon request via Bayer’s transparency website or cropscience-trans- 
parency@bayer.com 
13 
