 AASRI Procedia  3 ( 2012 )  118 – 126 
2212-6716 © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
doi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2012.11.021 
 
 
2012 AASRI Conference on Modeling, Identification and Control 
Modeling and Simulation of Astronaut Motions during 
Extravehicular Activity: A Complex System Based Method 
Hao Li, Ying Jin, Chunhui Wang* 
National Key Laboratory of Human Factors Engineering, China Astronaut Research and Training Center,  
P. O. Box 5132-26, Beijing 100094, China 
 
Abstract 
and build the guideline for astron
extravehicular activities is developed under the complex system theory. The astronaut in space suit with the backpack is 
described with a complex system model. Then a coupled forward-inverse dynamics model is present to calculate the 
motions of every subsystem and the whole system dynamically without introducing additional variables for multi results 
problem; and a sensor-actor model is built for analyzing the torque on the joints generated by the space suit which 
expands the analytical space from two dimensions to three dimensions. Finally, in order to show the effectiveness and 
feasibility of the method, application examples of the constrained operations are presented. 
 
© 2012 Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied 
Science Research Institute 
 
Keywords: astronaut; spacesuit; extravehicular activity; model 
1. Introduction 
Extravehicular Activity (EVA) is one of the basic technologies for manned space missions. Many 
important tasks, such as construction and maintenance of space stations, repair of important space equipment, 
 
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +86-010-66365692; fax: +86-010-66365691. 
E-mail address: chunhui_89@yahoo.com.cn. 
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
© 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
119
 Hao Li et al. /  AASRI Procedia  3 ( 2012 )  118 – 126 
 
even rescue for spaceflight accidents, need to be implemented by astronauts outside the space vehicles. 
However, EVA is also a type of difficult and expensive task, for it must be completed with limited time, work 
space and energy by astronauts wearing special space suits with heavy backpack in microgravity environment 
[1]. Therefore, each task needs a particular design before implementation and each astronaut needs hundreds of 
hours for training before launched to space [2]. All of the preparations need to be carried out under the 
conclusions from studies on the motions of suited astronauts in microgravity. Modeling and Simulation (M&S) 
is chosen as a good method for studies on EVA for the reasons that physical microgravity simulators have 
inherent limitations, even today it cannot recreate the same microgravity environment as that in space yet, and 
differences between operations in space and on the ground will shade some important information [3][4][5][6][7]. 
Many computational analyses had been put in practice, such as the simulations about STS-49 and STS-63 
missions [8][9][10]. These studies mainly focused on three aspects about EVA according to engineering 
applications. The first is that modeling suited astronauts with multi-body dynamics methods such as Newton-
Euler, Lagrangian, and Kane, in order to describe the suited astronaut with a set of dynamical equations and 
[3]. The second is mainly about modeling 
complex way, so descriptive models and physics-based models are developed for analyses in two dimensions 
space [11]
motions [12], etc. Although these works had well supported many EVA missions before, there are still some 
limitations, which can be summarized as follows: 
 Indeterminations of limbs. The dynamics equations of the multi-body system with redundant DOFs 
(Degree of Freedoms) such as human body have indeterminate resolutions, which cause indeterminations 
of limbs [see Fig. 1 (a)]. 
 Coupled suit-induced torques on one joint. Current models of the space suit generated torques are only 
applied for joints with a single DOF. If a joint has more than one DOF, the interaction between torques on 
different orientations is omitted [see Fig. 1 (b)]. 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 1. Limitations of Current Computational Studies on EVAs 
In fact, these limitations can be solved by only one method: torques can be viewed as constrains among 
different bodies in the system, while relationships between bodies can be viewed as behaviors of bodies. 
In next section, a novel method for M&S of the motions of astronauts during EVA is discussed in details. 
Then in section 3, some applications on preparations for space station mission are introduced, in order to show 
how to use the method. At last, discussion and recommendation for future work are presented respectively. 
2. Method 
The method includes three parts: basic model, the whole system model, and torque model for space suit. 
120  
 Hao Li et al. /  AASRI Procedia  3 ( 2012 )  118 – 126 
 
2.1. Framework and Fundamental 
A tree structure configuration of the suited astronaut with links and joints is shown in Fig. 2, which is 
designed on the base of an improved Hanavan model [12]. The head and the backpack are isolated bodies in the 
configuration although there are zero DOF between them and the torso for the reason that if the three bodies 
are combined as one part, some characters about the inertia tensor will be left out. And in order to describe 
motion of the whole body in the reference frame, there is a 6 DOFs joint (J11) between the torso and the 
environment (L00) which is the so-
recognize clearly on the right of Fig. 2. 
 
Fig. 2. Configuration of the Suited Astronaut 
The Newton-Euler model is chosen as the fundamental for the study, because it need not induce additional 
variables, and all of the models can be created on vector mechanics. 
2.2. A Coupled Forward-Inverse Dynamics Model for System 
There are two basic ways to construct dynamics model of the motion: forward and dynamics. In forward 
dynamics, a set of joint forces/torques is given to determine the motions of joints and limbs; while in inverse 
dynamics, a set of joint motions is given to determine the joint forces/torques to create the motions [12]. 
121
 Hao Li et al. /  AASRI Procedia  3 ( 2012 )  118 – 126 
 
 
Fig. 3. A coupled Forward-Inverse Dynamics Model 
In practice, the types of given information for different parts of the astronaut are different, for example, it 
may be easy to the force on the hand but difficult to catch its motion, while for the elbow, it is easy to get its 
angle but difficult to have the torque on it. Therefore a method is formulated by integrating forward and 
inverse dynamics in one framework, as shown in Fig. 3. There are two types of elements in the model: the link 
point. The link is a transducer with forward or inverse dynamics, which has a united formation defined in Eq. 
(1): 
L = <ID, CG, m, IT, SP, SZ, PoJ,  , MT > 
 
(1) 
Where, ID is the name of the link to identify with others, CG is the center of gravity, m is the mass, IT is the 
inertia tensor, SP is an enumerative value describing the shape of the limb, SZ describes the size of the limb, 
PoJ is a subset for describing the joints connected to the link,  is a subset of torques/forces on the link, and 
MT is also a subset for describing the motion of the limb with position, velocity, acceleration, etc. 
The joint is a connector to pass motions and forces/torques, which also has a united formation defined in 
Eq. (2): 
J = <ID, DOF, B, F, P, O, R, M,  > 
 
(2) 
Where, ID is the name of the joint, DOF is the degree of freedoms of the joint, B is the base link of the joint, F 
is the follower link of the joint, P is the position, O is the orientation, R describes the range of every DOF, M 
is a subset for describing the motion of the joint with angle, angular velocity, angular acceleration, etc., and  
is the torques/forces on the joint, which has two parts: 
 = p + a 
 
(3) 
Where, p is the passive torques/forces exerting on the joint, which will be discussed in the following section, 
and a is the active torques/forces generated by the astronaut. 
With the united models of links and joint, it is simply to get the motions and forces/torques of every 
element, as well as calculate the information of the whole suited astronaut dynamically. 
122  
 Hao Li et al. /  AASRI Procedia  3 ( 2012 )  118 – 126 
 
2.3. A Sensor-Actor Model for Joint Torque of Space Suit 
It had been shown that the torque-angle characteristics of space suit joints are hysteretic [13], or non-linear 
[14], i. e. the output torques depends on both the current value and the history of the input angles: 
 = f ( , 
h) 
 
(4) 
Where 
h is the history of the angle . In fact, torques generated by space suit passively depends not only on 
the history of the input, but many information about the joint. If there are one more DOFs on the joint, torques 
in different orientations will affect each other. And the angular velocity will affect the torque too. So the 
torque generated by space suit is: 
( ,
h , ,{ })
f
 
 
(5) 
Where  is the angle on different DOF. For the number of DOFs in the joints of the suited astronaut is less 
than four (as shown in Fig. 2), the models of joints with different DOFs are shown in Fig. 4: 1 DOF in (a), 2 
DOFs in (b), 3 DOFs in (c). In the models, the sensor to get the motions of the joint and the actor to exert 
torques on the joint are included as basic elements, and between them there is a computational element with 
the function in Eq. (5). The memorizers are included in the computational element to restore the history of the 
angle. A set of weighted sum functions is used for Eq. (5), and the values of weights qi,j can be got from 
physical experiments. 
1,1
1,(
1)
1,(
1)
1,(
2)
1
2,1
2,2
3,1
3,(
1)
3,(
1)
3,(
2)
1
if
0
( ,
, ,{ })
if
0
if
0
n
j
j
j n
j n
j
h
n
j
j
j n
j n
j
q
q
q
q
f
q
q
q
q
q
q
 
(6) 
Where n is the number of the memorizers. 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 4. A Sensor-Actor Model for the Joint Torque 
123
 Hao Li et al. /  AASRI Procedia  3 ( 2012 )  118 – 126 
 
2.4. Summary 
The process of the method can be divided into four steps: 
1) Set the geometric and physical parameters for every link and joint according to the tree structure 
configuration; 
2) Construct the sensor-actor model for every joint, set every weight qi,j, and choose adequate n for the 
history; 
3) 
 
4) Analysis dynamics of links and joints one in turn by using the Coupled Forward-Inverse Dynamics Model. 
Then the resolutions we are interested can get from step 4, such as the position of a selected link. 
Furthermore, with these resolutions we can calculate all the information for the whole system
 even output 
them to a graphical model for 3D animation. 
3. Applications 
Examples of the astronaut pulling a load under different constrain conditions are introduced for the 
simpleness and typicality in order to demonstrate the applications of the method. 
3.1. Task Introduction 
During the task, the astronaut pulls the handle by his left hand to move a load in direction to himself. There 
are three constrain conditions in the task which is typical for almost all of the EVA operations. The first is 
operating without constrain as shown in Fig. 5 (a); it is common for many primary EVAs because the tether 
for security seems never frapped. The second is working with the feet constrained, as shown in Fig. 5 (b). For 
more and more complex EVA tasks, the portable foot restraint is used commonly. The third is operating on a 
suspension which is designed for emplace the space suit on the ground. There are several rigid connections 
between the suspension and the backpack, which means only the left arm can move during the operation. 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Fig. 5. Examples of the Astronaut Pulling a Load 
3.2. Modeling and Simulation 
It is very easy to model the system on the base of the configuration present in section 2.1. For the first 
condition, the model can be got only by connecting a link to L41 by a 3 DOFs joint. For the second condition, 
which is shown in Fig. 6 (a). And for the third condition, the model can be got by deleting more than half of 
the basic configuration as shown in Fig. 6 (b), for it is not necessary to analyze the parts of the body except the 
left arm. 
124  
 Hao Li et al. /  AASRI Procedia  3 ( 2012 )  118 – 126 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 6. Configuration with Feet Constrained and Backpack Constrained 
A prismatic joint model is used to restrain the motion of the load, so the load can be moved only along the 
rod, which keeps the output force from the suited astronaut simple. 
Then the simulation experiments can be carried out following the steps listed in section 2.4. And the 
simulations will be repeated several times for choosing different parameters. 
3.3. Results and Demonstration 
Some result trajectories and animations for the first condition (i.e. the astronaut is operating without 
constrain) are shown in Fig. 7 for demonstration. On the left, the torque at the elbow is selected to be shown, 
operation are shown the right. 
3.4. Conclusion 
By comparing the trajectories of torques and observing the animations from the simulations, some 
conclusions can be drawn as follows: 
 When moving the same load, the torque without constrain is the biggest, while the torque with backpack 
constrain is the smallest. 
125
 Hao Li et al. /  AASRI Procedia  3 ( 2012 )  118 – 126 
 
 
e in order to make the center of 
gravity of the body lie on the extend line of the output force. For example, the lower limbs bend to move 
the center of gravity up. 
 When operating with constrain on the feet, it will be easier for the astronaut, because the counterforce get 
from the foot restrain which is used commonly for many EVAs. 
 The most ideal condition is setting constrain on the backpack, for it is the heaviest part in the whole system. 
However, it is very difficult for most EVAs to exert constrain on the backpack. 
These conclusions will be the guidelines for designing the EVAs, and many quantitative indexes can be 
drawn from data and the simulations in order to get optimized plans. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7. Result Trajectories and Animation for Demonstration 
4. Discussion and Future Work 
The method introduced in the paper is based on complex system theories, in which the suited astronaut is 
divided into many subsystems, and then organizes the system model according a tree structure configuration. 
Then the coupled forward-inverse dynamics model is used to avoid indeterminations of limbs; and the sensor-
actor model is used for modeling the torques generated by the space suit in three dimensions space. With the 
method, we can analyze more complex EVAs to be implemented in the future. But there are still many 
limitations in the method: 
 Functions with higher accuracy are needed for calculating the torques of the space suit. 
 Models of the torques/forces generated by the astronaut are needed for the method. 
 Some joints such as the wrist and waist are more complex than those used in the models, which need to be 
rebuilt according to their physical characters. 
Future work will be focused on these problems. Furthermore, both the method and its applications need to 
be certified by data got from ground physical experiments even from actual missions including EVAs. 
126  
 Hao Li et al. /  AASRI Procedia  3 ( 2012 )  118 – 126 
 
Acknowledgements 
This study was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program) (No. 
2011CB711005). 
References 
[1] Nicole C. Jordan, Joseph H. Salch, Dava J. Newman. The Extravehicular Mobility Unit: A Review of 
Environment, Requirements, and Design Changes in the US Spacesuit. Acta Astronautica 59 (2006) 1135-
1145. 
[2] Pierre J. Thuot and Gregory J. Harbaugh. Extravehicular Activity Training and Hardware Design 
Consideration. Acta Astronautica. Vol. 36, No. 1, 1995. 
[3] 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, June 1995. 
[4] Jason R. Norcross et al. Characterization of Partial-Gravity Analog Environments for Extravehicular 
Activity Suit Testing. NASA/TM-2010-216139, December 2010. 
[5] Norman I. Badler et al. Dynamic Simulation for Zero-Gravity Activities. International Space Human 
Factors Workshop, June 1999. 
[6] Man-Systems Integration Standards (NASA-STD-3000), Revision B. NASA, Washington, DC, July 1995. 
[7] Jeff Dutton. Extravehicular Activity Hardware for International Space Station. Journal of Aerospace 
Engineering, April 1997. 
[8] Grant Schaffner and Dava J. Newman. Computational Simulation of Extravehicular Activity Dynamics 
During a Satellite Capture Attempt. J. GUIDANCE. Vol. 23, No. 2, June 1999. 
[9] Dava J. Newman and Grant Schaffner. Computational Dynamic Analysis of Extravehicular Activity: 
Large-Mass Handling. Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets. Vol. 35, No. 2, March-April 1998. 
[10] G. Schaffner, D. J. Newman. Inverse Dynamic Simulation and Computer Animation of Extravehicular 
Activity (EVA). AIAA, Aerospace Sciences Meeting & Exhibit, 35th, Reno, NV, January, 1997. 
[11] Patricia Barrett Schmidt. An Investigation of Space Suit Mobility with Applications to EVA Operations. 
Doctorial Dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, September 2001. 
[12] Leia Abigail Stirling. Development of Astronaut Reorientation Methods: A Computational and 
Experimental Study. Doctorial Dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, June 2008. 
[13] David B. Rahn. A Dynamic Model of the Extravehicular Mobility Unit (EMU): Human Performance 
of Technology, June 1997. 
[14] Christopher E. Carr, Dava J. Newman. Characterization of a Lower-body Exoskeleton for Simulation of 
Space-suited Locomotion. Acta Astronautica 62 (2008) 308-323. 
