 AASRI Procedia  4 ( 2013 )  147 – 153 
2212-6716 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
doi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2013.10.023 
ScienceDirect
___
 
 *
E
On
Abst
In m
intera
intera
spon
servi
polic
apply
expli
can h
ration
 
© 20
Sele
 
Keyw
1. In
A
and 
obta
thou
_____ 
*Corresponding a
E-mail address: {M
n the Co
tract 
many dynamic o
actions may no
action allies. In
taneous networ
ice level agreem
cy of negotiatio
ying collabora
icitly and how 
help to control
nally since trus
013 Published
ection and/or p
words: Organizati
ntroduction 
A spontaneous
interactions w
ain the satisfie
ugh it may not
author. Tel.: +1-2
Mhamdi, Alqitha
2013 AAS
ore of Ag
Mohamm
Department of C
open systems, s
ot be secure fro
n light of this, 
rked organizat
ments (SLAs).  
on to accelerat
tive filtering (
these interactio
l the spontaneo
st is recorded in
d by Elsevier B
peer review un
ons, social netwo
s networked or
with each oth
ed strategy to 
t be computat
02-468-8498, +1
ami}@siu.edu 
SRI Confere
gents Int
O
med Hamdi*
Computer Science
social interactio
om self-interest
the focus is o
tion (SNO). It 
SLA and its ro
te the executio
CF), we exam
ons affect the so
ous flow of beh
n such a distribu
B.V. 
nder responsib
orks, interactions,
rganization (S
her to achieve 
accomplish t
tionally perfec
-618-303-8817 ; 
ence on Inte
teraction
Organiz
*, Saad Alq
e, Southern Illino
 
on plays an im
ted agents. For
on developing a
helps to overc
ole amongst th
on process of t
mine different ty
ocial capital. T
haviors and kn
uted organizatio
bility of Amer
, SLAs. 
SNO) is a coll
a certain goa
the goals. Thi
ct.  Formation
fax: +1-618-453-
elligent Syst
ns in a Sp
ation 
qithami*, H
ois University, Ca
mportant role fo
r that, each age
a different type
ome such a pr
e agents in the 
the fittest task 
ypes of data t
This method obt
nowledge to be 
on. 
rican Applied 
lection of agen
al [2].  In the
is satisfied so
n is considered
-6044 
tems and Co
pontaneo
Henry Hex
arbondale, IL 629
or the developm
ent must be cap
e of interaction
roblem through
SNO will be d
provided by th
o show how a
tains a high per
more accurate
Science Rese
nts characteriz
e real world, p
olution can m
d as a main gu
ontrol 
ous Netw
xmoor  
901, USA 
ment of social c
pable of identi
n among the ag
h applying a br
discussed. We w
he organizer. M
agents interact 
rformance of in
e when agents 
earch Institute 
zed by their sh
people alway
eet their own
uide to under
worked 
capital. These 
fying reliable 
gents inside a 
road range of 
will present a 
Moreover, by 
implicitly or 
nteraction and 
communicate 
hared values 
s attempt to 
n needs even 
standing the 
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
148  
 Mohammed Hamdi et al. /  AASRI Procedia  4 ( 2013 )  147 – 153 
reasons and trends that are possessed by all agents and in which have led to the emergence of this 
organization and its goals [6].  
Interactions among agents play an important role for the growing of social capital inside the SNO [1]. They 
give a rise to a set of social norms, shared value, relations and common goals that describe an organization. 
The behaviors, attitudes, and experiences of each agent are collectively influenced by other agents. Since the 
social capital is growing rapidly, the new strategies and planes will be launched dynamically to avoid arriving 
to the dissolution [1]. Therefore, the social interaction process plays an efficient factor in the creation of trust 
between agents or agents and other entities inside the organization.  
Shared values can strengthen the competitiveness for SNO's agents [6]. These shared values become 
cognitive contexts with agents, and they in a right manner can coordinate their actions and follow to combined 
communication. These cognitive contexts represent the social norms that can set roles and plans of behavior 
that synchronize agent's communication with others.  
Social norms are the level of social customs and traditions, and common trends, that demonstrated by 
organization's agents. They are legislated rules and procedures that pay individuals to adapt both when 
carrying out simple or complex interacts because they know and accept public laws, which increase the unit of 
organization cohesion and interdependence. These norms are shared values, which deeply cherished by 
individuals, affect their interactions, and characterized by congruence and similarity among the agents [2]. 
This is what helps to increase the degree of unity and cohesion of the organization. 
The spontaneous networked organization (SNO) has properties that are similar to many traditional 
organizations. Usually, it goes through processes from formation to dissolution. Some other operations may 
also exist inside it. Any organization goes through certain processes that formulate its existence. Virtual 
networks, for instance, have a life cycle stages of creation, operation, evaluation, dissolution, and 
metamorphoses [9]. These basic stages are very noticeable in the life cycle of many existing organization, 
such as the SNO.  
The organizer in SNO is responsible for building a coherent belief system from the agents in order to keep 
a sense of continuity toward their organizational behavior. The organizer has the opportunity to pick which 
agent has the best payoff (i.e. capability) to achieve the task assigned. After the organizer group receives the 
set of capabilities from the agents, he or she will start to examine the agents’ level of fitness and assign the 
tasks to the proper one of them who has the best fit capabilities (i.e. a set of payoffs) depending on their level 
of fitness. 
This paper mainly focuses on developing a different type of interaction among the agents inside the SNO. 
We present first the agent negotiation protocols through the interaction process, and then move to show the 
service level agreements (SLAs), and how to use them inside SNO in the following sections.  The interaction 
using distributed database will be shown next. The implicit and explicit interactions by applying the concept 
of collaborative filtering (CF) will be addressed in the last section. 
2. Agent Negotiation Protocols 
Agents are a set of individuals who are autonomous, social, reactive, and self- learning. They are coherent 
behaviorally and interact with each other to fix a problem and try to connect other agents. By the time, the 
organizer agent will offer a task and deploy it to others through the network. This attracts the agents to request 
the task from the organizer to achieve it. Thus, this composition environment allows both agents to interact 
and negotiate with each other in a proper manner. 
The task offered should have a semantic description and multi-attribute in order to guarantee the time and 
the scalability of the negotiation. It should have a high-level description to agents in the network, and it needs 
to be configured to help receivers to be specified when they receive it. If the task submitted by the organizer is 
149
 Mohammed Hamdi et al. /  AASRI Procedia  4 ( 2013 )  147 – 153 
suitable, agents will argue internally to assess the suitability, and they sometimes link their decisions on 
selecting task to find the next best fit to achieve each task. 
The agents must have multi- attribute qualitative (arbitrary) decision- making to help their decisions on 
selecting the fit task.  The agents have to be willing and cooperate dynamically or sometimes statically to 
make a decision to get this task.  They will show their capability by sending their payoffs to the organizer and 
set their preferences to select the tasks. The organizer, after examining the agents’ level of fitness, will choose 
the best agents according to the suitability or the capability and preference they send to execute the certain 
tasks.   
The negotiation among the agents will be based on the Contract Net Protocols that distribute the task as 
task announcement between the agents when the organizer offers it. These protocols allow the agents to 
negotiate with their peers to make the fitness agents candidates in one group of agents. When the agents 
receive the tasks and for some reasons they cannot solve the present them, they will become sub-tasks.  
Agents will form a contract between themselves, and announce the sub-tasks to the contract net acting as 
agents which evaluate the task with respect to their capabilities. Thus, other agents will attempt to bid more 
for winning this contract. The agents who have more bids will win the contract and then show their fit 
capabilities and abilities to the organizer to be assigned. The organizer in this case can evaluate the submitted 
bids, and choose the most appropriate agent to perform the task [8]. Furthermore, the organizer is responsible 
to capture the agent-specific data for particular tasks. When the contract agreement is established between the 
agents, SLA violation monitoring is applied in this group of agents to determine whether negotiation protocols 
are achieved or violated [13]. 
2.1. Service Level Agreements (SLAs) 
SLAs can be applied among the interacting organizations to describe the agreement type between them [1]. 
They are a negotiated agreement between two agents who interact in social networks. They compose the 
natural options to represent the agreed restrictions for individual tasks [8]. SLAs are performed to involve 
acceptable start and end time limits that simplify the description between sender and receiver requirements.  
They have been used in networks, such as the Grid Computing, SLA is used to be direct mediation between a 
service provider and a service requestor. It works depending on the Contract Net Protocols that allow the 
agents to negotiate with others for scheduling the tasks offered. SLAs help to get an efficient cooperation 
between the agents by advertising the task as a task-sharing to other agents in the network [8]. Moreover, 
SLAs use MARGO, an argumentation framework for decision making to allow the agents to interact with 
their peers for the actual deployment of tasks. The agents argue internally to support the decision on proper 
task and then decide their offers [4]. 
In the model of social interactions, we will use the SLA, is a twofold agreement between two group agents 
who interact in the organization, and it can be attached with each agent in the group. These compose the 
natural options to represent the agreed restrictions for individual tasks [8]. SLAs are performed to involve 
acceptable start and end time limits and a simple description of send and receive requirements. This pact 
between the two parties can specify interaction guarantees in terms of this interaction can be acceptable or 
unacceptable, and action to be taken in special cases as well [5].  SALs help the organization to be 
automatically configured based on the availability of different parties [12]. It will be set between the agents in 
the organization and the trust value for the agents will travel through the vectors that will connect the agent 
with others.  Here, in this system, the implicit interactions among the agents in one group of organization are 
controlled by SLA, and the agent can negotiate to improve the communication processes and guarantee the 
quality of the services, so improved the relationship between the parties.  
150  
 Mohammed Hamdi et al. /  AASRI Procedia  4 ( 2013 )  147 – 153 
SLAs have parameters and metrics that elaborate the service standards between at least the parties in the 
network and push them to interact in a proper manner.  Interaction using the SLA modeling will include some 
events that identify the actions occurring on it such as service discovery, negotiation, scheduling, monitoring.   
SLAs can be a cause of attracting the agents by establishing the credibility of the tasks offered [13]. 
2.2. Interaction using distributed database 
The method of distributing database and attaching them to work with each agent in SNO can obtain a high 
performance of interaction and can help to control the spontaneous flow of behaviours and knowledge to be 
more accurate when agents communicate rationally since trust is recorded in such a distributed organization. 
Therefore, the judgment over time will be gathered and adapted during further communication for them. 
Let N = {1, 2, …, n} be a finite of agents who interact frequently with their neighbors in the organization.   
Each agent is monitoring situations in a different state and maintains a local database that need to stay valid 
by avoiding contradictions. Since agents can only monitor their own state, they must rely on information from 
their peers in others states. As they receive information, they must decide whether to trust the information and 
enter it into their local data base or to reject it by distrusting the information sender. The database will keep 
updating to help the agent to be more accurate in future when some agents or same agents want to 
communicate with him or her again.  
The agents inside the organization are geographically dispersed, and they are able to interact with each 
other dynamically by depending on the information received.  The Distributed databases will be distributed 
through the network and these database used will work independently form SLA. They run and attach with 
every agent locally. Thus, they can make a quick access to data over a huge number of agents and support the 
agent for keeping some information for others in depository’s boxes added [3]. Data communication is a mean 
for the agents to be connected thorough the network. Database can store temporarily data received and work 
as a temporary database that update data automatically. 
 
 
Fig. 1. Interaction using distributed database
Once the agent is done using a temporary database, they must stay empty to be valid and able to get the 
information from other agents who attempts to connect, see Fig 1. As soon as an agent connects, a copy of this 
connection is transferred automatically to the organizer.  Maintaining the local database to stay free is an 
efficient way to avoid any contradictions between the agents and complex data and it will provide a high 
performance for the multi-agent systems. 
This method enables the connections to be rolled back and the procedures are updated automatically. 
Therefore, there is nothing can be stored in the main temporary database permanently except the depository’s 
boxes that saves transparent data of connections. The used databases update themselves through the 
interactions and run to pass the data to other agents. If the agents connect, the whole data will be sent to the 
agent who gets connected. This process will be continued till the data reaches the organizer. If the agent 
receives the information, this agent can decide whether moving the data to peers or setting himself or herself 
151
 Mohammed Hamdi et al. /  AASRI Procedia  4 ( 2013 )  147 – 153 
as planner for the SNO. This planer can assign the task to a proper agent to perform it or allows the data to be 
transferred to others. 
3. Implicit and explicit interaction 
The social organizations are typically structured by implicit and explicit relations and interactions among 
the agents. Interaction of implicit and explicit relation has been demonstrated in the online communities that 
have groups of agents connected by their relations [10].  
SLAs will be sectioned with each group of agents who interacts in different locations of SNO. The 
interaction among the agents who have a full similarity of attribute will be implicitly using SLA. SLA shows 
the relationship and level of correction between the agents depending on the contract of similarity they sign it 
before.  Thus, this will sign implicit agreement that ties the agents who have a similarity of attribute. This 
similarity will help the agent to behave dynamically over the time and may be employed to build implicit 
concoctions.  Therefore, SLA controls the implicit connections and relationships between the agents in the 
same case of similarity attribute.  
By using the Collaborative Filtering (CF) technique, we can know the agents who will interact implicitly 
and explicitly.  Agents from different locations seek to show their capabilities and preferences to get the tasks 
offered. In this model, we will illustrate that the agents who belong to one cluster after negotiating will send 
the agreed payoffs or final results of their negotiation. To compute the similarity between the two groups of 
agents (X, Y) for their attribute in the SNO, we will present the idea of (CF) of (Memory-Based), which filter 
data using techniques involving collaboration among multiple agents and the past agent behavior can be 
examined like (the previous transactions or product ratings), in order to create a new connection between 
these groups of agents. This method provides an automatic prediction for the interests of the agent by 
gathering the preference from many agents, thus matching agents with similar interests [11].  
Table 1. The matrix rows represent agents and the columns represent items. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
Fig. 2. an implicit and explicit interactions. 
 
In this example, we can see the correlation-based similarity between 2, 4 is implicit because they show 
more similarity of attribute than other group of agents, see Table 1. The ratio between them is [4:4], so they 
1 
2 
3
4
152  
 Mohammed Hamdi et al. /  AASRI Procedia  4 ( 2013 )  147 – 153 
share a full attribute and can interact implicitly in SNO. We can expect that they have a collection of attributes 
and shared values and they will interact relaying on their attribute similarities, see Fig 2. Computing the 
similarity between the agents is based on using Pearson Correlation that measures the correlation between two 
variables X and Y and then to apply a similar computation technique to determine the similarity x y, as 
showing in Equation [1]. 
 
     
,
,
2
2
,
,
,
x i
x
y i
y
i I
x i
x
y i
y
i I
i I
r
r
r
r
x y
r
r
r
r
                                                                   (1) 
Where the agents x, y have rated the set of items i  I 
 
In the formal case of two agents interact in (m × n) ratings matrix as shown above in Table 1, the similarity 
between them i, j is measured by computing the cosine of the m dimensional agent-space between these two 
vectors of matrix. The similarity between them i – j is given by Equation [2]: 
 
      
                                                                                               (2) 
 
Usually inside the organization, many agents share the values and have the same interests with other agents, 
so they have commonalties in their attributes. They are closely related characteristics to some agents in 
different clusters of SNO. This relationship will be characterized by a wide range of attribute, thus they will 
interact explicitly. The agents who interact explicitly will be controlled by the organizer rather than SLA 
which is responsible for the implicit relations only. In the game matrix above, the agents (1, 4) can interact 
explicitly because they are closely related characteristics. The ratio between two groups of agents 1 and 4 is 
[2:4], so they share some attribute and can interact explicitly in SNO.   
An affinity score is presented to compute the degree of similarity between the agents that interact explicitly 
[10]. The example above shows that there exist overlaps between two groups who interact (the overlap 
between the two groups of agents 1-3 is 1.  This overlap will be computed using Equations [3]. 
 
       
                                                                         (3) 
 
    Where,  is a set of attributes for i and j are different groups of agents. 
4. Social capital 
Social interactions play an important role that supports social capital to grow.  Social networks such as SNO 
are based on interdependence and communications between the agents. SNO creates an easy space for agents 
to communicate with others based on certain factors such as the similarity of interests and cultures.  Thus, 
these factors lead to configured SNO network that estimated quantitatively on a number of its agents and 
morally on a size of mutual trust and cooperation amongst the agents. 
Social capital refers to the social interactions and the organizational coherence of SNO. Trust and shared 
value can govern the implicit and explicit interactions among the agents [1], so effective ties between the 
groups of organization can be composed because the value of social capital has a positive effect the 
effectiveness of the performance and productivity of the individual or a group of agents. Each group of agents 
that shapes SNO network can be evaluated relying on their performance and productivities and on the quality 
153
 Mohammed Hamdi et al. /  AASRI Procedia  4 ( 2013 )  147 – 153 
of their implicit and explicit interactions. These groups of agents can interact with others based on the degree 
of similar interests and experiences.  
The SNO organization will be founded from implicit and explicit connections between the agents that may 
be characterized by any number of attributes in different locations. As social capital is based on social 
similarity which indicates to the implicit interactions and the individuals sometime create explicit connections 
when they have some similarities with others in different clusters, so the agent can interact inside and outside 
the group. This way of interaction can cause to spread the ideas to other agents, thereby increasing the social 
consensus to achieve the common interest and by using SLAs seek to set an agreement between the various 
actors and stakeholders to work together. 
5. Conclusion  
In conclusion, this paper has focused on the development of a different type of interactions among the 
agents inside a spontaneous networked organization (SNO). It helps to overcome the problem of interaction 
through applying a broad range of service level agreements (SLAs). Applying collaborative filtering (CF) 
allowed further examinations on different types of data to show how agents interact implicitly or explicitly 
and how these interactions affect the social capital. This method obtained a high performance of interaction 
and can help to control the spontaneous flow of behaviors and knowledge to be more secure when agents 
communicate rationally since trust is recorded in such a distributed organization. Future work will examine 
more about the security of these interactions and their effect on a wide range of organizations. 
References 
[1] Alqithami, S., Hexmoor, H. “Spontaneous Organizations: Collaborative Computing Model of a Networked 
Organization.” In the 8th IEEE International Conference on Collaborative Computing: Networking, Applications and 
Work-sharing (Collaborative Communities for Social Computing), Pittsburgh, PA, USA; 2012. 
[2] Alqithami, S., Hexmoor, H. Social Capital in Virtual Organizations, In Fourth International Conference on Intelligent 
Networking and Collaborative Systems, pp. 682-687, Bucharest, IEEE; 2012. 
[3] Baylis, R. Oracle Database Administrator’s Guide, 10g. Oracle®. Part No. B10739-01;2003. 
[4] Bromuri, S. Urovi, V. Morge, M. Stathis, K. Toni, F. A multi-agent system for service discovery, selection and 
negotiation. AAMAS '09 Proceedings of The 8th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent 
Systems - Volume 2. ACM, pp. 1395-1396.; 2009.  
[5] Giri, N. Mundle, S. Ray, A. Bonhe, S. Multi agent system based service architectures for service level agreement in 
cellular networks. ACM. 
[6] Hexmoor, H. Crowds and Spontaneous Collaboration, In Proceedings of IC-AI, Las Vegas, NV; 2011. 
[7] Nojoumian M. and Stinson D. R.Social Secret Sharing in Cloud Computing Using a New Trust Function. 10th IEEE 
Annual Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust (PST), pp. 161-167, Paris, France;2012. 
[8] Ouelhadj, D., Garibaldi, J., MacLaren, J., Sakellariou, R., Krishnakumar, K., and Meisels, A. “A Multi-agent 
Infrastructure and a Service Level agreement Negotiation Protocol for Robust Scheduling in Grid Computing.” Springer-
Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, EGC 2005, LNCS 3470, 2005. 
[9] Rutkowski, A., Vogel, D., Genuchten, M., Bemelmans, T. and Favier, M. “E-collaboration: The reality of virtuality”. 
IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication, vol. 45(4), pp. 219–231, 2002. 
[10] Smith, M., Giraud-Carrier, C. and Purser, N. “Implicit affinity networks and social capital.” ACM. Information 
Technology and Management, pp 123 – 134. 
[11] Su, X. and Khoshgoftaar, T. “A Survey of Collaborative Filtering Techniques.” ACM. Adv. Artificial Intellegence. 
[12] Trzec, K. and Mikac, B. “On agent-based service level agreement management in optical Internet”. Electrotechnical 
Conference, MELECON 2004. Proceedings of the 12th IEEE Mediterranean, 611 - 614 Vol.2, 2004. 
[13] Wu, L. Buyya, R. Service Level Agreement (SLA) in Utility Computing Systems. IGI Global. 2012. 
