Precise in-situ characterization and cross-validation of the
electromagnetic properties of a switched reluctance motor
Xiao Ling, Liang Gong⁎, Bingchu Li, Chengling Liu
The State Key Laboratory of Mechanical System and Vibration, School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 1 November 2019
Received in revised form 14 May 2020
Accepted 14 May 2020
Available online 28 May 2020
Keywords:
Switched reluctance motor
Electromagnetic property characterization
Self-inductance
Incremental inductance
Flux linkage
In-situ measurement
The electrical-magnetic characteristics of a Switched Reluctance Motor (SRM) exhibit highly nonlinear relation-
ship with respect to the rotor position and excitation current, which poses challenges for both precise static mea-
surements and exact calculation of these properties in real-time control. To guarantee that an in-lab test result
can be used in the application, ﬁrstly a measurement method is proposed to characterize the SRM's electromag-
netic properties such as the ﬂux linkage, magnetic co-energy, phase inductance and electromagnetic torque on
the basis of an installed SRM control circuitry and half-bridge power converter. By this means the characteriza-
tion process is equivalent to the online observation in its results. Secondly, a theoretical model is built to discrim-
inate the physical meaning between the incremental inductance and the phase inductance, which is the origin of
other relevant parameters. This helps to guide the correct utilization of the characterization result. Thirdly an
in-situ cross-validation experimentation according to the magnetizing and demagnetizing status measurement
veriﬁes the feasibilities and accuracy of the proposed inductance measuring method, which avoid a dubious
FEM-based comparison between the numerical calculation and experimental results. Cross-validation experi-
ment shows that the proposed in-situ characterization scheme obtains an accurate full-range electromagnetic
properties. The proposed methodology breaks the barrier between the in-lab measurement and on-line utiliza-
tion of the SRM parameters, highlighting the merits that it completely includes the in-situ factors and replicates
the operational scenario without the need of speciﬁcally designed instrumentation, which is especially suitable
for rapid ﬁeld characterization for high power motors.
© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open
access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
1. Introduction
Due to simple and rugged motor construction, potentially low pro-
duction cost, excellent torque/speed characteristics, high operating efﬁ-
ciency, and inherent fault tolerance, switched reluctance motors (SRMs)
are emerging as an attractive drive unit ranging from modern electrical
vehicles to high speed aircraft applications (Kamalakannan et al., 2011;
Wen et al., 2013). In recent years, substantial research efforts have been
devoted to various aspects of SRM such as speed regulation perfor-
mance analysis, controller design and instrumentation, drive applica-
tion, where the accurate knowledge of the SRM's electromagnetic
characteristics is a deﬁning property for all these cases.
Generally speaking, there are four principal parameters com-
monly used in high performance control of SRMs, namely the ﬂux
linkage ψ, magnetic co-energy W, phase inductance L and yielded
electromagnetic torque T. Precise characterization of these electro-
magnetic properties is essential for SRM applications. For example,
strategies in speed-position control, energy-efﬁcient control and po-
sition sensor elimination control are highly dependent upon the ac-
curacy of phase inductance (Yoo et al., 2009; Kjaer et al., 1995;
Brauer et al., 2012; Yu et al., 2015). Soft computing of electromag-
netic torque, instead of using a torque transducer, is extensively
adopted for torque ripple minimization and noise reduction (Cai
and Deng, 2012; Moron et al., 2012; Lee et al., 2012; Vujicic, 2012;
Zeng et al., 2014). Flux linkage and magnetic co-energy are
employed to realize high-performance four-quadrant operation
(Goto et al., 2010; Wong et al., 2009; Cheok and Fukuda, 2002; Shin
et al., 2005).
To date it remains challenging when precisely characterizing the pa-
rameters for control purpose since an SRM presents highly nonlinear
characteristics due to the motor's doubly salient structure and its inten-
tional operation in deep magnetic saturation for higher power density
(Miller, 2001; Dowlatshahi et al., 2014). Moreover, a prominent sub-
problem associated is that the current accurate in-lab measurement re-
sults are rarely applicable in engineering, especially when the precise
parameter evaluation is desired. The considerable errors between the
in-lab characterization and ﬁeld application stem from manufacturing
and material variations from the prototype, neglect of phase mutual
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 74–80
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: lingxiao@sjtu.edu.cn (X. Ling), gongliang_mi@sjtu.edu.cn (L. Gong),
bchli@sjtu.edu.cn (B. Li), chlliu@sjtu.edu.cn (C. Liu).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2020.05.002
2589-7217/© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage: http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-
intelligence-in-agriculture/
couplings, diverse winding copper and iron losses, and the chopping
loss of power electronics devices. Therefore, although precisely charac-
terizing the SRMs is extensively investigated (Zhang et al., 2010;
Parreira et al., 2005; Wang et al., 2014) and gives perfect insight into
the physics, there still exists a necessity to develop a rapid approach
on characterizing the motors individually. In this sense the core issue
is how to comprehensively replicate the operating scenario during the
characterization process, where an in-situ characterization lends itself
to serve this goal.
In engineering it deserves measurement innovations under several
regards, including the convenience of experimental setup conﬁguration,
replication of the operating conditions and regimes, and security con-
sideration for high power rating machines. Fortunately, these consider-
ations can be encompassed via using the power and control circuitries
readily equipped for a COTS motor product, given that the characteriza-
tion abides by the operating state in all electrical tractor. With this orig-
inal intention an in-situ method is proposed for precise measurement of
SRM's electromagnetic properties in this paper. Additionally, an analyt-
ical solution is addressed to clarify the physical meaning of phase and
incremental inductances, laying a theoretical foundation for different
monitoring and control strategy designs for electrical motor. The veriﬁ-
cation of this characterization plays an importance role in reliably utiliz-
ing the result, and correspondingly a cross-validation approach is
developed.
The organization of this paper is as follows. Section 2 proposes a pre-
cise SRM characterization model for an SRM, with an emphasis on dis-
criminating the deﬁnition of phase and incremental inductance.
Section 3 describes a COTS circuitry based in-situ characterizing ap-
proach for the motor, and the merits of this measuring method are
also highlighted. Parameter measurement results and parameter char-
acteristics are illustrated in Section 4, followed by a reliable in-situ
cross-validation method. Some conclusions are given in Section 5.
2. Electrical model of the SRM
Determination of the magnetic characteristics can be realized nu-
merically or experimentally. Measurement-based approaches show
the merits of high precision, isolation of manufacturing variation and in-
dependence of prerequisite knowledge of material magnetics when
compared to typical FEA numerical methods. In this section we present
the theoretical fundamentals for motor characterization and clarify an
important notation on the inductance, then propose a COTS apparatus
based approach capable of easily characterizing the SRMs with high
power ratings and the advantages are discussed.
2.1. Characterization fundamentals
Characterization of an SRM normally stems from measuring the ﬂux
linkage proﬁle in one motor phase, and then other relevant properties
can be derived using standard electrical machine theory. After blocking
the rotor to a certain position, a pulse voltage is applied and the phase
current responses are recorded and the measurement is repeated for
different rotor positions to proﬁle the motor properties according to
the following electrical equations. By Faraday's law the voltage equation
for one phase
u ¼ Ri þ dψ iθ
ð Þ
dt
ð1Þ
where U is the instantaneous voltage across the terminals of a single
phase of an SRM, i is the phase current, and R is the phase resistance.
ψ is the ﬂux linked per phase whose change rate with respect to time
can be obtained.
The phase inductance L is deﬁned by
ψ i; θ
ð
Þ ¼ L i; θ
ð
Þi
ð2Þ
when given a ﬁxed rotor position θ
ψ i; θ
ð
Þ ¼
Z τ
0
ðu−Ri
Þdt
ð3Þ
here when the phase current I traverses from zero to its maximum, the
ﬂux linkage can be computed accordingly. And the inductance proﬁle
can be calculated by partially deriving Eq. (3).
From the view angle of energy conservation, the input electrical en-
ergy We is equal to the sum of energy stored in the coil Wf and the en-
ergy converted into the mechanical work Wm.
We ¼ W f þ Wm
ð4Þ
We can deﬁne the stored magnetic energy Wf and its counterpart
electromagnetic co-energy W as
W f ¼
Z ψ
0
i ψ; θ
ð
Þ dψ
ð5Þ
W ¼
Z I
0
ψ i; θ
ð
Þ di
ð6Þ
The electromagnetic co-energy is introduced since it is common to
express the electromagnetic torque in terms of current rather than
ﬂux linkage. And obviously there exist relations as
iψ ¼ W f þ W
ð7Þ
Nomenclature
A.C.
Alternating Current
COTS
Commercial Off-the-Shelf
D
Diode
D.C.
Direct Current
DSP
Digital Signal Processor
FPGA
Field Programmable Gate Array
i
Instantaneous Phase Current for Integration (A)
I
Phase Current
IGBT
Insulated Gate Bipolar Transistor
L
Phase Inductance
l
Incremental Inductance
R
Phase Resistance
S
Power Switch (IGBT)
SDRAM
Synchronous Dynamic Random Access Memory
SRM
Switched Reluctance Motor
T
Electromagnetic Torque
u
Instantaneous Phase Voltage [V]
W
Magnetic Co-energy
We
Input Electrical Energy
Wm
Mechanical Energy
Wf
Magnetic Field Energy
3D
Three Dimension
Greeks
Ψ
Phase Flux linkage [Wb]
Θ
rotor angular position [rad]
τ
Integration Time[s]
75
X. Ling et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 74–80
and
∂W f
.
∂θ ¼ −∂W.
∂θ
ð8Þ
For the case of constant excitation, the incremental mechanical work
is equal to the change rate of co-energy W, which is nothing but the
complement of the ﬁeld energy Wf. Hence the incremental mechanical
work done can be written as
δWm ¼ δW
ð9Þ
where
W ¼
Z i
0
ψ θ; i
ð
Þdi
ð10Þ
The electromagnetic torque T in terms of the co-energy represented
as a function of rotor position and phase current is
T ¼ δWm
δθ
¼ ∂
R i
0 ψ i; θ
ð
Þ di
∂θ
¼ ∂
R i
0 L i; θ
ð
Þi di
∂θ
ð11Þ
In conclusion, once the ﬂux linkage versus i and θ is proﬁled, all the
other electromagnetic properties of an SRM can be hereby deduced.
2.2. Distinct inductance models
We read from Eq. (2) that the excitation current and the ﬂux linkage
deﬁne an inductance in an instantaneous status, which partially reﬂects
the stationary behavior of the winding impedance. However, when both
the dynamic and the stationary inductive characteristics are to be
discussed, two distinct models, namely the phase self-inductance L
and the incremental inductance l need to be derived.
Differentiate Eq. (2), we note that
dψ i; θ
ð
Þ
dt
¼ L i; θ
ð
Þ θ¼const
j
di
dt þ idL i; θ
ð
Þ
dt
ji¼const
ð13Þ
Alternatively,
dψ i; θ
ð
Þ
dt
¼ ∂ψ i; θ
ð
Þ
∂i
di
dt þ ∂ψ i; θ
ð
Þ
∂θ
dθ
dt ¼ l i; θ
ð
Þdi
dt þ ∂ψ i; θ
ð
Þ
∂θ
ω
ð14Þ
where
l i; θ
ð
Þ ¼ ∂ψ i; θ
ð
Þ
∂i
¼ ∂ R τ
0 u−Ri
ð
Þ dt
∂i
ð15Þ
Meanwhile, the relationship between two representations of phase
inductive behavior is
L i; θ
ð
Þ ¼ 1
i
Z i
0
l i; θ
ð
Þdi
ð16Þ
Note that the self-inductance is different from the incremental in-
ductance when the operating condition is not linear, which is usually
the case in an SRM drive system. It can be further disserted that only
the incremental inductance can be used to evaluate the dynamic induc-
tive characteristics such as in an algorithm for position sensorless con-
trol (Cai and Deng, 2012; Cai and Deng, 2013). Two inductance
models can be mutually converted by Eq. (16). Hence in the following
sections, only the phase inductance is analyzed unless there is any
need to discriminate them.
3. In-situ characterizing approach
Zhang et al. (Zhang et al., 2010) proposed a current saturation
method for accurately measuring the SRM inductance, which uses low
frequency and low voltage to minimize the machine loss. Although
this measuring setup is simple, unfortunately the proposed solution is
not suitable for high-power SRMs up to multiple hundred KW power
ratings. In this section we utilize a COTS SRM control circuitry and
half-bridge power converter to conduct the measurement, which
means the commercially available switched reluctance drive can be
used without requiring additional measuring apparatus. A decaying cur-
rent method
is
employed
to facilitate
the high power SRM
characterization.
Both COTS SRM development kits and industrial application solu-
tions are extensively provided by semiconductor manufacturers such
as Fairchild, Inﬁneon, and Texas Instrument that offer supports not
only for the independent central control units, power converters, and
integrated motor drivers but also for the comprehensive solution
(DiRenzo, 2000). A general-purpose SRM drive circuit is shown in
Fig. 1. The A.C. power source is rectiﬁed and ﬁltered to provide a D.C.
bus voltage, the power switches (IGBTs) S and diodes D are integrated
modules to form a compact asymmetry half bridge power converter
for SRM. Take Phase A for an example, when S1 and S2 are switched
on simultaneously, the phase winding is excited by the D.C. source up
to rated current, which is limited by a comparing circuitry associated
with the COTS SRM drive component. When S1 and S2 are switched
off, the current decreases.
The SRM electromagnetic characteristics measurement is based on
the voltage equation of the SRM in terms of the phase current and ﬂux
linkages. As mentioned in previous section, to obtain the parameters
for various positions, this experiment can be repeated by applying a
pulse voltage in one phase for various locked rotor positions ranging
from the aligned to the unaligned position of the stator and rotor
poles. Thereby the three-dimensional relationship of ψ(θ,i) vs. i vs. θ
can be plotted. This is sufﬁcient for the evaluation of magnetic co-
Fig. 1. Asymmetry half-bridge power converter for SRMs.
76
X. Ling et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 74–80
energy and instantaneous electromagnetic torque for any given current
and rotor position. A schematic diagram for measurement is shown in
Fig. 2.
The measurement could be conducted by monitoring either rising or
decaying current in the phase windings. Clearly, Eq. (1) describes a
magnetizing process when the current ﬂow as “+Vs-S1-Phase A-S2-
Gnd” while the demagnetizing current along “Gnd-D2-Phase A-D1-
+Vs”. theoretically,
−u ¼ Ri þ dψ i; θ
ð
Þ
dt
ð17Þ
here using the decaying current proﬁle is more appropriate for higher
currents since the voltage ﬂuctuation during a falling current is negligi-
ble and fairly constant (Gobbi et al., 2006). This is because the measure-
ment during a decaying current is carried out by eliminating the applied
voltage to the winding, and an alternative path to the winding current is
provided through a freewheeling diode connected across the machine
phase, hence no current drains from the ﬁlter capacity. The voltage
across the winding during the decaying current is only the forward volt-
age drop of the diode. In contrast, the applied source voltage varies
while the current is increasing, giving rise to errors due to quantization
and its use in the evaluation of ﬂux linkages (Krishnan, 2001).
The manner in which the ﬂux linkage is obtained is crucial to the ac-
curacy and application of the results. Generally speaking, the proposed
characterization method offers three advantages. First, its technical
merits and practical value of using the COTS based experimentation
setup lie in easily characterizing high-power motors and performing
the real application in-system testing. The readily-equipped power con-
vert avoids customizing a speciﬁc high power source, and the installed
Hall current sensor directly measures the excitation current and elimi-
nates the need for a high power rating data-acquiring precise resistor.
Further the phase current limitation is reliably curbed by using an
on-board protective circuitry. Therefore, the COTS circuit based experi-
mentation leads to a paradigm shift from laboratory prototyping to
manufacturer on-site characterization. Second, using the decaying cur-
rent to characterize the SRMs ensures a high accuracy via minimizing
the voltage ﬂuctuation. Third, although the iron/copper losses and
phase mutual inductance complicate the measurement of the electro-
magnetic properties, the proposed method is capable of genuinely re-
vealing the properties since it realistically duplicates the operating
scenario in converter, such as the current path and individual compo-
nent loss. Therefore, the proposed method can be applied in character-
izing a wide spectrum of SRMs.
4. Implementation and experimental results
4.1. Experimental setup
On an 8/6 SRM with the rated power of 750 W and 310 V D.C. bus
voltage, a COTS power converter is connected in a half-bridge topology.
Figs. 3 and 4 show the photographs of the experimental platform and
control circuitry respectively. And refer to the appendix for the detailed
parameters of the motor.
In the SRM control board the instantaneous maximum phase current
is limited to 13.0A during test, and the maximum current during motor
operation is 9.0A. The current sensor is LEM HMS 05-P with the accuracy
of 1%. The encoder is OMRON E6C2-C with the resolution of 2000 pulse/
round. The general controller is a 32-bit 150MIPS TMS320LF2812 DSP
which includes a 16-channel 12-bit on-chip 3D converter with the
12.5 M sampling bandwidth. An Altera FPGA EP2C8Q208C8 (8 speed
grade) is selected to expand the I/O and execute online CMAC NN com-
putation, which has 8256 logic cells and 165,888 memory bits. Mean-
while the FPGA has a 16 M byte SDRAM for temporarily reserving the
sensor-acquired data.
4.2. Experimentation of characterizing an SRM
For characterizing an SRM the proposed decaying current method
applies a D.C. voltage with given width at each rotor position. The
time span of the voltage pulse is determined by the current's rising to
the maximum. Fig. 5 demonstrates a rising and decaying current slope
when a 700us pulse voltage is applied at certain rotor position. By this
means the phase current will reach its maximum at all the rotor posi-
tions, which enable the characterization covers the entire motor operat-
ing regime. The decaying stage is recorded for characterizing the SRM.
As can be noticed the current shape is not absolutely symmetry due to
the machine loss and bus voltage ﬂuctuation.
Since the mechanical period of an 8/6 SRM is 60° for each phase, the
measurements starts from the rotor/stator completely unaligned posi-
tion −30° and terminates at +30° by 1° interval. The 0° position hints
the rotor and stator are strictly aligned. Technically an interpolation al-
gorithm is utilized to obtain ﬁne granular I and θ mesh, and ﬁnally we
obtain the θ [−30°, 30°] with 0.3° resolution and the current [0A,9.0A]
with 0.045A interval. Hence the input set ﬁelds are divided into a
201 × 201 mesh, which means a mapping that uses a table looking-up
algorithm will require at least 161,604 byte memory cells for 40,401 sin-
gle precision ﬂoating point data storage. The amount of memory occu-
pation indicates the direct table looking-up is not suitable for
obtaining multiple parameters in embedded control system, which ne-
cessitates a model-based algorithm to solve this problem.
Fig. 2. Asymmetry half-bridge power converter for SRMs.
Fig. 3. Experimental system of an SRM.
77
X. Ling et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 74–80
According to the equations established in Section 1, the electromag-
netic properties can be characterized. Figs. 6–9 render the 3-D relation-
ship among the variables θ, I and ﬂux linkage ψ, phase inductance L,
magnetic co-energy W, electro torque T respectively.
4.3. Cross-validating the characterization result
Traditionally we often resort to an FEM-based approach to validate
the testing result, which is dubious due to the errors induced by mis-
matches between simulation parameters and the real case.
In order to validate the effectiveness and accuracy of the characteri-
zation, two aspects are considered in this paper. First, decaying current
is used to characterize the incremental inductance and at the same po-
sition the rising current is used to validate its result. This approach is
name after cross-validation because both the currents are shapes by
the identical inductance regarding to the ﬁxed position. The second as-
pect is that a numerical model is built according to the decaying current
model and then a full process is simulated and experimentally recorded
to show their agreement.
At a randomly selected rotor position 41.3066°, a 1100 μs pulse volt-
age is applied so as to allow the phase current approach its maximum.
The voltage width and the phase current response are recorded to
perform the simulation. On the basis of the ﬂux linkage characterization
shown in Fig. 6, the excitation current proﬁle is generated accordingly.
The simulation MATLAB/SIMULINK procedure is shown in Fig. 10,
and the experimentally measured current proﬁle and the simulation re-
sult are compared in Fig. 11. Fig. 11 shows that the simulated phase cur-
rent response to a ﬁxed voltage pulse matches the measured current,
and it proves that the electromagnetic properties characterization are
accurate at the full spectrum of current and rotor position. The current
Fig. 4. Control and drive circuitry for the SRM with DSP and FPGA processors
Fig. 5. Phase current proﬁle when a pulse voltage is applied.
Fig. 6. Linkage ﬂux as a function of the rotor position and the phase current.
Fig. 7. Inductance as a function of the rotor position and the phase current.
Fig. 8. Magnetic co-energy as a function of the rotor position and the phase current.
78
X. Ling et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 74–80
plateau at 9A embodies the overcurrent chopping effect in the protec-
tion circuit.
Clearly, this in-situ validation approach can be conducted immedi-
ately after the characterization process, and the results can be evaluated
by simply check the agreement of two one dimensional curves.
5. Conclusion
The proposed methodology, including both of the characterization
and veriﬁcation techniques for SRMs, opens up the possibility of pre-
cisely calculating its electromagnetic characteristics in real time,
which lays a foundation stone for versatile advanced control schemes
that require obtaining accurate electromagnetic parameters in
corresponding models. A model-based in-situ measuring system instru-
mented in COTS platform enables fast, applicable machine-by-machine
characterization in a massive production line of the motor manufac-
turers, which can be easily involved in an existing infrastructure. Exper-
imental results proved that the proposed method could achieve an
encouraging performance. Conclusions are listed as follows.
1) The proposed measuring approach utilize the off-the-shelf devices
and circuitry to support in-factory SRM test and characterization,
easing the burden of developing an ad hoc test bench and possessing
the ability of including all physical effects that exist in the real
application.
2) The precisely measured electromagnetics data and established
model enable detailed and precise examination of SRM behavior
over a wide variety of simulated operating conditions without the
limitations associated with drive circuits, transducers or instrumen-
tation, as the case we used for validating the characterization preci-
sion in Section 4.2. And it worth noting that all the electromagnetic
parameters are able to be manipulated under a uniﬁed computa-
tional framework.
3) Highly reliable cross validation methodology is proposed for verify-
ing the in-situ characterization result, which does not need any spe-
ciﬁcally design instrument either.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Xiao Ling:Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Meth-
odology, Validation, Writing - original draft.Liang Gong:Data curation,
Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Validation, Writing - orig-
inal draft, Writing - review & editing.Bingchu Li:Data curation, Method-
ology,
Validation.Chengling
Liu:Funding
acquisition,
Project
administration, Visualization, Writing - review & editing.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the ﬁnancial support provided
by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (project No.
11202125 and project No. 51305258).
Appendix A
Motor data:
Number of phases 4;
Number of rotor poles 6;
Rated power 750 W;
Rated torque 5.0 N m;
Maximum speed 1500 r/min;
Phase current limitation 9A;
Design speciﬁcation of the aligned phase inductance 22 mH;
Design speciﬁcation of the unaligned phase inductance0.5 mH;
Phase resistance 1.3 Ohm
Bus D.C. voltage 300 V;
Lamination material: M19 steel
References
Brauer, H.J., Hennen, M.D., De Doncker, R.W., Jan. 2012. Control for polyphase switched
reluctance machines tominimize torque ripple and decrease ohmic machinelosses.
IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics 27 (1), 370–378.
Cai, J., Deng, Z.Q., Jul. 2012. Sensorless control of switched reluctance motor based on
phase inductance vectors. IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics 27 (7), 3410–3423.
Cai, J., Deng, Z.Q., Mar., 2013. A position sensorless control of switched reluctance motors
based on phase inductance slope. Journal of Power Electronics 13 (2), 264–274.
Cheok, A.D., Fukuda, Y., Apr. 2002. A new torque and ﬂux control method for switched re-
luctance motor drives. IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics 17 (4), 543–557.
DiRenzo, Michael T., Feb., 2000. Switched Reluctance Motor Control – Basic Operation and
Example Using the TMS320F240. Tech. Memo.spra420aTexas Instruments Inc., Austin.
Dowlatshahi, M., Saghaiannejad, S.M., Ahn, J.W., et al., Mar. 2014. Copper loss and torque
ripple minimization in switched reluctance motors considering nonlinear and mag-
netic saturation effects. Journal of Power Electronics 14 (2), 351–361.
Gobbi, R., Sahoo, N.C., Rajandran, R. Vejian, 2006. Rising and falling current methods for
measurement of ﬂux-linkage characteristics of switched reluctance motors: a com-
parative study. Proc.of IEEE PECON’06, pp. 383–387.
Goto, H., Nishimiya, A., Guo, H.J., Jan. 2010. Instantaneous torque control using ﬂux-based
commutation and phase-torque distribution technique for SR motor EV. COMPEL-
International Journal for Computation and Mathematics in Electrical and Electronic
Engineering 29 (1), 173–186.
Kamalakannan, C., Kamaraj, V., Paramasivam, S., Paranjothi, S.R., 2011. Switched reluc-
tance machine in automotive applications — a technology status review. Proc.
ICEES, pp. 187–197.
Kjaer, P.C., Nielsen, P., Andersen, L., Blaabjerg, F., May 1995. A new energy optimizing con-
trol strategy for switched reluctance motors. IEEE Transactions on Industry Applica-
tions 31 (5), 1088–1095.
Krishnan, R., 2001. In: Irwin, J.D. (Ed.), Switched Reluctance Motor Drives: Modeling, Sim-
ulation, Analysis, Design, and Applications. Boca Raton, London New York
Washington, D.C.
Lee, D.H., Ahn, S.Y., Ahn, J.W., Jan. 2012. A simple negative torque compensation scheme
for a high speed switched reluctance motor. Journal of Power Electronics 12 (1),
58–66.
Miller, T.J.E., 2001. Electronic Control of Switched Reluctance Machines. Newnes D.C, Bur-
lington MA,USA.
Moron, C., Garcia, A., Tremps, E., Apr 2012. Torque control of switched reluctance motors.
IEEE Trans. Magn. 48 (4), 1661–1664.
Fig. 9. Electromagnetic torque as a function of the rotor position and the phase current.
Fig. 10. MATLAB/Simulink procedure for simulating the phase current response to a
voltage pulse.
79
X. Ling et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 74–80
Parreira, B., Rafael, S., Pires, A.J., Branco, P.J. Costa, Jun. 2005. Obtaining the magnetic char-
acteristics of an 8/6 switched reluctance machine: from FEM analysis to the experi-
mental test. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics 52 (6), 1635–1643.
Shin, D.S., Li, Y.C., Yang, H.Y., et al., Mar. 2005. Rotor position sensing method for switched
reluctance motors using an indirect sensor. Journal of Power Electronics 5 (3),
173–179.
Vujicic, P. Vladan, Jan. 2012. Minimization of torque ripple and copper losses in switched
reluctance drive. IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics 27 (1), 388–399.
Wang, B., Lee, D.H., Lee, C.W., et al., Sep. 2014. Characteristics analysis of a novel segmen-
tal rotor axial ﬁeld switched reluctance motor with single teeth winding. Journal of
Power Electronics 14 (5), 852–858.
Wen, D., Liu, L., Lou, J.Y., Mar 2013. Design and control of a high-speed switched reluc-
tance machine with conical magnetic bearings for aircraft application. IET Electronic
Power Applications 7 (3), 179–190.
Wong, K.F., Cheng, K.W.E., Ho, S.L., Mar 2009. Four-quadrant instantaneous torque control
of switched reluctance machine at low speed based on co-energy control. IET Elec-
tronic Power Applications 3 (5), 431–444.
Yoo, A., Sul, S.K., Lee, D.C., Jun, C.S., Dec 2009. Novel speed and rotor position estimation
strategy using a dual observer for low-resolution position sensors. IEEE Transactions
on Power Electronics 24 (12), 2897–2906.
Yu, S.Y., Feng, F.G., Lee, D.H., et al., Jan. 2015. High efﬁciency operation of a switched reluc-
tance generator over a wide speed range. Journal of Power Electronics 15 (1),
123–130.
Zeng, H., Chen, Z., Chen, H., Mar. 2014. Smooth torque speed characteristic of switched re-
luctance motors. Journal of Power Electronics 14 (2), 341–350.
Zhang, P., Cassani, P.A., Williamson, S.S., Sept. 2010. An accurate inductance proﬁle mea-
surement technique for switched reluctance machines. IEEE Transactions on Indus-
trial Electronics 57 (9), 2972–2979.
Fig. 11. A comparison between the measured current and the model-generated current.
80
X. Ling et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 74–80
