 AASRI Procedia  1 ( 2012 )  1 
2212-6716 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
doi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2012.06.001 
2012 AASRI Conference on Computational Intelligence and Bioinformatics
Preface 
2012 AASRI Conference on Computational Intelligence and Bioinformatics (CIB2012) is held during July 1-2, 2012, at 
Changsha in China. 
The proceeding of CIB2012 include about 90 excellent papers selected from more than 300 submitted paper(s) whose 
authors involved at least countries and areas such as China, Malaysia, Japan. 
The conference is intended to bring together the researchers and engineers/technologists working in different aspects of 
Computational Intelligence and Bioinformatics. In addition to the contributed papers, the conference committee has 
invited papers by active researchers from various countries in relevant topic areas covered at CIB2012. And experts from 
several countries are invited to deliver plenary/Keynote lectures at CIB2012. 
Much of the credit of the success of the conference is due to topic coordinators who have devoted their expertise and 
experience in promoting and in general co-ordination of the activities for the organization and operation of the conference. 
The coordinators of various session topics have devoted a considerable time and energy in soliciting papers from relevant 
researchers for presentation at the conference. The Chairs of the different session played important role in conducting the 
proceedings of the session in a timely and efficient manner and the Committee expresses sincere appreciation for their 
involvement. 
The reviewers of the manuscripts, those by tradition would remain anonymous, have been very helpful in efficiently 
reviewing the manuscripts, providing valuable comments well within the time allotted to them. The Editors express their 
sincere and grateful thanks to all reviewers. 
The CIB2012 International Committee is proud to dedicate this conference proceeding to the Prof. Tianbiao Chang from 
American Applied Sciences Research Institute (USA) and Andrew Hunter from Kuala Lumpur ACM Chapter(Malaysia). 
Selected as our Conference Chairs, They are not only outstanding and visionary researchers but also humble leaders. 
Finally, our sincere thanks to the support from technology program committee for designing the conference web page and 
also spending countless days in preparing the final conference program in time for printing. Many thanks to Miss Han: 
CIB2012 secretary for arranging to type a large number of the invitation letters and for establishing the vast CIB2012 
conference address data base. Sincere thanks to our organization committee for their several months’ hard work in sorting 
out manuscripts from various authors. Also thanks to other staffs assisting in the various stage of the editorial work, 
especially the international committees of our conference. 
Wei Deng 
AASRI
Procedia
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
