REVIEW ARTICLE
The salient features of personal data
protection laws with special reference to
cloud technologies. A comparative study
between European countries and Russia
Zharova Anna *
Department of Innovations and Business in IT, Faculty of Business Informatics, National Research
University, Higher School of Economics, 33 Kirpichnaya Str., Moscow, Russia
Received 22 April 2015; revised 30 June 2015; accepted 27 July 2015
Available online 14 August 2015
KEYWORDS
Internet;
Relationships between
entities;
The legal regulation;
Cloud computing;
Personal data;
ISP
Abstract
This article describes the basic directions of state policy in the use and
implementation of cloud computing. It answers the question about the applica-
bility of foreign cloud services for the processing of personal data of citizens of
Russia. It describes the systematization of cloud services in Russia and the EU. It
deﬁnes some speciﬁc measures to ensure the protection of personal data using the
standards of the EU and Russia.
� 2015 The Author. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud
University. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
* Tel.: +7 (495) 771 32 38.
E-mail address: ajarova@hse.ru.
URL: http://www.hse.ru/en/org/persons/index_best.html?ltr=Z.
Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.
Production and hosting by Elsevier
Applied Computing and Informatics (2016) 12, 1–15
Saudi Computer Society, King Saud University
Applied Computing and Informatics
(http://computer.org.sa)
www.ksu.edu.sa
www.sciencedirect.com
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2015.07.001
2210-8327 � 2015 The Author. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents
1.
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.
The concept of cloud computing in Europe and Russia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.
The legal concept of cloud computing in Europe and Russia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.2.
The technical concept of cloud computing in Europe and Russia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
3.
The policy of the States about the regulation of cloud computing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
4.
Legal regulation on use of personal data in Russia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5.
Ensuring the technological security of the transmission and processing of personal
data in Russia and Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
6.
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1. Introduction
The term ‘‘cloud computing” is often used in various spheres of public life. It
refers to technology created to optimize business processes and improve the service
quality of different service providers and to increase people’s informatization level.
Questions on people’s interpersonal relationships arise more acutely in the ﬁeld of
medicine, government, banking and the private sector. The application of cloud
computing is a strategically important development for computer technologies
and offers the opportunity to provide different services.
The active introduction of cloud computing posed questions for legislators
about the speciﬁcs of regulating people’s behavior online. These questions concern
data security when it is stored in the cloud, and whether cloud computing is
privately- or government-owned. Questions about the requirements for cloud
Internet Service Provider’s (ISP) effective functions, as well as an ISP’s
responsibility for its own actions and those of third parties, remain unanswered.
Is it possible to be sure that technology which allows us access to cloud comput-
ing is reliable and safe? What if public information and IT systems are hosted
abroad?
In this article we will not consider the questions of the processing of state secrets
or publicly accessible data by cloud computing. Rather we will address the main
issues with cloud computing as far as data protection is concerned. Kristina Irion
has described this problem, saying ‘‘many governments have raised concerns
about national data sovereignty when government information is moved to the
cloud. How can conﬁdentiality of public information assets residing in the cloud
be ensured? What if public information and IT systems are hosted abroad?. . .”
[[16], p. 41]
I will consider the difﬁculties that legislation encounters when trying to ensure
the protection of limited-access data, such as personal details.
2
Z. Anna
2. The concept of cloud computing in Europe and Russia
2.1. The legal concept of cloud computing in Europe and Russia
Although currently the active application of the term ‘‘cloud computing” in the
Russian
Federation,
and
implemented
programs
for
public
e-health
and
e-government are based on cloud computing, this term has no legislative
deﬁnition. The State Program of the Russian Federation ‘‘Information Society
(2011–2020)” considers the development of cloud computing to be one of the main
priorities for 2015. The creation of a national platform of cloud computing is
provided for in this government program. It is planned to connect all the
public authorities of the Russian Federation in the period of 2011–2020 [30].
In fact, cloud computing was taught at technical universities in 1990s and the
further development of this technology at public institutes was predicted.
Consequently, we use the deﬁnition of the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers (IEEE). According to the IEEE’s deﬁnition published in
2008, ‘‘Cloud data processing is a paradigm within which information is
constantly stored on servers on the Internet and is temporarily cached with
the client party, for example on personal computers, game consoles, laptops
and smart-phones [15].” The IEEE, investigating the prospects for developing
cloud computing, drew a parallel between this technology and the internet. In
Russia, IEEE companies operate in Siberia, the Northwest (St. Petersburg)
and Central Russia (Moscow) [32].
Unlike Russia, the European Union passed a law in 2012, in which it was spec-
iﬁed that ‘‘Cloud computing in simpliﬁed terms can be understood as the storing,
processing and using of data on remotely located computers accessed over the
internet.” This means that users can command almost unlimited computing power
on demand, that they do not have to make major capital investments to fulﬁl their
needs and that they can access their data from anywhere so long as they have an
internet connection. Cloud computing has the potential to slash users’ IT
expenditure and to enable many new services to be developed [6].”
In Russia, the lack of a legal deﬁnition allows ambiguous interpretations of the
area of legislative regulation.
2.2. The technical concept of cloud computing in Europe and Russia
Cloud computing is considered to be a platform for different services. However,
it is only classiﬁed in the technical sphere. The site International Organization
for
Standardization
(ISO)
contains
the
following
classiﬁcation
of
cloud
computing:
(1) SaaS (Software as a Service) – the user of cloud computing is granted the
right to use and access the necessary software.
Personal data protection laws with special reference to cloud technologies
3
(2) IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service) – the user of cloud computing is granted the
right to use a provider’s hardware–software complex for work and data
storage.
(3) PaaS (Platform as a Service) – the user of cloud computing is granted the
right to use a hardware–software complex for the development, testing,
expansion and support of web applications [13].
In 2013, the Russian Federation’s service for technical export control set out the
State projected standard which deﬁned cloud services such as follows:
– Hardware as a Service (HaaS);
– Security as a Service (SecaaS);
– Business process as a Service (BPaaS);
– Data as a Service (DaaS);
– Trust as a Service (TaaS);
– Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS);
– Cloud Development Environment as a Service (CDEaaS);
– Communication as a Service (CaaS);
– Platform as a Service (PaaS);
– Connection as a Service (CnaaS);
– Transparency as a Service (TraaS);
– Workplace as a Service (WaaS).
This classiﬁcation complements the ISO classiﬁcation. However, it seems it is
redundant. Probably for this reason it is not accepted in Russia as a legal
standard.
3. The policy of the States about the regulation of cloud computing
Legal questions about the regulation of the use of cloud computing are a concern
for the majority of the European countries. In 2012, the EC developed a proposal
for the regulation of the European parliament and for the Council on the protec-
tion of individuals’ personal data processing and on the free movement of data
(General Data Protection Regulation) [21].
The Cloud Security Alliance (CSA) discussed the importance of this problem of
data protection, particularly personal data, in cloud computing. ‘‘Data privacy
considerations are often overlooked in the development phase of the cloud, Inter-
net of Things and Big Data solutions, and instead are viewed through a maze of
complicated regulations and guidance [4].” Angela Adrian remarks also that
‘‘unfortunately the legal infrastructure is inadequate to secure privacy.” [[1], p. 49]
This problem is very important for Russia. In 2010 the Deputy Minister of the
Ministry of Communications and Mass Communications, Ilya Massukh, said that
‘‘these kinds of proprietary technologies in Russia are practically non-existent,
therefore this sector is actively engaging with foreign companies such as
4
Z. Anna
Google [20].” But, in 2014, a Russian Advisory Council from the Ministry of
Communications and Mass Media Communications was created to improve the
development of, and implement a state policy for, standards and legal regulation
of cloud computing. The Advisory Council aimed to develop suggestions for
improving the legislation for cloud computing to ensure the regular interaction
of the Ministry of Communications and Mass Media with the expert community
on cloud technologies [29].
EU Member States are also attempting to solve the problems which have arisen
for users and developers of cloud computing. On 11 September 2013, the
European Commission (EC) adopted a legislative package called ‘‘Connected
Continent: Building a Telecoms Single Market.” The website claimed that ‘‘the
package could boost the cloud computing market in Europe, as, among others,
it aims at improving the quality of service that new services (such as cloud
computing, video-conferencing, 3D printing) can offer [7].”
In Russia, according to the Order of the Government of the Russian Federation
of 22.02.2012 No. 238-p Rostelecom1 was appointed the sole executor for the fur-
ther creation and development of complex information technology and telecom-
munications infrastructure including cloud computing and e-government for
2012–2014.
Rostelecom must execute the list of activities of the Russian state program
‘‘Information Society (2011–2020 years).” This program includes the development
of a portal for public services, the development of a common space of trust in elec-
tronic signatures, the development of interagency electronic interaction and a sin-
gle identiﬁcation system. It is planned that Rostelecom will engage in the
development of mechanisms which enable the use of mobile devices for access
to e-government services and to the state-mail address which is used for the inter-
action between citizens and government agencies.
Rostelecom must create common directories and qualiﬁers for state information
systems and it must develop systems such as the ‘‘Electronic Registry Ofﬁce,”
‘‘E-Regions” and ‘‘E-democracy.” The basis for the implementation of these
systems is a cloud computing platform. These systems offer infrastructure and
software as a service (IaaS and SaaS). [The Ofﬁcial website of the Ministry of
Communications and Mass Communications of the Russian Federation]
The Strategy ‘‘of the development of information technologies in the Russian
Federation for 2014–2020 and planning until 2025” directs the creation of a
Russian national platform for cloud computing [31]. For the realization of this
strategy, the Russian government operates as the sole customer for everything
needed for the Russian market for information technologies. Rostelecom devel-
oped and launched a cloud platform in August 2011. This helps Rostelecom sell
their computing resources and software to third parties. In the future, this
platform could be integrated into the national platform of cloud computing.
1 The largest national telecommunications company in Russia.
Personal data protection laws with special reference to cloud technologies
5
Currently, the Russian Federation plans to create seven powerful data centers,
on the basis of which cloud services for government agencies and academia will be
provided. They include the public services platform, ‘‘Gospriklad,” which was
developed for the provision of public services [27].
The Decree of the Government of the Russian Federation of July 20, 2011 N
1275-p approved the concept of the creation and development of an integrated
information system for the state management of public ﬁnances, the so-called
‘‘Electronic budget.” This concept was recommended to the executive authorities
of the Russian Federation and local authorities for the development of systems of
public (municipal) ﬁnance. The subsystems of ‘‘Electronic budget” system will be
available as a service for citizens of the Russian Federation, the municipalities or
government sector organizations on a pro bono basis. These subsystems will be
submitted as a model of ‘‘Software as a Service” (SaaS).
The portal of the Russian ‘‘Electronic budget” will consist of closed and of open
parts.
The open part of this portal is being provided as a public information resource,
providing free access to the regulatory, statistical and analytical information for
the management of public ﬁnances. Storage and processing are being carried
out in a centralized service of the ‘‘Electronic budget” system.
The closed part of this portal consists of ‘‘private ofﬁces” which can be available
to users with the appropriate authorization and electronic signature keys. The
closed part is the common point for user access to all services of the ‘‘Electronic
budget,” which will include a uniﬁed system of management of user access levels,
depending on their powers. These services will be available to users of the cloud
platform in areas such as medicine, housing, energy, and transport.
An example of the application of cloud computing for providing public services
is the UK. In 2010 the UK started a project called G-Cloud (‘‘Government
cloud”). This optimizes the activities of government data centers and reduces gov-
ernment spending. Features of the G-Cloud include ﬂexible scaling, open access to
resources, an adequate level of security, a high degree of standardization and
extensive information sharing. Such features make G-Cloud an attractive and eco-
nomical solution to the complex architecture of internet-based administration. It is
planned that through the G-Cloud the British authorities will have been able to
reduce IT costs by over 20% in 2014 [25].
In the UK, a government gateway (Government Gateway) was introduced
which provided the centralized online access to the government cloud. The
Government Gateway has helped to bring together the disparate public internet
resources of Great Britain, and also has closed a thousand duplicate administra-
tion sites out of a previous total of four thousand. This government gateway
allows the exchange of information between portals. In addition, it stores all infor-
mation in case of the failure of one of the subordinate portals. All citizens and
legal entities are required to register in the Government Gateway for work and
6
Z. Anna
to use this technology. The residents and the organizations in Britain are able to
use three main British online services:
1. DirectGov: the portal of the Ministry of Work and Pensions for individuals;
2. NHS Choices: the portal of the Ministry of Health for individuals;
3. BusinessLink: the portal of the Ministry of tax and customs revenues for
businesses.
The applicable technological system provides the transaction authentication
and security. According to experts, the savings will be not less than £8 each time
a citizen accesses these services [25].
Unfortunately, in the Russian Federation there are not so many examples of the
use of models of public services based on cloud computing, although, from 2013
the idea of cloud computing in government was being actively implemented [26].
4. Legal regulation on use of personal data in Russia
Of course, answers to the above questions are linked to the category of informa-
tion (limited access or open information) and also to subjects of the relationships
such as the ISP, the user or the government. Cloud technology can belong to
foreign or Russian ISPs. Information can be public or have limited access (ch. 2
Art. 5 of Federal law ‘‘Information, Informational Technologies and Protection
of
Information”)
[9].
Limited
access
information
can
be
personal
data;
‘‘know-how”; and secret data imported from companies, and is regulated only
by Federal legislation.
Cloud computing depends on its owner, which can be public or private. Public
clouds belong to the state authorities or the local council. Furthermore, public
cloud data may be better protected than the private cloud computing.
As Angela Adrian remarks, ‘‘how should legal rules change to accommodate
the new communication technology? If cloud computing does not alter our funda-
mental values, how should legal rules adapt and change in order to maintain our
current values? What should the substance of our rules be in light of the changing
environment for the actors in the cloud? [Angela Adrian, p. 49]
According to Art. 7 of the Russian Federal law ‘‘On personal data,” ‘‘the users
of personal data and other persons who have access to personal data are obliged
not to disclose this information to third parties and not to impart personal data
without consent of the subject of personal data. The other cases must be provided
by the law [10].”
What ought to be done if information is stored in a foreign cloud?
According to item 11. Art. 3 of the Federal law ‘‘On personal data,” the cross-
border transfer of personal data is the transfer of personal data to the territory of
a foreign state, to the authority of the foreign state, to a foreign national person or
a foreign legal entity.
Personal data protection laws with special reference to cloud technologies
7
Therefore, the cross-border transfer of personal data is the transmission of per-
sonal data on any person from the Russian Federation to a foreign person, abroad
as, for example, when a person is ﬁlling in a form online to purchase goods from a
foreign seller.
Art. 19 of the Law ‘‘On personal data” states that the Russian operator of per-
sonal data has to establish in the agreement with the foreign handler of the infor-
mation, the duty to comply with the conﬁdentiality of personal data, to ensure to
the safety of personal data, and also to comply with other requirements to protect
personal information. According to item 3. Art. 12 of the Law ‘‘On personal data”
the operator of personal data must be convinced that the foreign country to which
the data are transferred provides adequate protection for people’s rights to their
personal data. The Federal law ‘‘On personal data” speciﬁes that states can be
considered in two groups of countries:
(1) Member countries of the Convention for the Protection of Individuals with
regard to the Automatic Processing of Personal Data (1981); (This Conven-
tion came into force in the Russian Federation on September 1, 2013) [24].
(2) Countries which are not the party to the Convention for the Protection of
Individuals with regard to the Automatic Processing of Personal Data
(1981), but which are listed as foreign states which provide adequate protec-
tion of the people’s rights to their personal data.2
The Russian Ministry of Communications and Mass Media, in unofﬁcial letter
on May 13, 2009, explained that ‘‘the adequacy of protection means that the
foreign state provides a level of security of people’s rights to their personal data,
not less than the standards provided for in Russia. One of the assessment criteria
of the state in this respect is the ratiﬁcation of the Convention for the Protection
of Individuals with regard to the Automatic Processing of Personal Data
(1981) [17].”
However, if a cross-border transfer of personal data is being carried out in for-
eign states which do not provide adequate protection for people’s rights to their
personal data, then the user of the personal data must receive, in written form,
that person’s consent for their personal data to be transferred. These relationships
between foreign ISP (operator of personal data) and the owner of personal data
are regulated by the two Russian laws. They are the Federal law ‘‘On personal
data” and the Federal law ‘‘On electronic signatures” [11].
2 Australian alliance; The Argentine Republic; The State of Israel; Canada; Kingdom of Morocco; Malaysia;
United Mexican States; Mongolia; New Zealand; The Republic of Angola; The Republic of Benin; The Republic
of Cape Verde; The Republic of Korea; The Republic of Peru; The Republic of Senegal; Republic of Tunisia;
Republic of Chile; Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China; The Swiss
Confederation//The Order of the Federal Service for Supervision of Communications, Information Technology
and Communications of March 15, 2013 No. 274 ‘‘On approval of the list of foreign countries that are not parties
to the Convention of the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Individuals with regard to
Automatic Processing of Personal Data, and provide adequate protection of human subjects personal data”//
http://www.garant.ru/products/ipo/prime/doc/70268490/#ixzz3E8YwESIQ.
8
Z. Anna
In accordance with part 4 Art. 9 of the Federal law ‘‘On personal data,” the
participants in the relationship have the right to use an electronic signature to
create a written form of their agreement. Art. 4 of the Federal law ‘‘On electronic
signatures” deﬁned the rights of parties in the electronic interaction been using any
information technology and (or) the technical means to apply an electronic
signature. However, the Federal law ‘‘On electronic signatures” requires that
participants (the provider of personal data and owners of personal data) must
approve of these actions. This approval can be placed on the main web page of
the cloud ISP which handles personal data. The owner of the personal data must
agree with these conditions.
However, there is another view. Vladimir Kanashevsky writes that sending an
e-mail message from a Russian user to a foreign cloud ISP of personal data cannot
be signed with an electronic signature. ‘‘The foreign ISP potentially can be
brought to civil liability in accordance with Russian law. In connection with this
action, the claim for the damages and compensation for moral damages can be
brought to the foreign operator [14].”
I do not accept the opinion of Vladimir Kanashevsky. Firstly, this author did
not consider the provisions of the Russian Federal law ‘‘On electronic signatures.”
This law points directly to the recognition of foreign electronic signatures. Article
7 of this law indicates that ‘‘if an electronic signature is created in accordance with
the law of a foreign state and the international standards then it is recognized in
the Russian Federation as an electronic signature that corresponds to the Federal
law ‘‘On electronic signatures.” Also, according to part 2 of Art. 7 of this law ‘‘On
electronic signatures,” an electronic document signed by an electronic signature
cannot be regarded as illegal only on the basis that the electronic signature
veriﬁcation key certiﬁcate is issued in accordance with the rules of the foreign
law. [Federal law ‘‘On electronic signatures,” 2011]
Secondly, part 2 of Art. 9 of the Federal law ‘‘On personal data” determines
that the consent of the subject of personal data can be given in any form. For
example, this form can be an e-mail message. Thus, the Federal law ‘‘On personal
data” and the Federal law ‘‘On electronic signatures” deﬁne the legal conditions of
consent recognition.
However, be aware that the Federal law ‘‘On personal data” allows the ISP of
personal data not to obtain the consent of the subject of personal data if the cross-
border transfer of personal data is carried out ‘‘for the execution of a contract.
And party to this contract is the subject of personal data.” (part 4 Art. 12 of
the Federal law ‘‘On personal data”). Thus, this Federal law indicates the presence
of the preliminary agreement on cooperation.
There is another exception under which the telecom operator3 does not have to
obtain the consent of the personal data individual. In 2013, the Russian Federal
law ‘‘On communications” was changed [12]. Art. 53 of this law added the right
3 The telecom operator in accordance with Russian law is a legal entity or individual employer which provides
communication services based on a relevant license.
Personal data protection laws with special reference to cloud technologies
9
of the telecom operator to entrust the processing of personal data of clients to
third parties even if a telecom operator has not received the consent of this person.
This is the case only if the telecom operator processes the personal data in accor-
dance with the contract for the provision of telecommunications services, and/or
the telecom operator acts for the implementation of the rights and legitimate inter-
ests of the service provider or the client. However, the Federal law ‘‘On commu-
nications” did not disclose whether the operator had to warn of the fact that
personal data was processed by a third party.
In addition, in 2014 the Federal Law ‘‘On Personal Data” was included the
obligation of the operator of personal data to provide entry the storage, clariﬁca-
tion, update, change and the extraction of personal data of citizens of the Russian
Federation with the use of databases that were in the territory of the Russian
Federation.
Thus, Kanashevsky’s opinion about the complexities of personal data process-
ing by a foreign cloud ISP of personal data does not apply in most cases.
In 2013–2014, the overall transmission model of personal data to external
operators was changed in Russia. The list of cases expanded in which consent is
not required from the subject of personal data on processing their data by third
parties. So in terms of legal regulation in Russia, the implementation of any cloud
service through the use of foreign cloud has become easier.
5. Ensuring the technological security of the transmission and processing of personal
data in Russia and Europe
Of course, the cross-border transfer of data is associated with problems of trans-
mission security and the processing of personal data. Experts in the technical
sphere claim that it is impossible to ensure the absolute safety of these technologies
[2]. Noriswadi Ismail has also written about these problems [18].
Providers of cloud services must address the questions of data security. The
technological complexity of security in the cloud means that a virus-infected ﬁle
from one client can infect other connected and inactive clients. In connection with
this, there is the danger of compromised data being stored in the cloud. The
responsibility for protection lies with the provider. Users of cloud services need
to be sure that the provider uses security tools. The provider of cloud services
should allow the user to check the level of protection and should record the actions
of all clients who have access to the cloud.
Also it is difﬁcult to select a required standard from all the existing standards. A
European Commission communication described this problem: ‘‘A jungle of
standards generates confusion by, on one hand, a proliferation of standards and
on the other hand a lack of certainty as to which standards provide adequate levels
of interoperability of data formats to permit portability; the extent to which safe-
guards are in place for the protection of personal data; or the problem of the data
breaches and the protection against cyber-attacks. . . [6]”. The authors propose to
10
Z. Anna
solve the problem of responsibility for the actions of third parties through a choice
of jurisdiction which is determined by the agreement.
But here it is necessary to bear in mind that there is no legal obligation to
choose standards in the European Union or the Russian Federation. The choice
of technology depends only on the parties to the relationship. Usually, the respon-
sibility lies with the cloud ISP of personal data for the choice of the standard.
Taiwan chose this approach. Fa-Chang Cheng and Wen-Hsing Lai write that
‘‘The Information Industry in Taiwan is now trying to realize the accountability
concept through building up the certiﬁcate system in protecting the personal infor-
mation privacy, especially for the purpose of protection within Cyberspace [8].”
In Russia, the Federal Service for the Supervision of Communications, Infor-
mation Technology, and Mass Media (Roskomnadzor) for reducing the require-
ments for the protection system described in the ‘‘Recommendations on the
choice of methods for the depersonalisation of data [19]” made recommendations
and proposed various methods to anonymize personal data. When personal data
depersonalize the complexity of the selection standards is lowered.
Noriswadi Ismail writes about solution adopted by Microsoft. ‘‘Microsoft pro-
poses the amendment of CFAA’s civil action provision that the cloud service pro-
viders possess a private right of action against those who illegally access their data-
centers or secure unauthorized access to their customers’ accounts. This proposed
cause of action shall allow cloud service providers to combat digital criminals on
behalf of their customers.” [[18], p. 252]
If there are no special requirements of the law, then a Russia provider of cloud
computing can voluntarily be audited and certiﬁed by the ISO/IEC 27001: 2005
and (or) SAS 70 Type II and Type I. Voluntary certiﬁcation will allow the provider
to prove that he sought by his actions to ensure data security.
The European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) proposed
using ISO27001. Moreover ENISA noted that all suppliers must demonstrate
compliance. They are NOT required to be accredited but compliance is veriﬁed
through yearly submission of their information security management system
and associated policy documents.
Additional certiﬁcations and accreditations assist European Health organisa-
tions in choosing appropriate providers, e.g., ISO20000 (Service Management),
ISO9001 (Quality), but these are not required.
In terms of audit and compliance with regulations or the nominated standards
of the service provider, cloud computing service providers must ensure that they
are able and willing to allow the right to audit their policies, processes, systems
and services.” [Cloud Computing. Beneﬁts, risks, 2009]
There are other mechanisms to ensure information security of processed and
stored data. The report made by ENISA suggests possible solutions to existing prob-
lems. All datacollected by European Health must satisfythe following requirements:
Data (including sensitive personal data) must be encrypted in transit and at rest
where potentially at risk (e.g., on mobile devices);
Personal data protection laws with special reference to cloud technologies
11
Data processing must satisfy European data protection law (e.g., deﬁnition of
‘‘data processor” for all operations);
National law applies certain restrictions on the processing of the data (e.g., data
should not leave the original country of collection at any time);
Clinical safety has to be paramount with certain applications, meaning that
integrity and availability have to be guaranteed in some instances;
Sensitive data should be destroyed at a speciﬁed time in its lifecycle (e.g., by
destruction of hard disks at the ‘end of life’ of equipment);
Physical security controls in data-centers where data is stored must be ade-
quately assured (some of this is covered currently via ISO27001 submissions from
suppliers);
Senior staff are given special responsibility for the conﬁdentiality of ‘‘patient
and service-user information [3].”
The Federal law, ‘‘About Technical Regulation [12]” in Art. 12 permits the
voluntary application of standards in the ﬁeld of a hardware–software. At the
same time, the Russian Federation is actively cooperating with such organizations
as the Technical Committee (TK) in the ﬁeld of standardization. This has given
Russian experts the opportunity of working in the international ﬁeld of IT
standardization. The international organization is the joint technical committee
IS0/IEC JTC1, ‘‘Information technologies,” with its subcommittees and working
groups. The Russian experts working in this organization have had the opportu-
nity to vote when standards have been discussed and new rules proposed.
Thus, the question of the technological security of personal data between
Europe and Russia can be solved if countries agree on a speciﬁc standard as
any international standard is developed by ISO is legal in the territory of Russia.
Every participant in a well-regulated market knows that, without implementa-
tion of the requirements of the existing standards which are have been developed
with the direct voluntary participation of the product suppliers and service provi-
ders, not only successful activity but the existence of the market itself, would be
impossible.
6. Conclusion
Cloud computing has drawbacks which carry new risks. These are topical both in
Russia and Europe.
The European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) has identi-
ﬁed network and information security risks which small and medium size enter-
prises (SMEs) should take into account when adopting cloud computing. [5]
1: Software security vulnerabilities
2: Network attacks
3: Social engineering attacks
4: Management GUI and API compromise
12
Z. Anna
5: Device theft/loss
6: Physical hazards
7: Overloads
8: Unexpected costs
9: Vendor lock-in
10: Administrative or legal outages
11: Foreign jurisdiction issues
The Cloud Security Guide for SMEs detailed the causes of such risks for plat-
forms such as IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS.
Russia has not produced an ofﬁcial, systematized description of the risks asso-
ciated with cloud computing. However, there is a systematized list of requirements
for the protection of the information contained in information systems. Thus, in
2013, the Federal Service for Technical and Export Control promulgated an Order
‘‘On approval of requirements on data protection that do not constitute state
secrets and that are included in state information system [28].” In this Order, cloud
computing is mentioned only in claim 24 as ‘‘the measures of information protec-
tion that is being selected and is being implemented in information system...can
apply to the environment of virtualization and cloud computing.”
In 2014, the Ministry of Communications prepared a bill ‘‘On Amendments to
Certain Legislative Acts of the Russian Federation regarding the use of cloud
computing [23].” This proposed amendments to the Federal Law ‘‘On Informa-
tion, Information Technologies and Protection of Information.” It included the
concept of ‘‘cloud computing” and the qualiﬁcation requirements for providers
of cloud computing services; requirements for ﬁnancial stability of the respective
suppliers; data protection which is processed by such providers; rules for tariff
regulation of prices for cloud computing services; conditions for the use of cloud
computing and rules for the provision of cloud services; and responsibilities of the
parties. Simultaneously, the bill proposes to amend the Federal Law ‘‘On personal
data”
to
establish
protection
for
personal
data
subject
to
cross-border
transmission.
The adoption of this bill should enable a deﬁnition of the scope of legal rela-
tions, rules and regulations applicable to the parties involved in such relationships.
However, it has not yet been introduced into the State Duma for consideration.
This is a serious impediment to the further development of relationships in connec-
tion with cloud computing in the Russian Federation.
References
[1] Angela Adrian, How much privacy do clouds provide? An Australian perspective, Comput. Law Secur. Rev.
29 (2013).
[2] A.P. Baranov, Can we protect in the ‘‘cloud” of conﬁdential information?, High Avail Syst. 8 (2) (2012).
[3] Cloud Computing, Beneﬁts, risks and recommendations for information security, November 2009, <http://
www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/risk-management/ﬁles/deliverables/cloud-computing-risk-assessment>
(accessed 12.12.14).
Personal data protection laws with special reference to cloud technologies
13
[4] Cloud Security Alliance, Published 2014, 23, September/2014 CSA Research News/New Cloud Security
Alliance Survey Reveals Emerging International Data Privacy Challenges, <https://cloudsecurityalliance.
org/media/news/csa-survey-reveals-emerging-international-data-privacy-challenges/> (accessed 10.12.14).
[5] Cloud Security Guide for SMEs, <http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/Resilience-and-CIIP/cloud-com-
puting/security-for-smes/cloud-security-guide-for-smes>.
[6] Communication from the commission to the European parliament, the council, the European economic and
social committee and the committee of the regions unleashing the potential of cloud computing in Europe,
Brussels, 27.9.2012, <http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2012:0529:FIN:EN:
PDF> (accessed 12.12.14).
[7] Digital Agenda for Europe, A Europe 2020 Initiative, European Cloud Computing Strategy, 2012, <https://
ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/european-cloud-computing-strategy> (accessed 10.12.14).
[8] Fa-Chang Cheng, Lai Wen-Hsing, The impact of cloud computing technology on legal infrastructure within
internet—focusing on the protection of information privacy, Procedia Eng 29 (2012) 241–251.
[9] Federal law of the Russian Federation on 27 July 2006, in N 149-FZ ‘‘On Information, Informational
Technologies and Protection of Information”, The system GARANT Legislation with comments.
[10] Federal law of the Russian Federation on 27 July 2006, in N 152-FZ ‘‘On Personal Data”, The system
GARANT Legislation with comments.
[11] Federal law of the Russian Federation on 6 April 2011, N 63-FZ ‘‘On Electronic Signature”, The system
GARANT Legislation with comments.
[12] Federal law of the Russian Federation on 27 December 2002, N 184-FZ ‘‘About Technical Regulation”, The
system GARANT Legislation with comments.
[13] ISO/IEC TR 20000-9:2015 Information technology – Service management – Part 9: Guidance on the
application of ISO/IEC 20000-1 to cloud services, <http://www.iso.org/iso/home/store/catalogue_tc/cata-
logue_detail.htm?csnumber=65671>.
[14] V.A. Kanashevsky, Legal regime of cross-border transfer of Personal Data, Legislation, N 12, December,
2012.
[15] Klaus, How High Clouds Go, 2011, <http://blog.stimulsoft.com/articles/how-high-clouds-go> (accessed
12.12.14).
[16] Kristina Irion, Government cloud computing and national data sovereignty, Policy Internet 4 (3–4) (2012).
[17] Letter of the Ministry of Communications and Mass Communications of the Russian Federation of 13 May
2009 N CP-P11-2502 ‘‘On the implementation of the cross-border transfer of personal data”, The system
GARANT Legislation with comments.
[18] Noriswadi Ismail, Cursing the cloud (or) controlling the cloud?, Comput Law Secur. Rev. (2011) 27
[19] Ofﬁcial website of the Federal Service for Supervision of Communications, Information Technology, and
Mass Media (Roskomnadzor), <http://rkn.gov.ru/news/rsoc/news23181.htm> (accessed 12.12.14).
[20] Ofﬁcial website of the Ministry of Communications and Mass Communications of the Russian Federation,
<http://minsvyaz.ru/ru/monitoring/index.php?id_4=43034> (accessed 12.12.14).
[21] Proposal for a regulation of the European parliament and of the council on the protection of individuals with
regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data (General Data Protection
Regulation),
<http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/document/review2012/com_2012_11_en.pdf>
(accessed 11.05.15).
[23] The bill of the Russia Federation ‘‘On Amendments to Certain Legislative Acts of the Russian Federation
regarding the use of cloud computing”, <http://www.consultant.ru/law/hotdocs/33631.html?utm_cam-
paign=hotdocs_day8&utm_source=ya.direct&utm_medium=cpc&utm_content=412295200>.
[24] The Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data,
Strasbourg, 28.I., 1981,<http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/EN/Treaties/HTML/108.htm>(accessed12.12.14).
[25] The experience of the e-government in the United Kingdom, <http://www.microsoft.com/rus/govern-
ment/electronic/> (accessed 12.12.14).
[26] Internet interview with the head of the department of information technologies, communication and
information security of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Russian Federation, Lieut-Gen of internal
service Tyurkin M.L. Development and introduction of modern information technologies in system of the
Ministry of Internal Affairs of Russia, The system GARANT Legislation with comments.
[27] The Ministry of Telecom and Mass Communications will create a resource it is Gospriklad.ru in, 2011,
<http://minsvyaz.ru/ru/monitoring/index.php?id_4=41944> (accessed 12.12.14).
[28] The Order of the Federal Service for Technical and Export Control ‘‘On approval of requirements on data
protection that do not constitute state secrets and that are included in state information system.”, <http://
14
Z. Anna
fstec.ru/normotvorcheskaya/akty/53-prikazy/702-prikaz-fstek-rossii-ot-11-fevralya-2013-g-n-17?highlight>
(accessed 12.12.14).
[29] The Order of the Ministry of Communications and Mass Communications of the Russian Federation N 178
of June 30, 2014 ‘‘On the Council of Experts on the use of cloud computing in the Ministry of
Communications and Mass Communications of the Russian Federation”, The system GARANT Legislation
with comments.
[30] The State Program of the Russian Federation ‘‘Information Society (2011–2020)” endorsed by Order of the
Government of the Russian Federation on 20 October 2010, N 1815-r, The system GARANT Legislation
with comments.
[31] The Strategy of development of branch of information technologies in the Russian Federation for 2014–2020
and on prospect till 2025 endorsed by Order of the Government of the Russian Federation on 1 November
2013, The system GARANT Legislation with comments.
[32] The Tomsk group and student’s ofﬁce of Institute of engineers on electrical equipment and radio electronics,
<http://ieee.tusur.ru/index.htm> (accessed 11.12.14).
Further reading
[22] Security Issues in Cross-border e-Authentication, <http://www.enisa.europa.eu/media/news-items/secu-
rity-issues-in-cross-border-e-authentication> (accessed 12.12.14).
Personal data protection laws with special reference to cloud technologies
15
