 AASRI Procedia  1 ( 2012 )  410 – 415 
2212-6716 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
doi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2012.06.064 
2012 AASRI Conference on Computational Intelligence and Bioinformatics 
Construction of Graduate Employment Service System Based on 
Public Information Platform 
Jun Zhenga,*, Jundong Tang b, Jiansheng Gao b
a Finance Department, Hebei United University, Hebei Tangshan, P.R.China, 063009 
bJitang College, Hebei United University, Hebei Tangshan, P.R.China,063300 
Abstract 
With the continuous enrollment in colleges and sharp growth in the number of graduates in recent years, employment and 
the amount of information tend to expand rapidly, and then very difficult to split, merge data, facing any one of these huge 
tasks are not completed things on a single computer in the short term. In view of this, in order to meet the tough changing 
employment situation and enable the timely effective employment guidance for university graduates, building a dynamic, 
quantitative and systematic employment information platform has become an urgent task of the current employment 
guidance for college students. 
2012 Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied 
Science Research Institute 
Keywords:  Employment; Public information platform; Service system; 
1. Introduction 
As late 90th century university enrollment and the industrialization of education policy since its 
introduction, students increases far exceeded economic growth in the number of personnel required to growth, 
"graduate unemployment" become a common phenomenon of Chinese College students in recent years. 
* Corresponding author.  
E-mail address: mycw1015@163.com. 
AASRI
Procedia
www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
411
 Jun Zheng et al. /  AASRI Procedia  1 ( 2012 )  410 – 415 
According to statistics, 2010 National University graduates for the 6.3 million people, than the cent in 2009 
more than 200,000 people, plus previous failed employment plus fresh returned students, requires employment 
of graduates more than 8 million people, the employment situation is severe. 
As several major participates in the process of employment of college students, governments, universities, 
businesses, media plays an important role in the information exchange on employment of college students. 
Information barriers between government and universities mainly reflect in the Government's conditions, not 
knowing about teachers of colleges, maladjustment of introduced policy situation in colleges and 
universities .Information barriers between universities and enterprises is characterized not what businesses 
need to have quality personnel in colleges and universities, and not targeted for training; Information barriers 
between Government and Enterprise mainly for government enterprises, Enterprise talents did not fully grasp 
the development of, developing economic policies and development needs of local enterprises are different. 
2. System design 
Demand analysis on employment of college students platform service serve mainly to university graduates, 
employers, job management and system management of four categories, therefore, the system needs to meet 
college graduates, employers, employment-related and system administration personnel needs. Demand for 
university graduates is to understand the employment news, maintain their own account information, see view 
job fair information, employment information, see the employer's basic and published personal employment 
information; Recruitment information, view student job employers need to publish information, apply for 
school to hold job fair; Job management features the most complex, including the management and 
maintenance of university graduates, employers, and review relevant information for graduates, view a student 
contracted with units of the employment statistics, and completed operations on the database, including the 
employment policy, job fairs, employment news, and more information added, deleted, modified; System 
administration staff is mainly to maintain the system. ASP's operating mode is shown in figure 1. 
Fig. 1. ASP's operating mode 
This article is as the base to ASP. Student employment information platform management system for the 
application of NET background, research the following two issues: Using the more advanced than ASP ASP. 
NET technology to build systems model and classification module, using ADO .NET technology to access the 
database and build a complete management system of college student employment information public 
platforms. Improving ASENET technical security mechanisms, to comprehensive evaluation of the system, 
Web server 
Active Server 
Pages
Server 
Browser
HTTP request 
HTTP response 
412  
 Jun Zheng et al. /  AASRI Procedia  1 ( 2012 )  410 – 415 
analysis of evaluation results, and ASP. Research and realization of .NET security put forward some views 
and suggestions for improvement.  
There are two major modes in system structure design model of a web application, namely, B/S 
(Browser/Server) pattern, C/S (Client/Server) model. B/S mode using two-layer structure, and C/S models 
generally use three-tier architecture. Structure of two-layer B/S mode for smaller, less users, application 
software systems within a single local area network, and require the Outlook client has faster response times, 
higher quality and more complex functionality. Using direct database connectivity and operation does not 
cause bottlenecks of a database system. C/s mode of three layer structure suitable for developing large-scale, 
multi-user, software applications across multiple network layers, because times a lot of very frequently on 
database now, security requirements relatively high, the software client republished will be more 
stringent .Three-tier architecture by applying a unified control of server resources and unified implementation 
of function, you can more effectively ensure the efficiency, security, and easier to maintain. On one hand, this 
framework is currently more popular software applications, the main client software applications purely made 
without any business logic, and business data presentation layer, which can maximize overall system security, 
data protection and stability. The other hand, for those who are providing nuclear, If, controls management 
clients, thanks to special control, use the range is very small, in this case, you can simplify management, 
safety certification and safety control of client work, to focus more energy on the development of more 
efficient, more powerful management features. ASP.NET structure is a system of three-layer structure model: 
that is, the user interface layer (UX) business logic and data tiers. 
Fig. 2. ASP. NET model of system structure chart 
UI layer is responsible for interacting with the user, accepting user input and data from the server-side 
rendering to the client, the ASRNET page-level, providing users with access to application features. Business 
logic layer is responsible for receiving requests from the browser and the request is passed to the data tier, 
while the request processing results to the browser. It consists of a curved form w, Extensible Markup 
Language (Extensible Markup Language, XML) composed of Web services and component services. Web 
form is ASRNET of which lies at the heart of the application, it is the basis for presenting data and 
information to customers, respond to and deal with customers and display w song forms generated by the 
interaction of information and data base, due to the layer directly associated with the database, but also for the 
UI layer services, so the business logic layer design is directly related to the success or failure of the entire 
system. Data tier is the system the basement, store. 
Of which Web form is the core of the ASRNET application, it is the base that presents to the customer data 
and information, but also the foundation to respond to and deal with customers and display of song form w-
generated information and interactive data, due to the layer is associated with the database directly, while 
Client web 
browser 
UI layer 
XML 
Web 
Services 
Component 
Services 
Web 
Form 
Business Logic Layer 
ADO.
NET
RDBMS 
Date layer 
SOAP
XML 
Binary
413
 Jun Zheng et al. /  AASRI Procedia  1 ( 2012 )  410 – 415 
services for the UI layer, so the design of the business logic is directly related to the success or failure of the 
entire system. The data system is the bottom of system, which stores all the data of the system, the system 
database of this system uses SQL Server 2000 to achieve, through the ADO. NET to manipulate the data for 
the business logic layer providing data services, such as storing the results of data manipulation, data retrieval 
to return the results and so on. 
3. System analysis and general design program 
3.1. System Architecture Design 
Web application system involving in title uses the three layer structure mode, separately display for Web 
layer, data access layer, database. The overall design of the system architecture as shown in Figure 3. 
   
 
Fig. 3. Overall system of architecture design 
Database is the bottom, which stores all the system data. Dynamic link library database operations (DLL), 
which accesses to the database of application system directly, from ASPNET2SQLHelper to achieve. Data 
access layer is based on the database, providing data services for the Web display layer, application program 
access the database through the layer. Data Access General operation of the database layer package to select, 
add, update and delete operations, but also provides for the business logic for access to the database interface 
or function or methods. It is associated with the database, while the presentation layer for Web services, so the 
data access layer design is directly related to the success or future of the entire system. 
3.2. System Functional Design 
In this system, college student employment information public platform management system is a complete 
school information management system. According to the requirements of the system demand analysis, it 
mainly includes the user login and registered module, the user management module, and the role of 
government information management module,, media information management module, the school 
information management module, students' information management module, and system maintenance 
management module of seven major module. The management system function characteristics shown below:  
(1) Simple, friendly interface: completely control type the page layout, make the information of the entry 
work more easily; Many options including information category, the source departments and only have to 
click on the click of a mouse you can finish; In addition, tracking the hints that appear information also let 
users always aware of their operations.  
Web display layer 
Web Pages 
Data Access Layer 
DAL 
Database 
DLL 
Database 
(SQL Server)
414  
 Jun Zheng et al. /  AASRI Procedia  1 ( 2012 )  410 – 415 
(2) Instant visible: the processing of information (including the entry, update, delete, etc.) will be 
immediately displayed on the home page of the corresponding column out to achieve "instant publishing, 
instant effective" function. 
(3) The perfect function: including common website all aspects of the information management (including 
information entry, update, browse, delete, query and other aspects), the full realization of the site for 
information management requirements. 
(4) Convenient transplantation: in view of the different schools or related enterprise unit, only minor 
modifications can be developed for the characteristics of the unit information management system. 
3.3. System Development Environment 
College students' employment information public platform management system development environment 
system shown below: 
(1) technology platform; Microsoft. NET Framework 2.0 
(2) development tools; Microsoft Visual Studio. NET 2005 Chinese enterprise edition  
(3) development  language: ASP. NET, using using c Zeng speech to achieve  
(4) Database: Microsoft SQL Server 2000 
(5) HS: Internet Information Server 6.0 
Operating system platforms: development process using Windows XP Professional Edition, you can use 
run-time Windows 2000/XP/2003 or other operating systems. 
Fig. 4. College students' employment public information platform 
Information 
release 
for companies 
and students
Companies
interact with
students 
Information
management for 
companies and 
students 
Online job
fairs, 
interview
System 
Management
Website
Distribution of Internet companies 
Time and experience 
Back-office 
systems 
Updated leap 
Step by step 
Personalized, 
intelligent
Customer 
benefits 
and
Service 
quality
415
 Jun Zheng et al. /  AASRI Procedia  1 ( 2012 )  410 – 415 
4. College students' employment public information platform  
Students in basic information management by the page Student Manage. aspx to achieve, StudentManage. 
aspx. cs code-behind file for it. In the interface design phase, the first page StudentManage. Add a ListBox 
control on aspx, two lmage Button controls and a Button, names are StudentList, EditBtn, DeletcBtn, AddBtn. 
Which controls StudentList used to display information for all students, control EditBtn, DeleteBtn, AddBtn 
were modified to achieve student information, delete and add functions. Initialization phase of the page. 
Display information for all students to achieve the functionality achieved by the function Page Load0. Among 
them, the student information from the function calls of the Student class GetStudent0 BindStudentData0 way 
to get from the database and stored for use sqlDataReader object reet results show that all students in the 
information, and then close the database connection. 
College students' employment public information platform is based on ASP.net architecture structures, and 
its aim is to achieve university employment information of the electronic, digital, and complete the web-based 
integrated network of information the automatic collection, processing, storage, transmission and exchange, 
and ultimately students employment information resources to fully development and universally shared. 
Diagram is as in figure 4. 
5. Conclusion 
Based on ASP asp.net application integration is the service technology integrated technology of the first 
important change, and it is considered a new generation of application integration technology. In the college 
students' employment service information system integration using asp.net service technology, beneficial to 
protection and utilization of college left over from the past heterogeneous system; At the same time because it 
is based on open standards and so on, also conducive to data sharing and reuse; At the same time as a modular 
and loose coupling, also simplified the maintenance, reduce maintenance costs. Of course, asp.net service 
technology is currently in a period of development, many contents still not mature, for example to solve the 
security authentication, the service charge, transaction processing and reliability, and many other problems 
although some related standards, but to public college students' employment information platform security 
realization are further research needs, based on the grid technology in order to improve the university students' 
employment information platform, make it play out the business benefits should be.  
6. Funding sources 
The research was supported by 2012 Social Science Fund Projects of Hebei Province. 
References 
[1] BATTU, H., BELFIELD, C. & SLOANE, P. How well can we measure graduate over-education and its 
effects?. National Institute Economic Review, 171, pp. 82–93. (2000). 
[2] BELFIELD, C., BULLOCK, A., CHEVALIER, A., FIELDING, A., SIEBERT, W. & THOMAS, H. 
Mapping the Careers of Highly Qualified Workers. HEFCE Research Series M10/97 (Bristol, Higher 
Education Funding Council for England). (1997). 
[3] BROWN, P., GREEN, A. & LANDER, H. High Skills: Globalisation, Competitiveness and Skill 
Formation. Oxford, Oxford University Press. (2001). 
