Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 59–67
Available online 26 April 2023
2666-5441/© 2023 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC
BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Machine learning elucidates the anatomy of buried carbonate reef from 
seismic reflection data 
Priyadarshi Chinmoy Kumar a,b, Kalachand Sain a,b,* 
a Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, 33 GMS Road, Uttarakhand, India 
b Seismic Interpretation Laboratory-WIHG, India   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Carbonate reef 
Marine seismic 
Seismic attributes 
Structure 
Machine learning 
Offshore 
NW Australia 
A B S T R A C T   
A carbonate build-up or reef is a thick carbonate deposit consisting of mainly skeletal remains of organisms that 
can be large enough to develop a favourable topography. Delineation of such geologic features provides 
important input in understanding the basin’s evolution and petroleum prospects. Here, we introduce a new 
attribute called the Reef Cube (RC) meta-attribute that has been computed by fusing several other seismic at-
tributes that are characteristics of the reef through a supervised machine-learning algorithm. The neural learning 
resulted in a minimum nRMS error of 0.28 and 0.30 and a misclassification percentage of 1.13% and 1.06% for 
the train and test data sets. The Reef Cube meta-attribute has efficiently captured the anatomy of carbonate reef 
buried at ~450 m below the seafloor from high-resolution 3D seismic data in the NW shelf of Australia. The 
novel approach not only picks up the subsurface architecture of the carbonate reef accurately but also accelerates 
the process of interpretation with a much-reduced intervention of human analysts. This can be efficiently suited 
for delimiting any subsurface geologic feature from a large volume of surface seismic data.   
1. Introduction 
A carbonate reef is a thick carbonate deposit displaying an ante-
cedent topography relative to the surrounding depositional surface 
(Heckel, 1974; Burgess et al., 2013). Carbonate reefs are attractive tar-
gets for hydrocarbon exploration in frontier and mature sedimentary 
basins (Burgess et al., 2013; Saqab and Bourget, 2015). Tectonic pro-
cesses, eustasy, basinal physiography, and climatic conditions (Zampetti 
et al., 2004) control their evolution and geometry. They are potential 
stratigraphic traps and account for half of the global hydrocarbon re-
serves (Kusumastuti et al., 2002; Neuhaus et al., 2004; Ehrenberg et al., 
2007; Ahr, 2011). The seismic reflection experiment is one of the best 
possible methods for delineating subsurface carbonate reefs. However, it 
might be challenging to interpret them accurately as they exhibit 
fundamental similarities to other geologic features, e.g., buried vol-
canoes, erosional remnants, or tilted fault blocks (Burgess et al., 2013; 
Niyazi et al., 2021). 
The processing/modeling of seismic data has made substantial 
progress over the past decade, significantly improving subsurface im-
ages (Burgess et al., 2013; Kumar and Sain, 2018; Kumar et al., 2019; 
Kumar and Sain, 2020; Sain and Kumar, 2022). Human analysts or 
interpreters primarily use seismic attributes to capture the structural 
geometry and disposition of subsurface features from the derived im-
ages. However, interpreters need help to derive accurate information 
about a specific geologic target. An individual seismic attribute is not 
uniquely responsive to a particular geologic body and thus cannot 
distinguish objects of different origins (Kumar and Sain, 2018; Kumar 
et al., 2019; Kumar and Sain, 2020; Sain and Kumar, 2022; Niyazi et al., 
2022). Hence, the impact of an attribute’s geological non-uniqueness 
and non-completeness keeps changing based on its usage and is 
entirely interpretation-dependent (Sain and Kumar, 2022). 
Here we attempt to provide a unique solution to such a perplexing 
scenario by designing a new attribute, defined as the Reef Cube (RC) 
meta-attribute, using a fully connected multi-layer perceptron neural 
network following the supervised scheme of machine learning that al-
lows a machine or intelligent system to learn and get equipped in solving 
a complex problem for prediction of the desired result. A set of 
computer-oriented programs are employed on a small portion of data 
(preferably 20%) during the learning process to accelerate the realistic 
interpretation of the entire volume of data without extensive human 
intervention (Kumar and Sain 2018, 2020; Kumar et al., 2019; Sain and 
Kumar 2022). Since the Browse Basin on the NW shelf off Australia has 
* Corresponding author. Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, 33 GMS Road, Uttarakhand, India. 
E-mail addresses: kumarchinmoy@gmail.com (P.C. Kumar), kalachandsain7@gmail.com (K. Sain).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 
journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-geosciences 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiig.2023.04.001 
Received 10 January 2023; Received in revised form 3 April 2023; Accepted 19 April 2023   
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 59–67
60
developed a reef-rimmed carbonate platform during the Miocene period, 
we have looked into the high-quality 3D seismic data for the delimita-
tion of the 3D subsurface architecture of carbonate reefs. First, we 
computed the seismic attributes that can characterize the carbonate 
reefs and then amalgamated them into a single hybrid attribute, termed 
the RC meta-attribute, using a machine learning algorithm. The pres-
ence of meta-attribute within the data volume, implying the existence of 
carbonate deposition, can now elucidate the anatomy of carbonate reef 
automatically from huge data volume with a much-reduced human 
intervention. 
2. Tectonic structure of the browse basin 
The Browse Basin is a 140,000 km2 offshore extensional sedimentary 
basin in Australia’s NW Shelf region. (Fig. 1). The basin resembles a 
pond-like sedimentary depocentre (Rosleff-Soerensen et al., 2016), 
bounded by the Scott Plateau on the west and Leveque Shelf and 
northern Canning Basin to the east (Fig. 1; Struckmeyer et al., 1998). It 
embraces several half-graben structures that dip landwards and strike 
parallel to the margin (Struckmeyer et al., 1998). The primary depo-
centers of the basin are the Caswell and Barcoo sub-basins, which 
contain a thick pile of Paleozoic, Mesozoic, and Cenozoic sedimentary 
successions (Fig. 1). Tectonically the Browse Basin evolved because of 
the Jurassic continental rifting between Greater India and Western 
Australia (Müller et al., 1998; Kaiko and Tait 2001; Langhi and Borel, 
2007). The final phase of the rifting occurred in the Middle Jurassic and 
Early Cretaceous that generated a dominant SW-NE-oriented structural 
trend of the basin (Fig. 1b). During the Aptian, the tectonic activity 
ceased and the basin was covered with a thick sequence of 
passive-margin sediments (Struckmeyer et al., 1998). 
The evolution of Browse basin initiated during the Late Carbonif-
erous because of an extensional phase associated with the separation of 
Sibumasu from NW Australia (Struckmeyer et al., 1998; ConocoPhillips, 
2012; Dixit and Mandal, 2020). This resulted into the formation of a 
series of extensional intra-cratonic half-graben structures in the basin. 
Initially fluvio-deltaic sediments infilled basin in the Carboniferous, 
then grading into marine shales and limestones in the Lower Permian. 
The basin then underwent a phase of thermal subsidence in the Late 
Permian continuing through to the Triassic (Struckmeyer et al., 1998; 
ConocoPhillips, 2012). The Permian to Middle Triassic post-rift sag 
phase resulted in deposition of shales, sands, carbonates of the Hyland 
bay Formation and marine shales of the Mt. Godwin formation. A period 
of increased tectonism commenced in the Late Triassic, with the initia-
tion of the beak-up of Australia from the Argoland. The Early to Middle 
Jurassic marked extensional event resulting in widespread, small scale 
faulting and collapse of the Triassic anticlines. Minor faulting occurred 
in the Late Jurassic to Early Cretaceous associated with Callovian 
break-up event along the NW margin of Australia. This event was fol-
lowed by a period of relative tectonic quiescence in the Browse Basin. An 
overall transgressive cycle commenced in the Early cretaceous and 
peaked by Middle Turonian, with open marine conditions established 
throughout the basin. Basin infill in the Early Tertiary lead to shallow 
marine sedimentation across the Browse Basin. 
As the Australian plate moved northward due to seafloor spreading 
in the Indian and Southern Oceans, the dominant sediment type on the 
NW shelf shifted from siliciclastic to carbonate during the Cenozoic era 
Struckmeyer et al., (1998); ConocoPhillips (2012); Dixit and Mandal 
(2020). The Early-Middle Miocene period witnessed the development of 
a typical reef-rimmed carbonate platform in the Browse Basin, which 
formed part of an unbroken reef belt extending along the NW shelf 
margin of Australia (Rosleff-Soerensen et al., 2012). Most of the 
present-day reefs in the basin and nearby areas grew on this extensive 
foundation of paleo-reefs and carbonate build-ups (Ryan et al., 2009). 
3. Data and methods 
This research uses a time-migrated 3D seismic cube of the Poseidon 
survey area in the Browse Basin, North-west shelf offshore Australia. The 
survey was operated by ConocoPhillips in 2010 (ConocoPhillips, 2012) 
and was acquired by CGG Veritas using the seismic vessel Geowave 
Voyager (ConocoPhillips, 2012). The survey covered a total area of 
2828 km2. The survey’s primary objective was to provide detailed 
subsurface coverage of potential exploration leads within the Cretaceous 
and Jurassic formations of the basin. The seismic data consist of 3436 
inlines (range: 983–4419) and 5052 crosslines (range: 504–5556) and 
was acquired using a bin size of 18.75 m × 12.5 m (inline × crossline), 
with a 2 ms sampling interval and total recorded length of 6 s. The data 
was processed using conventional processing sequences, including noise 
attenuation, tidal static corrections, radon transform for residual linear 
noise attenuation, NMO corrections, velocity analysis, multiple attenu-
ation, and frequency-dependent offset noise attenuation followed by 
Kirchhoff time migration. The survey region consists of four exploration 
wellbores: Poseidon 1, Poseidon 2, Kronos 1, and Torosa 1 (Con-
ocoPhillips, 2012). 
The methodology (Fig. 2), designed for this study, includes four (4) 
basic steps: (a) Structural enhancement of 3D seismic data; (b) Selection 
of seismic attributes suited to characterize carbonate reef; (c) Picking 
Fig. 1. (a) Browse Basin, located in the NW shelf of offshore Australia based on 
the Gridded Bathymetry Chart of the Oceans (GEBCO); (b) Geo-tectonic map of 
the Browse Basin showing different structural elements that chiefly strikes 
northeast. The basin is bounded by the Scott Plateau on the west and Leveque 
Shelf to the east. The Poseidon 3D seismic survey is shown in red rectangular 
polygon. MaP/MeF: Major Paleozoic/Mesozoic fault; MaF: Major Fault; CeF: 
Cenozoic Fault; NSR: North Scott Reef. 
P.C. Kumar and K. Sain                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 59–67
61
example locations, and (d) Neural Modelling. These steps are elaborated 
on in succeeding paragraphs. 
3.1. Structural enhancement of 3D seismic data 
Structural conditioning of seismic data maintains the lateral conti-
nuity of seismic events and provides enhanced subsurface structural 
images (Kumar and Sain, 2018; Sain and Kumar, 2022). We have 
enhanced the 3D seismic cube through a classical dip-steering tech-
nique, resulting in a steering cube (or a dip-azimuth volume) (Tingdahl, 
1999, 2003; Kumar and Mandal, 2017). The cube contains seismic dip 
and azimuth information at every sample position. A 3D Fourier 
Transform-based dip algorithm proposed by Tingdahl (2003) is used to 
compute the steering cube. The algorithm produces a stable dip-azimuth 
steering volume. The dip-azimuth is calculated at every sample by 
transforming a sub-cube of 3 × 3 × 3 samples to the 3D Fourier domain. 
The maximum dip is estimated with the help of a third-order polynomial 
curve fitting (Tingdahl, 2003) to the sub-cube around the sample of the 
highest energy in the Fourier domain. Then a search for the local max-
ima is done, and the corresponding dip-azimuth to the local maxima is 
set as the output. The operation is performed throughout the seismic 
volume to generate the dip-azimuth volume, called the ’Detailed 
Steering Cube’ (DSC), and stores detailed structural information. Use of 
coarser median filtering to the DSC by a filtering step out, i.e., inl: xrl: 
sample 5 × 5 × 5, results in a steering cube, which is now called the 
’Background Steering Cube’ (BSC). It contains the overall dip trends of 
seismic reflectors and outlines the background structural information. 
For the present study, the DSC is deemed the best, as the research aims to 
capture the detailed structural architecture of the geological target. 
The DSC is taken as an input for data enhancement through struc-
tural filtering (Kumar and Sain, 2018). Structural filtering is performed 
using a structure-oriented filter (SOF). The key objective of using the 
SOF is to differentiate between the dip-azimuth of seismic reflectors and 
overlying noises (Kumar and Sain, 2018; Sain and Kumar, 2022). This 
not only removes the noise bursts but also enhances the lateral conti-
nuity of seismic events (H¨ocker and Fehmers, 2002) and ultimately 
provides smooth and improved images of geological structures (Kumar 
and Mandal, 2017; Kumar and Sain, 2018; Sain and Kumar, 2022). This 
is carried out using a dip-steered median filter (DSMF), which employs 
median statistics over amplitudes ensuing the dip of seismic reflectors 
(Kumar and Sain, 2018; Sain and Kumar, 2022). A filtering step-out of 3 
× 3 is used to execute the filtering operation. This resulted in a filtered 
seismic cube (also known as the DSMF cube), which, after a detailed 
quality check, is used to extract seismic attributes, select train-
ing/testing locations, and design the neural model. 
3.2. Seismic attributes and their selection 
Seismic attributes efficiently interpret the structural geometry and 
configuration of geologic features from 3D seismic data volume (Kumar 
and Sain, 2018; Sain and Kumar, 2022). To begin the selection of seismic 
attributes, it is crucial to understand the geological characteristics of 
carbonate platforms. A carbonate build-up demonstrates an antecedent 
topography and is associated with high-amplitude capping reflections 
(Zampetti et al., 2004; Burgess et al., 2013). Internally, the reflections 
vary from moderate to high amplitudes and are stacked parallel one 
upon the other (Zampetti et al., 2004; Burgess et al., 2013). Their 
marginal ends are typically associated with localized thickening, and 
their depositional wings exhibit variable dips. Faults at either end of 
their flanks make reflections weakly correlated. Above the build-ups, 
very often, there occurs any absence of equivalent overburden struc-
tures. Moreover, sediments onlap along their flanks, forming wedge-like 
structures. Being governed by these characteristics, in seismic data, the 
carbonate build-ups are associated with high energy capping reflections, 
possess variable dips along the flanks, and demonstrate a convex-up 
geometry. Moreover, they exhibit discontinuous geometry along the 
dipping edges of the flanks. Hence, a suitable set of seismic attributes, 
such as similarity, dip angle variance (DAV), energy, curvature, and 
Fig. 2. (a, b) Structure and process of Neural Network used in the present research; (c) Proposed workflow for the computation of Reef Cube meta-attribute.  
P.C. Kumar and K. Sain                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 59–67
62
reference time (Table 1), have been chosen to arrest these geophysical 
signatures. The readers can refer to other works of authors (Kumar and 
Sain, 2018, 2020; Kumar et al., 2019; Sain and Kumar, 2022) for the 
definitions and mathematical equations about these attributes. 
3.3. Example locations for training/testing 
The labeled locations are marked arbitrarily along a few xlines and 
inlines. The Reef-yes and Reef-no locations are designated following the 
seismic signatures and geologic properties described in the previous 
paragraph. The Reef-yes locations are assigned binary number 1, and 
Reef-no locations are allocated binary number 0 according to the clas-
sification rule of binary numbers. Ambiguous areas where there is no 
hint of the presence of the target or the areas that are devoid of the target 
are avoided. About 870 Reef-yes and 880 Reef-no locations are labeled 
for training and testing. The binary data (0, 1) and seismic attributes at 
the marked locations are fed into the neural model for training and 
testing. This entire process is summarized in the following steps.  
• In the first step, we randomly examined the seismic lines for the 
presence of carbonate build-ups.  
• In the second step, we further investigated the seismic characteristics 
of the target over these lines with the help of attribute responses. 
• Combining the first and second steps, we selected appropriate loca-
tions that should be assigned for the network to learn.  
• Neural training is then executed over these seismic lines to compute 
the meta-attribute.  
• Once satisfied with the performance of the neural model, the 
network is made to scan over the entire seismic cube to generate the 
hybrid attribute, called the Reef Cube (RC) meta-attribute, which is 
then used to decipher the structural geometry of the buried car-
bonate reef. 
3.4. Neural Modelling 
We have designed a fully connected multi-layer perceptron (MLP) 
network to compute the RC meta-attribute from a suitable suite of 
seismic attributes to arrest the structural configuration of carbonate 
build-ups. The MLP consists of three distinct layers: the input, the hid-
den, and the output layers, which contain 5, 4, and 2 neurons, respec-
tively. The seismic attributes and binary numbers at the picked/labeled 
locations are fed into the input layer. Neurons receive these data in the 
hidden layer, where they are grouped and rescaled using a sigmoidal 
function. This activation function splits the output into binary numbers, 
i.e., 0s and 1s, where 0 refers to the minimum probability of the car-
bonate reef and 1 signifies the maximum likelihood. Only 20% of the 
data are randomly picked up for training and testing. Again, 70% of the 
picked data are used in training to predict any value between 0 and 1 
using a feed-forward process (Poulton, 2001; Kumar and Sain, 2018). 
The network parameters (learning rate, momentum, and, most impor-
tantly, synaptic weights) are adjusted through successive iterations 
using the backpropagation procedure (Rosenblatt, 1962; Rumelhart 
et al., 1995) to reduce the differences between predicted and train re-
sponses (0,1). In this research, the learning rate and momentum are 
optimally set to 0.01 and 0.25, respectively, through several trials. 
Because the process also predicts at the remaining 30% of locations (test 
data), the difference between the expected response and the test data (0, 
1) is calculated simultaneously to determine whether the network is 
performing appropriately by observing the nature of the difference 
curve, i.e., the steadily declining trend of difference with iterations 
(Kumar and Sain, 2018). Neural training through successive iterations is 
continued until there is a minimum normalized root-mean-square 
(nRMS) error and a minimum misclassification percentage between 
prediction and train/test data, resulting in a probability output at all 
selected locations. The network’s performance is validated visually by 
co-rendering the predicted meta-attribute over other seismic lines that 
were not considered in training. Once this validation is complete, the 
network runs over the entire seismic cube, automating and speeding up 
the interpretation process. We must state that the probability output 
with more than 0.75 thresholds highlights the RC meta-attribute, which 
delimits the anatomy of the carbonate build-up in the entire 
three-dimensional space. 
4. Results and interpretation 
The Poseidon 3D seismic volume is contaminated with noisy re-
flections that mask the carbonate build-ups and pose disturbances for 
interpretation (Fig. 3a–b). Structural data conditioning improves visu-
alization by removing noise bursts and making reflections laterally 
continuous (Fig. 3c–d). The build-up possesses an antecedent topog-
raphy with high amplitude or energy-capping reflections (Fig. 4a). The 
platform of the build-up is associated with high energy. On the other 
hand, the internally layered geometry is a reduction in energy content 
(Fig. 4a). The flanks are associated with variable dips. In contrast, re-
flections are weakly correlated along the edges demonstrating low 
similarity (Fig. 4b–c). The overall anticlinal geometry of the build-up is 
enhanced by the positive curvature attribute (Fig. 4d). Hence, several 
attributes improve the interpretation by capturing the structural re-
sponses of the carbonate build-up or reef from the data. 
In this research, the neural operation (Fig. 5a–c) yielded a minimum 
normalized root-mean-square (RMS) error (Fig. 5d) and minimum 
misclassification percentage (Fig. 5e) for both the train and test data 
sets. It is observed that the nRMS of 0.28 and 0.30 and minimum 
misclassification of 1.13% and 1.06% are achieved after 25 iterations for 
the train and test data sets, respectively. The relative contribution of the 
individual seismic attributes while training the system is given in 
Table 2. The reference time offers the maximum assistance to the neural 
training, followed by the DAV, energy, curvature, and similarity attri-
butes. At each sample point of the 3D seismic volume, the neural 
network predicted values lying between 0 and 1. The values closer to 
0 represents the minimum likelihood of carbonate build-up, and those 
closer to 1 elucidates the maximum possibility of carbonate build-up 
(Fig. 6). The maximum probability is interpreted using an optimal 
color scale (in Fig. 6 the meta-attribute is displayed using turquoise-sky 
blue-dull green-white-deep yellow-red color variations). The values of 
more than the 0.75 thresholds are considered as the Reef-Cube (RC) 
meta-attribute (Fig. 6). 
The carbonate build-ups in the study area are associated with a 
positive topography with high amplitude capping reflections (Fig. 6a, c, 
and e). Their marginal ends are onlaped by a thick sediment wedge. 
Internally, reflections are stacked in parallel and are associated with 
moderate to high amplitude reflections. Such a stacking pattern 
Table 1 
Geometrical and seismic characteristics of carbonate reef.  
Name of the 
Target 
Geometry 
Seismic Characteristics 
Suitable 
Seismic 
attributes 
Carbonate 
Reef 
Positive antecedent 
topography 
High amplitude 
capping reflections 
Energy 
Localized Thickening 
High dips at the 
marginal ends of the 
structure 
Dip Variance 
Depositional wings 
(or on-lap) 
Positive topography 
leading to convex-up 
structure 
Discontinuity along 
flank edges 
Curvature 
(most 
positive) 
Similarity/ 
Coherency 
Margin related 
faulting 
Discontinuous 
reflections 
Similarity/ 
Coherency 
Absence of any 
equivalent 
overburden structure 
Continuous and 
parallel reflections 
–  
P.C. Kumar and K. Sain                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 59–67
63
indicates different growth stages of the build-up. The RC meta-attributes 
have efficiently captured these phenomena by isolating the build-ups 
from the surrounding sedimentary successions (Fig. 6b, d, f, and g). 
The co-rendered view of the amplitude cube and RC meta-attribute have 
revealed detailed structural geometry of the carbonate build-ups or reef 
observed over the time map sliced at t = 1168 ms and t = 1244 ms 
(Fig. 7a–f), respectively. The carbonate reefs consist of several sym-
metrical rings stacked upon one another, showing an elbow geometry. 
Their crest contains several small reef patches with circular geometry 
(Fig. 7b–d). 
To validate the RC meta-attribute’s outcome, we compared the 
structurally filtered seismic section (Fig. 6e) with the machine- 
generated RC meta-attribute co-rendered with the same section 
(Fig. 6f and g), which was not included while training the system. The 
visual inspection shows that the predicted RC meta-attribute has 
captured the structural configuration of the carbonate build-up from the 
Fig. 3. (a) Original time migrated seismic section for 
IL 3430 from the Poseidon 3D survey; (b) zoomed 
view of the carbonate-build-up zone marked by black 
rectangle in (a). Internal reflections within the car-
bonate is noisy and are associated with amplitude 
bursts; (c) Dip Steered Median Filtered (DSMF) time 
migrated seismic section for the same line IL 3430; 
(d) zoomed view of carbonate build-up zone marked 
by black rectangle in (c) showing enhanced seismic 
reflections free from amplitude bursts within the 
carbonate build-up.   
Fig. 4. Selected suitable seismic attributes e.g., (a) energy, (b) dip angle variance, (c) similarity and (d) curvature (most positive) attribute demonstrating seismic 
responses of carbonate build-ups, displayed by co-rendering with the seismic section for line IL 3209. 
P.C. Kumar and K. Sain                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 59–67
64
seismic cube. Based on the threshold value of 0.75 for the RC meta- 
attribute, we could generate the 3D structural anatomy of the buried 
carbonate build-ups (Fig. 6). The elbow geometry, circular geometry of 
small reef patches at the crest, and stepped growth platforms are illu-
minated automatically. The neural model resembles a "deep-seated 
cake" structure (Fig. 8) buried ~450 m below the seafloor in the Browse 
Basin off Australia. 
5. Discussion 
5.1. Reef Cube as a new interpretation tool for interpreting buried 
carbonate reefs on seismic reflection data 
5.1.1. Effect of structural conditioning of seismic data 
Seismic data, when contaminated by coherent or random noise, the 
S/N ratio decreases and lowers the accuracy of static and dynamic 
corrections during the processing stage. This finally degrades the quality 
of the processed seismic cross-sections (Liu et al., 2006; Onajite, 2014). 
As a result, interpreters struggle to interpret the buried carbonate reefs 
and their internal anatomy precisely. Advanced data conditioning ap-
proaches help to overcome such problems. The initial phase of this 
research’s workflow aimed at improving the seismic responses of the 
buried carbonate reefs from reflection seismic data. The original 
time-migrated 3D seismic data from the Poseidon seismic survey show 
that the carbonate reef is associated with distorted seismic signals and 
noisy events (Fig. 3a–b). To circumvent such problems, we have applied 
a structure-oriented filter called the DSMF to remove the noises that 
surround and mask the carbonate reef. The filter uses a pre-processed 
steering cube and a median statistic (i.e., computation of median be-
tween the sample values) over seismic amplitudes following the seismic 
Fig. 5. (a–b) Picked example locations: Reef-yes (ice 
blue dots) and Reef-no (pink dots) demonstrated on a 
portion of the seismic line IL 3385; (c) A fully con-
nected MLP network designed for this study. The 
color codes showing the relative contribution of 
nodes during the neural operation (red with the 
highest contribution and light yellow with the least 
contribution); (d–e) Performance of the neural model 
through the normalized RMS (nRMS) and misclassi-
fication (%) error curves for train (red curve) and test 
(blue curve) data sets respectively.   
Table 2 
Relative contribution of seismic attributes during training 
the Neural Model.  
Seismic Attributes 
Weights 
Energy 
72 
Reference Time 
98 
Similarity 
55 
Dip Variance 
82 
Curvature(Most Positive) 
57  
Fig. 6. (a, c) Seismic section for lines IL 3385 and IL 
3269 respectively demonstrating the carbonate build- 
up with positive antecedent topography. The top and 
base are marked using thick orange and green line, 
and the growth stages are indicated by thick blue, 
pink and red lines; (b, d) Same section co-rendered 
with the machine generated RC meta-attribute. A 
color scale with blue-through pale yellow-to red is 
used to display the meta-attribute, where red defines 
the highest probability of the carbonate build-up; (e) 
Seismic section for line IL 3210, not considered for 
training, showing the presence of carbonate build-up. 
The seismic line intersects the drilled well Poseidon-1 
which penetrates through the SE flank of the study 
area; (f) Same seismic section for IL 3210 co-rendered 
with the RC meta-attribute validates the interpreta-
tion by efficiently capturing the geometry of the 
build-up in the study area; (g) Cross sections of 
seismic lines IL 3210 and XL 2160 co-rendered with 
the RC meta-attribute shows a perfect match at the 
intersection, marked by an inverted green triangle. 
IR: Internal Reef.   
P.C. Kumar and K. Sain                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 59–67
65
dips (Sain and Kumar, 2022). The filter effect is tested through different 
step-outs (e.g., 3 × 3; 5 × 5; 7 × 7). Over-smoothing of the amplitude 
content is avoided. Thus, applying a mild median filtering step-out (i.e., 
3 × 3) to the data volume makes the amplitude content throughout the 
reef complex (both at the top and internally) laterally continuous, 
random noise gets suppressed, and the S/N ratio is enhanced. This, in 
turn, improves the visibility of the carbonate reef (associated with high 
amplitude content) from the surrounding environment in the condi-
tioned seismic volume (see Fig. 3c–d and 6). The seismic conditioning 
not only preserves the structural architecture of the carbonate reef but 
also improves the signal quality (S/N) in and around the reef complex. 
5.1.2. Manual interpretation versus neural network analysis 
Manual interpretation, including auto-picking approaches, needs a 
careful recognition of carbonate reef complexes from seismic data 
(Burgess et al., 2013; Saqab and Bourget, 2015; Van Tuyl et al., 2019). 
However, it becomes successful only when interpreters can effectively 
distinguish these targets based on their geologic and seismic charac-
teristics (see Table 1) from the host-rock strata and geophysical artifacts. 
Analysis of individual seismic attributes have been efficient in such case, 
but their success depends mainly on adequate parameter settings to 
capture the maximum geological responses from the data (Chopra and 
Marfurt, 2007; Barnes, 2016; Sain and Kumar, 2022). Furthermore, the 
downside of using a single attribute for such interpretation is that a 
seismic attribute on its own hardly ever responds to a geological target 
of interest and thus brings out a mixed set of geological responses 
(Meldahl et al., 2002; Tingdahl, 2003; De Groot et al., 2004; Kumar and 
Sain, 2018; Sain and Kumar, 2022; Niyazi et al., 2022). In the present 
study, we aim to bring out a realistic interpretation of reef complexes 
through a neural network approach. These targets are interpreted based 
on the interpreter’s judgment. Based on the geological characteristics of 
the target (see Table 1) and the interpreter’s geological knowledge, lo-
cations that mark the presence of carbonate reefs (i.e., the maximum 
probability) and locations that are devoid of carbonate reefs (i.e., the 
least probability) are selected (Fig. 5a–b). This judgment is then coun-
terchecked with the responses revealed by multiple seismic attributes 
(see Table 1). Finally, the judgment and the responses are linked through 
a fully connected MLP network to minimize the error so that an optimal 
output is obtained (Fig. 5d–e). This, in turn, generates a meta-attribute 
that brings out enhanced images of the target (as per the present 
research, it is the carbonate reef complex). The Reef Cube meta-attribute 
in this study illuminated the "deep-seated cake" architecture and the 
internal anatomy of the buried carbonate reef from seismic reflection 
data (Fig. 8). 
5.2. Limitations 
The RC meta-attribute is a neural network approach that aims to 
illuminate the structural architecture of buried reef complexes from 3D 
seismic data by exploiting the generalization capability of artificial 
neural networks (ANNs). The downside of this approach relates to the 
Fig. 7. (a, c) Time maps, sliced at t = 1168 ms and t = 1244 ms respectively, by co-rendering the seismic amplitude cube with the RC meta-attribute; (b, d) Line 
drawings corresponding to the same time maps showing the structural elements of the carbonate build-up; (e, f) Random seismic line BB’ and the corresponding 
interpretation. RP: Reef Patch. 
Fig. 8. 3D anatomy of the carbonate reef or build-up, as elucidated by the RC 
meta-attribute. The build-ups demonstrate a “deep seated cake” structural 
configuration. A pastel color scale is used to display the RC meta-attribute. The 
small reef patches (dark red color) has high probability of being identified as 
reef and CB crest and growth platforms (yellow to light red) have the low 
probability of being a reef. CB: Carbonate Build-up. 
P.C. Kumar and K. Sain                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 59–67
66
use of noisy or poor-quality data as input for the computation of the 
meta-attribute. Using such data may result in feeding inaccurate 
example locations to the network. As a result, the learning capability of 
the neural network decreases, and thus the generalization efficiency of 
the NN fails, making the network to output artifacts. This thus impedes 
the interpretation. In such instances, the computed meta-attribute may 
scuffle to deliver a successful interpretation of reef complexes from the 
data volume. 
6. Conclusions 
This research shows that interpreting subsurface geologic features 
through an amalgamation of suitable seismic attributes, guided by an 
interpreter’s acquaintances, results in a hybrid attribute or the so-called 
meta-attribute (Figs. 4–6). Though an individual attribute captures the 
seismic response of subsurface geologic structures from the data, a 
suitable combination improves the images of subsurface targets and 
reduces interpretation uncertainties. This research’s newly designed RC 
meta-attribute has efficiently isolated the structural anatomy of buried 
carbonate reefs or build-ups from the 3D seismic volume (Figs. 6–8). The 
carbonate build-up delimited through the computation of the RC meta- 
attribute, resembles a "deep-seated cake" consisting of several vertically 
stacked platforms, giving rise to an antecedent topography (Fig. 8). 
Seismic interpreters can employ this neural-based approach to delimit 
the structural anatomy of carbonate reservoirs from 3D seismic data 
acquired over sedimentary basins worldwide. Thus, the meta-attribute 
sets an example for advanced interpretation of seismic data over an 
individual attribute analysis. 
Data availability 
The data used in this research is publicly available and can be found 
online. The seismic data and reports are available from Geoscience 
Australia (http://www.ga.gov.au/). Conoco Philips shared this data in 
the public domain through the Google Drive link (https://drive.google. 
com/drive/folders/0B7brcf-eGK8CRUhfRW9rSG91bW8?resourc 
ekey=0-NsLk7JL-IDDxUKPVp0dZrw). 
Author contributions 
P.C.K. (the first author): Conceptualisation, Data curation and 
interpretation, Methodology, Investigation, Visualization, Project 
administration, Writing, Figures-drafting, Review, and Editing, Open-
dTect™ Software Resources. K.S (the second author): Review and 
Proofread, Software Resources. 
Funding 
There is no funding associated with this work. 
Declaration of conflict interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgements 
Director, WIHG, Dehradun, is grateful for permission to publish this 
work. The authors acknowledge GeoScience Australia for making the 
seismic data and petroleum reports publicly available under this 
research’s Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Australia (CC BY 3.0 AU) 
license. dGB Earth Sciences is duly acknowledged for providing software 
support (OpendTect™ v5.0 & v6.0) for this work. Halliburton™ is 
thanked for providing the DSG interpretation suite. Geosoftware™ is 
thanked for providing academic licence of Hampson Russell 13.0 and 
Jason 12.0 for this research. The authors are thankful to the anonymous 
reviewers, and the Editor-in-Chief Gabriele Morra for the comments and 
valuable suggestions on earlier version of this manuscript. GEBCO 
Compilation Group (2019) is thanked for making gridded bathymetry 
files freely available for academic research. KS acknowledges DST-SERB 
for according him with JC Bose National Fellowship. This is a Wadia 
contribution no. WIHG/0274.  
Appendix 
A. Normalized Root Mean Square Error (nRMS) 
The nRMS error is computed from the RMS error (Eq. A.1) between the targeted (ti) and computed (ci) values for i ranging from 1 to n, which is 
given as (Eq. A.2) (Kumar and Sain, 2018): 
RMS =
̅̅̅
1
n
√
∑
n
i=1
(ti − ci)2
(A.1)  
normalized RMS = RMS
/
̅̅̅
1
n
√
∑
n
i=1
(ti − mean)2
(A.2)  
where the mean is given as in Eq. A.3: 
mean = 1
n
∑
n
i=1
ti
(A.3) 
The nRMS error curve demonstrates the overall error on the train and test data sets, with a scale ranging from 0 to 1, where 0 corresponds to no 
error, and 1 corresponds to the highest error. It has been demonstrated that the lower the nRMS, the better the neural outcome is (Kumar and Sain, 
2018, 2020; Kumar et al., 2019; Sain and Kumar, 2022). The other benefit is that error performance can be observed from a single graph display. 
B. Misclassification percentage (%) 
The misclassification percentage is a quality control parameter to understand the wrong predictions made during the classification. To have control 
over this accuracy, creating a truly representative distribution of the observations for each class (i.e., target and non-target zones) is good enough. The 
P.C. Kumar and K. Sain                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 4 (2023) 59–67
67
classification percentage (Eq. B.1) is the ratio of correct predictions to the total number of predictions. 
Classification (%) = Number of correct predictions
Total numebr of predictions x 100
(B.1) 
The misclassification percentage (Eq. B.2) is defined as the ratio of wrong predictions to the total number of predictions. 
Misclassification (%) = Number of wrong predictions
Total numebr of predictions x 100
(B.2)  
References 
Ahr, W.M., 2011. Geology of Carbonate Reservoirs: the Identification, Description and 
Characterization of Hydrocarbon Reservoirs in Carbonate Rocks. John Wiley & Sons. 
Barnes, A.E., 2016. Handbook of Post-stack Seismic Attributes, SEG, Tusla. 
Burgess, P.M., Winefield, P., Minzoni, M., Elders, C., 2013. Methods for identification of 
isolated carbonate buildups from seismic reflection dataIdentification of Isolated 
Carbonate Buildups from Seismic Reflection Data. AAPG Bull. 97 (7), 1071–1098. 
Chopra, S., Marfurt, K.J., 2007. Seismic Attributes for Prospect Identification and 
Reservoir Characterization. SEG, Tusla.  
ConocoPhillips, 2012. Poseidon 3D Marine Surface Seismic Survey Interpretation Report 
(unpublished). https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/0B7brcf-eGK8Cbk9ueH 
A0QUU4Zjg. 
De Groot, P., Ligtenberg, H., Oldenziel, T., Connolly, D., Meldahl, P., 2004. Examples of 
multi-attribute, neural network-based seismic object detection. Geological Society 
29 (1), 335–338. London, Memoirs.  
Dixit, A., Mandal, A., 2020. Detection of gas chimney and its linkage with deep-seated 
reservoir in Poseidon, NW shelf, Australia from 3D seismic data using multi-attribute 
analysis and artificial neural network approach. J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng. 83, 103586. 
Ehrenberg, S.N., Nadeau, P.H., Aqrawi, A.A.M., 2007. A comparison of Khuff and Arab 
reservoir potential throughout the Middle East. AAPG Bull. 91 (3), 275–286. 
Heckel, P.H., 1974. Carbonate Build-Ups in the Geologic Record: a Review. https://doi. 
org/10.2110/pec.74.18.0090. 
H¨ocker, C., Fehmers, G., 2002. Fast structural interpretation with structure-oriented 
filtering. Lead. Edge 21 (3), 238–243. 
Kaiko, A.R., Tait, A.M., 2001. Post-rift tectonic subsidence and paleo-water depth in the 
northern Carnarvon basin, western Australia. APPEA J 41, 367–380. 
Kumar, P.C., Mandal, A., 2017. Enhancement of fault interpretation using multi-attribute 
analysis and artificial neural network (ANN) approach: a case study from Taranaki 
Basin, New Zealand. Explor. Geophys. 49 (3), 409–424. 
Kumar, P.C., Sain, K., 2018. Attribute amalgamation-aiding interpretation of faults from 
seismic data: an example from Waitara 3D prospect in Taranaki basin off New 
Zealand. J. Appl. Geophys. 159, 52–68, 2018.  
Kumar, P.C., Sain, K., 2020. A machine learning tool for interpretation of Mass Transport 
Deposits from seismic data. Nature Scientific Reports 10 (1), 1–10. 
Kumar, P.C., Omosanya, K.O., Alves, T., Sain, K., 2019. A neural network approach for 
elucidating fluid leakage along hard-linked normal faults. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 110, 
518–538. 
Kusumastuti, A., Van Rensbergen, P.V., Warren, J.K., 2002. Seismic sequence analysis 
and reservoir potential of drowned Miocene carbonate platforms in the Madura 
Strait, East Java, Indonesia. AAPG Bull. 86 (2), 213–232. 
Langhi, L., Borel, G.D., 2007. Reverse structures in accommodation zone and early 
compartmentalization of extension system, Laminaria High (NW shelf, Australia). 
Mar. Petrol. Geol. 25, 791–803, 2007.  
Liu, C., Liu, Y., Yang, B., Wang, D., Sun, J., 2006. A 2D multistage median filter to reduce 
random seismic noise. Geophysics 71 (5), V105–V110. 
Meldahl, P., Najjar, N., Oldenziel-Dijkstra, T., Ligtenberg, H., 2002. Semi-automated 
detection of 4D anomalies. In: In64th EAGE Conference & Exhibition. EAGE 
Publications BV cp-5).  
Müller, R.D., Mihut, D., Baldwin, S., Purcell, P.G., Purcell, R.R., 1998. A new kinematic 
model for the formation and evolution of the west and northwest Australian margin. 
The sedimentary basins of Western Australia 2, 55–72. 
Neuhaus, D., Borgomano, J., Jauffred, J.C., Mercadier, C., Olotu, S., Grtsch, J., 2004. 
Quantitative Seismic Reservoir Characterization of an Oligocene Miocene Carbonate 
Build-Up: Malampaya Field, Philippines, vol. 81. AAPG Memoir, pp. 169–183. 
Niyazi, Y., Eruteya, O.E., Warne, M., Ierodiaconou, D., 2021. Discovery of large-scale 
buried volcanoes within the Cenozoic succession of the Prawn Platform, offshore 
Otway Basin, southeastern Australia. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 123, 104747. 
Niyazi, Y., Warne, M., Ierodiaconou, D., 2022. Machine learning delineation of buried 
igneous features from the offshore Otway Basin in southeast Australia. Interpretation 
10 (3), SE101–SE118. 
Onajite, E., 2014. Understanding noise in seismic record. In: Seismic Data Analysis 
Techniques in Hydrocarbon Exploration. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 63–68. 
Poulton, M.M., 2001. Computational Neural Networks for Geophysical Data Processing. 
Elsevier), London.  
Rosenblatt, F., 1962. Principles of Neurodynamics. Perceptrons and the Theory of Brain 
Mechanisms (No. VG-1196-G-8). Cornell Aeronautical Lab Inc Buffalo NY. 
Rosleff-Soerensen, B., Reuning, L., Back, S., Kukla, P., 2012. Seismic geomorphology and 
growth architecture of a Miocene barrier reef, Browse Basin, NW-Australia. Mar. 
Petrol. Geol. 29 (1), 233-25.  
Rosleff-Soerensen, B., Reuning, L., Back, S., Kukla, P.A., 2016. The response of a basin- 
scale Miocene barrier reef system to long-term, strong subsidence on a passive 
continental margin, Barcoo Sub-basin, Australian North West Shelf. Basin Res. 28 
(1), 103–123. 
Rumelhart, D.E., Durbin, R., Golden, R., Chauvin, Y., 1995. Backpropagation: the basic 
theory. Backpropagation: theory, architectures and applications 1–34. 
Ryan, G., Bernardel, G., Kennard, J., Jones, A.T., Logan, G., Rollet, N., 2009. A pre-cursor 
extensive Miocene reef system to the Rowley Shoals reefs, Western Australia: 
evidence for structural control of reef growth or natural hydrocarbon seepage? The 
APPEA Journal 49 (1), 337–364. 
Sain, K., Kumar, P.C., 2022. Meta-attributes and Artificial Networking: A New Tool in 
Seismic Interpretation. AGU-John Wiley & Sons. 
Saqab, M.M., Bourget, J., 2015. Controls on the distribution and growth of isolated 
carbonate build-ups in the Timor Sea (NW Australia) during the Quaternary. Mar. 
Petrol. Geol. 62, 123–143. 
Struckmeyer, H.I.M., Blevin, J.E., Sayers, J., Totterdell, J.M., Baxter, K., Cathro, D.L., 
1998. Structural evolution of the Browse Basin, North west shelf: new concepts from 
deep-seismic data. In: Purcell, P.G., Purcell, R.R. (Eds.), The Sedimentary Basins of 
Western Australia 2: Proceedings of the Petroleum Exploration Society of Australia 
Symposium, vol. 1998, pp. 345–367 (Perth, WA).  
Tingdahl, K.M., 1999. Improving seismic detectability using intrinsic directionality: 
technical report, B194. In: Earth Sciences Centre. Goteborg University. 
Tingdahl, K.M., 2003. Improving seismic chimney detection using directional attributes. 
InDevelopments in petroleum scienceElsevier 51, 157–173. 
Van Tuyl, J., Alves, T., Cherns, L., Antonatos, G., Burgess, P., Masiero, I., 2019. 
Geomorphological evidence of carbonate build-up demise on equatorial margins: a 
case study from offshore northwest Australia. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 104, 125–149. 
Zampetti, V., Schlager, W., van Konijnenburg, J.H., Everts, A.J., 2004. Architecture and 
growth history of a Miocene carbonate platform from 3D seismic reflection data; 
Luconia province, offshore Sarawak, Malaysia. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 21 (5), 517–534. 
P.C. Kumar and K. Sain                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
