Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100052 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ailsci 
Editorial 
Speciﬁc contributions of artiﬁcial intelligence to interdisciplinary life 
science research – exploring and communicating new opportunities 
Jürgen Bajorath 
Department of Life Science Informatics and Data Science, B-IT, LIMES Program Unit Chemical Biology and Medicinal Chemistry, Rheinische 
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität, Friedrich-Hirzebruch-Allee 5/6, Bonn D-53115, Germany 
a r t i c l e 
i n f o 
Keywords: 
Artiﬁcial intelligence 
Deep learning 
Life sciences 
Drug discovery 
Interdisciplinary research 
Artiﬁcial intelligence between hype and reality 
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is lauded as an auspicious problem solver 
in many areas. However, the understanding of AI methods is often lim- 
ited. Hence, an aura of mystery –and also concern– might be generated 
around AI. For example, the expectation that machines would “think ”
independently and reach autonomous decisions beyond human reason- 
ing is not factual. In science, the popularity and promise of AI mostly 
originate from notable advances in a few ﬁelds, but are also inﬂuenced 
by business-driven hype and unrealistic expectations. 
As Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences (AILSCI) is completing its 
second year, this contribution aims to put developments in AI that are 
particularly relevant for the journal into scientiﬁc perspective. It is based 
upon –and further extends– two recent open access publications address- 
ing a wide life science audience [ 1 , 2 ]. 
In computer science, various disciplines are covered under the term 
AI [3] . Among these, deep learning (DL) using deep neural networks 
(DNNs), a sub-discipline of machine learning (ML), has been responsible 
for recent progress in areas such as computer vision (image analysis) or 
natural language processing. These advances have greatly contributed to 
the popularity of AI in science. Robotics, another AI discipline, is a main- 
stay in industry and also plays an important role in laboratory automa- 
tion. Furthermore, expert and recommender systems, which also belong 
to the AI spectrum, are explored in diﬀerent scientiﬁc ﬁelds. Similar 
to AI-driven developments in physics, theoretical biology, or quantum 
chemistry, AI is beginning to impact the life sciences including early- 
phase drug discovery on a larger scale. Here, the term AI is for the most 
part synonymously used with DL when applied at interfaces between 
computation and experiment [ 2 , 4–6 ]. In medicine, DL is employed in 
E-mail address: bajorath@bit.uni-bonn.de 
diﬀerent therapeutic areas [7] such as radiology or oncology [ 8 , 9 ]. In 
clinical practice, medical image analysis represents a prime growth area 
for DL [ 8 , 10 ]. 
For these developments in the greater life science arena, AILSCI rep- 
resents a well-positioned publication venue. One of AILSCI’s core values 
is ensuring high scientiﬁc standards of publications, including method 
development and AI applications. 
Characteristics of deep machine learning 
Generally, ML uses algorithms for the extraction of feature patterns 
from training data to classify test objects or address regression tasks. 
Hence, ML methods are statistical in nature and derive predictive mod- 
els capturing linear or non-linear instance-feature relationships based on 
inference from data. DNNs are well suited for feature extraction from 
large volumes of unstructured data (such as pixels in images) and for 
learning new object representations. DL relies on systematic correlation 
of feature patterns and known class labels and derives models with de- 
cision functions that are not pre-programmed. Hence, there is nothing 
mysterious about this type of supervised “machine intelligence ”. 
Shallow NNs were popular during the early stages of ML in biology, 
chemistry, and drug discovery, but were largely replaced by other ap- 
proaches such as decision tree methods (random forest, gradient boost- 
ing), Bayesian modeling, or support vector machines. This was largely 
due to a general tendency of shallow NNs to overﬁt models to train- 
ing data and their high sensitivity to varying parameter settings. The 
increasingly popular second-generation DNNs represent highly versa- 
tile computational architectures. In computer science, a great variety of 
DNNs and associated learning strategies have been introduced, some- 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ailsci.2022.100052 
Received 7 December 2022; Accepted 9 December 2022 
Available online 11 December 2022 
2667-3185/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ) 
J. Bajorath 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100052 
times described with terms like a network “jungle ” or “zoo ” [11] . This 
architectural variety has pros and cons. For many applications, alterna- 
tive DNNs can be considered, but ﬁnding preferred solutions is not nec- 
essarily straightforward. Moreover, complex DNN models are often de- 
rived without demonstrating that their complexity is indeed required for 
the predictions tasks at hand. Compared to other ML approaches, DNNs 
are particularly rich in hyper-parameters and derivation of DNN models 
requires substantial knowledge, skills, and experience. Accordingly, al- 
though public domain software is available for constructing DNNs, DL 
is not an approach that is readily accessible to non-experts. There is 
a strong discrepancy between the mechanics of model building, which 
might be handled by less experienced users, and the evaluation of re- 
sults and recognition of potential caveats or model errors, which re- 
quires much more expertise. Importantly, similar to other –but not all–
ML methods, DNNs have notorious “black box ” character [12] , meaning 
that it is not transparent how these models reach their decisions. The 
black box of DNNs is a major issue in life science and drug discovery 
applications, as further discussed below. 
Data heterogeneity 
Life science and drug discovery data are highly heterogeneous in 
terms of volumes, composition, and complexity. Early-phase drug dis- 
covery concentrating on target validation, bioassays, compounds, and 
activity assessment is not a data-rich discipline compared to other ar- 
eas where DL has made a strong impact. In early-phase drug discovery, 
data sets from medicinal chemistry are typically conﬁned to test results 
for compound series and therefore limited in size. This also applies to 
data sets from, for example, probe investigations in chemical biology, 
time series experiments in biology, or conﬁrmatory assays in biological 
screening. A consequence of data heterogeneity and sparseness is that 
suﬃciently large data sets for “hungry ” DNNs are often not available. 
Moreover, informatics approaches in the life sciences have traditionally 
employed pre-deﬁned object (for example, target or compound) repre- 
sentations (descriptors) and not relied on representation learning. To 
further complicate matters, eﬀective ML/DL models can also be gener- 
ated on the basis of very small data sets [13] . Hence, there are many 
incentives to undertake expeditions into the DNN jungle, further ana- 
lyze learning characteristics of diﬀerent methods, and compare ML/DL 
models of diﬀerent complexity. 
Artiﬁcial intelligence in medicinal chemistry 
As an exemplary ﬁeld with many opportunities for practical applica- 
tions, one may have a closer look at the state-of-the art of AI in medicinal 
chemistry, a core discipline of early-phase drug discovery. 
ML already has a long history in medicinal chemistry, a traditionally 
conservative discipline. For more than two decades, ML methods have 
been used for compound property predictions and other applications. 
In medicinal chemistry, properties of interest for computational stud- 
ies include, ﬁrst and foremost, biological activities of small molecules, 
but also physiochemical (e.g. solubility) or in vivo properties (such as 
metabolic stability or toxicity). Predictions of such properties aim to 
support the key task in the practice of medicinal chemistry, that is, de- 
ciding which compound(s) to synthesize next. Over time, shallow NNs 
that were popular early on for property predictions were for the most 
part replaced by other ML methods, as discussed above. Importantly, in 
medicinal chemistry, chemical intuition, experience, and subjective de- 
cisions continue to play a major role. Accordingly, black box predictions 
that cannot be explained in chemical terms work against the acceptance 
of ML for practical applications. However, the popularity of DNNs and 
high expectations associated with DL are also changing computational 
medicinal chemistry. 
Balancing high hopes 
In a publication comparing black box models, explainable, and inter- 
pretable ML from a computer science perspective [14] , Cynthia Rudin 
states the following: 
“When considering problems that have structured data with meaningful 
features, there is often no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in performance between 
more complex classiﬁers (deep neural networks, boosted decision trees, 
random forests) and much simpler classiﬁers (logistic regression, decision 
lists) after preprocessing . ”
This situation exactly applies to medicinal chemistry. Here, one typ- 
ically does not work with very large sets of low-resolution data (such a 
pixels comprising images) for representation learning, a notable strength 
of DNNs. Instead, in medicinal chemistry projects, available data sets 
are mostly small and well-deﬁned molecular representations are used 
(e.g. molecular graph-based descriptors). Such conditions explain ob- 
servations that are frequently made: At least for property prediction in 
medicinal chemistry, there typically is little, if any detectable advantage 
of DNNs over other (simpler) ML methods. 
In her article, Cynthia Rudin makes another key point that is equally 
applicable to medicinal chemistry and drug design: 
“There is a widespread belief that more complex models are more accu- 
rate, meaning that a complicated black box is necessary for top predictive 
performance. However, this is often not true …” [14] . 
One may rephrase this point and emphasize that methodological 
complexity does not necessarily scale with predictive performance. 
Clearly, no complex ML approach is “validated ” until it is not conclu- 
sively demonstrated that simpler methods do not yield comparable re- 
sults; a critical issue that is often not suﬃciently considered in the liter- 
ature. 
New opportunities 
While molecular property predictions in medicinal chemistry cur- 
rently only beneﬁt little from DL, DNNs open the door to novel types 
of applications, for example, in generative molecular design [ 15 , 16 ] or 
chemical reaction analysis and modeling [17–19] , which would be dif- 
ﬁcult to tackle using other ML methods. Generative compound design 
aims to construct chemically novel compounds with desired properties. 
In these and other areas, recent DL applications illustrate the scientiﬁc 
heterogeneity of the ﬁeld. For example, despite reports of individual 
success stories in molecular design [20] , caveats remain along the way 
[21] and consistently successful applications of a given approach on 
diﬀerent compound classes are rare. While various compound design 
strategies can be implemented using DNNs the jury is still out whether or 
not DL is capable of generating new chemical entities that are of higher 
quality than others. There are recurrent claims by AI-driven drug dis- 
covery enterprises of breakthroughs in generating novel compounds in 
record times. However, these claims can typically not be assessed scien- 
tiﬁcally because the data are kept proprietary. In general, scientiﬁcally 
sound reports of practical AI applications with a clear positive impact 
on medicinal chemistry are still rare [22] . 
Big data trends 
Beneﬁts of DNNs are often associated with learning from “big data ”. 
While early-phase drug discovery is not a data-rich discipline, as noted 
above, big data trends on a relative scale are also observed in medic- 
inal chemistry [23] . Major public repositories of compound data have 
grown to contain millions of bioactive compounds with activity anno- 
tations for thousands of biological targets. In addition, more than 200 
million commercial compounds are oﬀered for medicinal chemistry. Of 
course, for investigators working in particle physics, genomics, or social 
media, such data volumes might be a far cry from what they perceive 
2 
J. Bajorath 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100052 
as big data. However, for medicinal chemistry, which is traditionally 
not data-driven, these data volumes are challenging. On the other hand, 
data-driven approaches provide new opportunities for the further devel- 
opment of medicinal chemistry as a scientiﬁc discipline [24] . 
The situation is diﬀerent for predictive modeling. In medicinal chem- 
istry, ML is mostly applied at the level of individual target-directed 
projects using relatively small data. Each of these projects provides a 
speciﬁc context for modeling. In data science, the context dependence 
of data structuring and analysis is known to work against generaliza- 
tion of knowledge extraction, which requires abstraction from project- 
based data sets and project-speciﬁc analysis criteria [25] . By contrast, in 
medicinal chemistry, project focus takes center stage and conﬁnes the 
applicability of ML. Furthermore, the predominant small data frame- 
work in medicinal chemistry also suggests alternative strategies for ML. 
Rather than heavily investigating methodologies whose strengths de- 
pend upon large data volumes, approaches such as transfer learning 
[26] or active learning [ 27 , 28 ] can be applied that are capable of pre- 
dicting molecular properties or new compounds on the basis of sparse 
data. Transfer learning makes it possible to use data from related pre- 
diction tasks (targets) for modeling; active learning derives predictive 
models from minimal sets of informative training instances. In medici- 
nal chemistry, these approaches are particularly relevant for addressing 
novel targets with interesting disease biology for which only limited 
compound information is available. All in all, there is much room for 
further computational developments with practical utility for medicinal 
chemistry. 
Model impact and acceptance 
Returning to the greater life science arena, there are other areas 
where DNNs have achieved unprecedented advances such as in de novo 
protein structure prediction [29] . Regardless, DL will ultimately only 
become an integral part of interdisciplinary life science research if it 
measurably impacts experimental programs. Importantly, further estab- 
lishing DL in interdisciplinary settings is only possible if life science in- 
vestigators and drug discovery practitioners agree to rely on predictions 
for experimental design. This requires increasing model acceptance in 
interdisciplinary research. As is the case with any new technology, time 
will be required until DL can realize its potential in this area. However, 
there are speciﬁc requirements that must be met to further increase the 
conﬁdence of experimentalists in predictive models. 
Rationalizing predictions 
Experimentalists are naturally reluctant to rely on predictions that 
are diﬃcult or impossible to understand. Given the black box nature of 
DNNs, this presents a major obstacle for the acceptance of such models 
for experimental design. Therefore, increasing attention is being paid to 
approaches for “explainable AI ” (XAI) that make it possible to rational- 
ize the results of ML/DL models and interpret predictions in chemical or 
biological terms [ 30 , 31 ]. Among others, these include methods for the 
identiﬁcation of features making largest contributions to individual pre- 
dictions or the determination of feature sets that are minimally required 
to produce an accurate prediction. Closely related to XAI approaches 
are methods to quantify the uncertainty of predictions [32–34] . Obtain- 
ing uncertainty estimates also helps to build conﬁdence in predictive 
modeling. Although there are ML approaches that yield prediction un- 
certainties, for example, probabilistic (Bayesian) modeling [34] , most 
methods including DNNs produce endpoints without uncertainty esti- 
mates, which are subject to further analysis. 
Prospective applications 
The ultimate assessment of the potential of ML/DL for the life sci- 
ences depends on prospective applications, that is, predictions leading 
to experimental evaluation in real-life projects. In interdisciplinary re- 
search settings, prospective applications require conﬁdence in predic- 
tive modeling. However, it must also be considered that predictions re- 
lying on project data are inevitably inﬂuenced by data generation pro- 
cesses and data integrity [35] and that predictions might succeed or fail 
for diﬀerent reasons. Accordingly, an incorrect prediction might not nec- 
essarily be attributable to methodological failure. Hence, in prospective 
applications, predictions should be analyzed, explained, and carefully 
evaluated within a given project context and care should be taken not 
to prematurely generalize successes or failures. 
Conclusion 
The rise of AI in many scientiﬁc ﬁelds comes along with promises and 
new challenges. AI and DL are often synonymously used, although DL is 
only a part of the AI spectrum. In the life sciences and drug discovery, 
many DNN variants are being considered for method development and 
diﬀerent applications. However, in interdisciplinary research, DL will 
ultimately only meet expectations if it positively impacts experimental 
programs. This will require time, making immediate breakthroughs un- 
likely, especially in drug discovery. For example, medicinal chemists 
currently witness methodological advances in synthesis design through 
DL. However, these new approaches are not easily accessible in the prac- 
tice of medicinal chemistry. Thus, transforming expert-dependent com- 
putational models into robust and readily usable computational tools is 
one of the grand challenges in the ﬁeld. More prospective applications 
will also be essential to further advance DL in interdisciplinary research 
and demonstrate true impact on high-proﬁle projects. In turn, this will 
require narrowing the gap between DL and experiments and further in- 
creasing the conﬁdence of practitioners in predictions. 
For AILSCI, method development eﬀorts, practical applications, and 
perspectives concerning the development of AI approaches at interfaces 
with the life sciences are equally relevant. High scientiﬁc quality is an 
essential criterion for publication in AILSCI , which also strongly encour- 
ages data sharing and open science initiatives. Furthermore, diversity 
of authors and research topics is highly desired and submissions of “oﬀ- 
the-beaten-path ” contributions are strongly encouraged, for example, 
as conceptual analysis, methods, or viewpoint contributions. Notably, 
in line with its speciﬁc aims, AILSCI has launched several Themed Ar- 
ticle Collections (TACs), which essentially correspond to special issues 
and focus on, for example, young investigators or women in AI. Going 
forward, these and other TACs are expected to play a major role for 
AILSCI’s further development. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The author declares that he has no known competing ﬁnancial inter- 
ests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the 
work reported in this paper. 
Data Availability 
No data was used for the research described in the article. 
References 
[1] Bajorath J. Artiﬁcial intelligence in interdisciplinary life science and drug discovery 
research. Future Sci OA 2022;8:FSO792 . 
[2] Bajorath J. State-of-the-art of artiﬁcial intelligence in medicinal chemistry. Future 
Sci OA 2021;7:FSO702 . 
[3] Rapaport WJ. What Is artiﬁcial intelligence? J Artif General Intell 2020;11:52–6 . 
[4] Webb S. Deep learning for biology. Nature 2018;554:555–8 . 
[5] Leite ML, de Loiola Costa LS, Cunha VA, Kreniski V, de Oliveira Braga Filho M, 
da Cunha NB, Costa FF. Artiﬁcial intelligence and the future of life sciences. Drug 
Discov Today 2021;26:2515–26 . 
[6] Chen H, Engkvist O, Wang Y, Olivecrona M, Blaschke T. The rise of deep learning 
in drug discovery. Drug Discov Today 2018;23:1241–50 . 
[7] Wang F, Casalino LP, Khullar D. Deep learning in medicine – promise, progress, and 
challenges. JAMA Intern Med 2019;179:293–4 . 
3 
J. Bajorath 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100052 
[8] Hosny A, Parmar C, Quackenbush J, Schwartz LH, Aerts H. Artiﬁcial intelligence in 
radiology. Nat Rev Cancer 2018;18:500–10 . 
[9] Farina E, Nabhen JJ, Dacoregio MI, Batalini F, Moraes FY. An overview of artiﬁcial 
intelligence in oncology. Future Sci OA 2022;8:FSO787 . 
[10] Shen D, Wu G, Suk HI. Deep learning in medical image analysis. Ann Rev Biomed 
Eng 2017;19:221–48 . 
[11] van Venn, F. The neural network zoo (2016). https://www.asimovinstitute. 
org/neural-network-zoo/ . 
[12] Castelvecchi D. Can we open the black box of AI? Nature 2016;538:20–3 . 
[13] Siemers FM, Feldmann C, Bajorath J. Minimal data requirements for accurate com- 
pound activity prediction using machine learning methods of diﬀerent complexity. 
Cell Rep Phys Sci 2022;3:101113 . 
[14] Rudin C. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes deci- 
sions and use interpretable models instead. Nat Mach Intell 2019;1:206–15 . 
[15] Meyers J, Fabian B, Brown N. De novo molecular design and generative models. 
Drug Discov Today 2021;26:2707–15 . 
[16] Tong X, Liu X, Tan X, Li X, Jiang J, Xiong Z, Xu T, Jiang H, Qiao N, Zheng M. 
Generative models for de novo drug design. J Med Chem 2021;64:14011–27 . 
[17] De Almeida AF, Moreira R, Rodrigues T. Synthetic organic chemistry driven by ar- 
tiﬁcial intelligence. Nat Rev Chem 2019;3:589–604 . 
[18] Struble TJ, Alvarez JC, Brown SP, Chytil M, Cisar J, DesJarlais RL, Engkvist O, 
Frank SA, Greve DR, Griﬃn DJ, Hou X, Johannes JW, Kreatsoulas C, Lahue B, 
Mathea M, Mogk G, Nicolaou CA, Palmer AD, Price DJ, Robinson RI, Salentin S, 
Xing L, Jaakkola T, Green WH, Barzilay R, Coley CW, Jensen KF. Current and fu- 
ture roles of artiﬁcial intelligence in medicinal chemistry synthesis. J Med Chem 
2020;63:8667–82 . 
[19] Bort W, Baskin II, Gimadiev T, Mukanov A, Nugmanov R, Sidorov P, Marcou G, Hor- 
vath D, Klimchuk O, Madzhidov T, Varnek A. Discovery of novel chemical reactions 
by deep generative recurrent neural network. Sci Rep 2021;11:1–15 . 
[20] Stokes JM, Yang K, Swanson K, Jin W, Cubillos-Ruiz A, Donghia NM, McNair CR, 
French S, Carfrae LA, Bloom-Ackermann Z, Tran VM, Chiappino-Pepe A, Badran AH, 
Andrews IW, Chory EJ, Church GM, Brown ED, Jaakkola TS, Barzilay R, Collins JJ. 
A deep learning approach to antibiotic discovery. Cell 2020;180:688–702 . 
[21] Walters WP, Murcko M. Assessing the impact of generative AI on medicinal chem- 
istry. Nat Biotechnol 2020;38:143–5 . 
[22] Bajorath J, Kearnes S, Walters WP, Meanwell NA, Georg GI, Wang S. Artiﬁcial intel- 
ligence in drug discovery: into the great wide open. J Med Chem 2020;63:8651–2 . 
[23] Hu Y, Bajorath J. Entering the ‘big data’ era in medicinal chemistry: molecular 
promiscuity analysis revisited. Future Sci OA 2017;3:FSO179 . 
[24] Bajorath J. Foundations of data-driven medicinal chemistry. Future Sci OA 
2018;4:FSO320 . 
[25] Provost F, Fawcett T. Data science and its relationship to big data and data-driven 
decision making. Big Data 2013;1:51–9 . 
[26] Cai C, Wang S, Xu Y, Zhang W, Tang K, Ouyang Q, Lai L, Pei J. Transfer learning for 
drug discovery. J Med Chem 2020;63:8683–94 . 
[27] Warmuth MK, Liao J, Rätsch G, Mathieson M, Putta S, Lemmen C. Active learning 
with support vector machines in the drug discovery process. J Chem Inf Comput Sci 
2003;43:667–73 . 
[28] Yu J, Li X, Zheng M. Current status of active learning for drug discovery. Artif Intell 
Life Sci 2021;1:100023 . 
[29] Jumper J, Evans R, Pritzel A, Green T, Figurnov M, Ronneberger O, Tunyasuvu- 
nakool K, Bates R, Ž ídek A, Potapenko A, Bridgland A, Meyer C, Kohl SAA, Bal- 
lard AJ, Cowie A, Romera-Paredes B, Nikolov S, Jain R, Adler J, Back T, Petersen S, 
Reiman D, Clancy E, Zielinski M, Steinegger M, Pacholska M, Berghammer T, Boden- 
stein S, Silver D, Vinyals O, Senior AW, Kavukcuoglu K, Kohli P, Hassabis D. Highly 
accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold. Nature 2021;596:583–9 . 
[30] Linardatos P, Papastefanopoulos V, Kotsiantis S. Explainable AI: a review of machine 
learning interpretability methods. Entropy 2021;23:18 . 
[31] Rodríguez-Pérez R, Bajorath J. Explainable machine learning for property predic- 
tions in compound optimization. J Med Chem 2021;64:17744–52 . 
[32] Lakshminarayanan B, Pritzel A, Blundell C. Simple and scalable predictive un- 
certainty estimation using deep ensembles. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst (NIPS) 
2017;30:6402–13 . 
[33] Hie B, Bryson BD, Berger B. Leveraging uncertainty in machine learning accelerates 
biological discovery and design. Cell Syst 2020;1:461–77 . 
[34] Lazic SE, Williams DP. Quantifying sources of uncertainty in drug discovery predic- 
tions with probabilistic models. Artif Intell Life Sci 2021;1:100004 . 
[35] Kearnes S. Pursuing a prospective perspective. Trends Chem 2021;3:77–9 . 
4 
