 AASRI Procedia  4 ( 2013 )  85 – 89 
2212-6716 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
doi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2013.10.014 
ScienceDirect
2013 AASRI Conference on Intelligent Systems and Control 
The Research of the Smart Automatic Voltage Control(Smart 
AVC) 
Xiaoqun Dinga, Jing Shia* ,Ling Zhoua  
a School of Energy and Electronics, Hohai University, Nanjing 211100, China  
 
Abstract 
This paper begins with a brief introduction to the basic knowledge of Smart, as well as the drawbacks of traditional 
AVC. Then from four aspects, it expounds Smart AVC's main function comprehensively. By some problems of the 
conventional AVC’s practical application connecting with the actual situation and the new functions of the Smart AVC, 
this paper points out that the conclusion of Smart AVC is inevitable. It also points out that the future development 
direction of the Smart AVC. 
 
© 2013 Xiaoqun Ding, Jing Shi , Ling Zhou. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute 
 
Keywords: Smart AVC; ”self-healing” ; multi-objective; online control , prevention and evaluation; new energy. 
1.  Foreword 
Smart AVC is an important part of the smart grid’s construction. The technology features of the Smart 
AVC is information, digitization, automation, and interactive. In Smart AVC’s system’s design and 
application, it can use structural systematic, fine analysis, intelligent control and interactive harmonization to 
reflect specifically. At present, the Smart AVC’s building still belongs to the concept level, and its specific 
implementation is confronted with great difficulties. Simple Smart AVC is not a simple and direct 
 
 
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +8625-15895967215; fax: +8625-83733751. 
E-mail address: shijing0119@126.com 
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
86  
 Xiaoqun Ding et al. /  AASRI Procedia  4 ( 2013 )  85 – 89 
organization and integration. It requires co-endeavour between power generation, power supply, users and 
academia and the engineering profession for smart AVC. In the near future, I believe that Smart AVC will be 
achieved in our country and it will bring incalculable benefits for our lives and the power grid. Smart AVC 
system can control the grid real-time operation status, detect and eliminate hidden faults. In the participation 
of less labor, it can avoid blackouts caused by voltage and has the grid self-healing capabilities. In addition, 
the Smart AVC can optimize grid operation, support the access to solar, wind and other good distributed 
power, and reduce the power costs and increase supply reliability [1,2]. 
2. Traditional AVC and Smart AVC 
Domestic reactive power and voltage control (Traditional AVC) began in the 1980s, its control mode has 
undergone VQC (voltage and reactive power control system of substation), centralized automatic voltage 
control based on the whole network optimization, the tertiary voltage control of the entire network based on 
"soft" the partition, the distributed control based on the whole network optimization. 
Traditional AVC can solve voltage qualification rate and power factor qualified rate, reduce the net loss 
rate and effectively reduce the sub-connected switches of power transformer, capacitors, the number of action 
times of the electric reactor equipment .And traditional AVC play an important role in these facets. But it 
exists the fault that adjustment process is not enough narrow, and it is not able to achieve the goal of the true 
sense of reactive power site and stratified balance finely. What’s more, it also cannot control voltage 
fluctuations completely reasonably and cannot be self-healing to recover voltage in the grid failure [3,4].  
Finally, it claims that the control mode of traditional AVC play an important role in its special field. But due 
to the imperfections of its function, there are a series of much-needed improvements in the operation, which 
determines the development of the Smart AVC is required. 
3. Propose and study of the main function of the Smart AVC 
The building of Smart AVC need to address not only the traditional AVC’s existed problems, but also to 
respond to the new problems that may arise in the smart grid actively. Smart AVC’s objectives are as follows: 
The research and development of Smart AVC should be carried out on the basis of the traditional AVC, and it 
could be compatible with traditional AVC, reduce waste, optimize resources. Smart AVC is not subject to any 
channel or grid failure factors. The results from distributed computing adapt to any changes in the operation 
mode functionality. Smart AVC creates self-healing rely on the closed-loop control system formulated by in-
place  calculating compensation. It can avoid the purpose of the power outage due to voltage problems, and 
can effectively resist the attack to help the grid to improve disaster prevention capacity; and is able to handle 
huge amounts of data, reactive scheduling and active coordination of scheduling [1,5]. 
The following is from the four aspects study Smart AVC amply: 
3.1 Smart AVC and grid "self-healing" 
Smart AVC’s self-healing function is the ability that the system can restore the voltage level in the case of 
little or no human intervention when grid causes voltage collapse accident. Essentially the grid quickly 
achieves the capacity of local reactive balance. To achieve smart grid’sself-healing, the core is real-time 
decision-making online, realizing trouble-free and stable operation, small fault autonomy run. Preventing the 
occurrence of cascading failures of large area is grid’s self-prevention and self-recover when the big failure 
event occur. 
To achieve the Smart AVC's self-healing function and draw on the power grid running state, the running 
87
 Xiaoqun Ding et al. /  AASRI Procedia  4 ( 2013 )  85 – 89 
state of the smart grid could be partitioned first and the nature of the work that it can be divided into a very 
fragile area, fault disturbance area and repair and maintenance area when the running state is abnormal. After 
performing workspace, three non-normal zone can be controlled respectively, and ultimately ensure the grid 
to optimize the control grid of run in the normal zone. So the grid realizes the optimization run, and optimize 
the allocation of grid resources. In this way, the power grid operation can be divided into the following five 
areas: optimized operation zone, routine operation zone, abnormal and vulnerable zone, contingency and fault 
zone and repair maintenance zone. 
3.2 optimization modeling based on Smart AVC multi-objective  
The multi-objective reactive power optimization modeling of Smart AVC system is transformed by single 
objective function optimized by traditional power system reactive power flow. The model is: 
m in
m in (
)
(
)
m ax (
)
m in (
)
PL o ss
f
x
V
 
Where, 
)
min(
PLoss
 indicates the minimum system active power loss, 
)
min( U  presents the best 
System load node voltage level (the minimum voltage fluctuations), 
)
max(
min
 shows the maximum 
System voltage stability margin. 
   Reactive power flow optimization’s equality constraints mainly contain flow equations’ equation 
equality constraints, the constraints of control variables (transformer taps’ regulation, reactive power 
compensation capacity’s determination, the generator terminal voltage’s regulation), which must meet the 
system power flow equations. 
Reactive power flow optimization’s variable constraints mainly contain the state variables constraints and 
control variable constraints, in which the control variable is divided into a variable transformer voltage ratio, 
reactive power compensation capacity and the generator terminal voltage; and state variables is divided into 
each load node voltage and injection reactive of power generator and the maximum transmission capacity 
restriction. 
3.3 Smart distribution grid and distribution network AVC 
The smart distribution network is an important part of the smart grid, which is related to our smart grid 
which can be successfully achieved or not. Compared with the traditional distribution network, the smart 
distribution network has the following characteristics: 
1) It has higher supply reliability. It has the ability to withstand natural disasters and external damages, and 
intelligent processing of real-time prediction of grid security risks and minimize the impact of the distribution 
network fault on the users. 
2) It has higher quality power. It uses advanced technology for power electronics and power quality 
monitoring and compensation techniques to achieve optimization of reactive power and voltage control. It can 
ensure voltage uninterrupted power quality sensitive equipment, high quality, and continuity of supply. 
3) It is more interactive. It supports in the distribution network access to a large number of distributed 
power generation unit, energy storage, renewable energy, and the seamless connection to distribution network. 
And it supports micro-network operation, and increases the flexibility of the distribution network run and load 
reliability of supply. 
The key technologies of smart distribution network AVC is: Intelligent distribution network is a highly 
88  
 Xiaoqun Ding et al. /  AASRI Procedia  4 ( 2013 )  85 – 89 
open network system, each part of the system can be a two-way communication achieved through the 
establishment of an advanced communication system. Smart distribution grid AVC carries its own software 
tools, which are highly integrated interface, trends, reports, and other services within the database, making the 
system more simple and effective. Smart distribution grid AVC can finely display real-time conditions and 
matters in the man-machine interface, and can choose to display the conditions and events, event playback, 
update speed information according to user requirements. 
3.4 Smart AVC acceptance of renewable energy 
In recent years, with the gradual increase of the energy crisis and the growing awareness of environmental 
protection, wind power and photovoltaic power generation are increasingly important, and they have become 
the most promising renewable energy power generation. As the most potential for development of renewable 
energy generation technologies, wind power has a rapid development in China, and a lot of them are access to 
the distribution network. Due to random and intermittent of wind energy, wind turbine output power changes 
with wind speed randomly, and wind farms and network will interfere with the normal operation of the 
existing distribution system. Therefore, the wind farm active power control incorporated into the distribution 
network, the reactive voltage regulator and optimized operation with the grid have a widespread concern. 
Reactive power and voltage control of the traditional grid, by changing the OLTC transformer voltage ratio 
and switching capacitor banks regulator, reduces network losses and improve voltage quality, when voltage 
quality requirements are met. Thereby, it enhances the power distribution economy and security of the 
network operation. The large-capacity wind farms and network operation will interfere with the normal 
operation of the existing distribution network voltage regulation equipment, and even lead to the distribution 
network voltage control function failure seriously and affect the optimal operation of the power grid. 
Smart AVC system start to use analysis, research and analysis of the equivalent model of wind turbine 
access system and flow calculation method through the access of renewable energy, especially wind power 
equivalent model. And it finally studies double-fed motor wind farm network control reactive power voltage 
optimization, and obtains wind power grid optimization model and method. 
4. Conclusion 
This paper prospects and studies future Smart AVC grid "self-healing", smart AVC multi-objective 
optimization modeling, smart distribution grid and distribution network AVC, new energy equivalent access 
and other features of the model based on the analysis of the drawbacks of traditional AVC. And it describes 
the new features of Smart AVC different from the tradition AVC in details, and provide new ideas and 
directions for the future development and improvement of Smart AVC. 
References 
[1]Ding Xiaoqun,Zhou Ling,Chen Guangyu. Automatic voltage control ( AVC ) technique and case analysis. 
Bei Jing: Machinery Industry Press, 2010. 
[2] Ding Xiaoqun,Zhou Ling,Chen Guangyu. Intelligent automatic voltage control (Smart AVC) technology. 
Bei Jing: Machinery Industry Press, 2012. 
[3] Ding Xiaoqun,Chen Sheng,Xu Xingtao. Application of Optimization and Centralized Control System for 
Reactive Ppower/Voltage in Taizhou Power Network. Power system technology, 2000
24(12)
21-23
44. 
[4]Ding Xiaoqun,Huang Wei,Deng Yong. A Control System for Reactive Power/Voltage in Main 
Station/Substation Model Based on Hierarchical Technology. Automation of Electric Power Systems, 2004
89
 Xiaoqun Ding et al. /  AASRI Procedia  4 ( 2013 )  85 – 89 
28(5)
63-66. 
[5]Tang Yinsheng
Ding Xiaoqun . Research on Features of Smart AVC and Its Construction.Power system 
technology, 2010, 34(10): 10-14. 
[6]Chen Lin,Zhong Jin,Ni Yixin,elt. Optimal Reactive Power Planning of Radial Distribution Systems with 
Distributed Generation. Proceedings of the CSEE,2006 ,30 (14) :20-24. 
[7]Wu Junling,Zhou Shuangxi,Sun Jianfeng,elt. Analysis on Maximum Power Injection of Wind Farm 
Connection to Power System.Power system technology,2004 ,28 (20) :28-32. 
