Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Array 

journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/array 

Novel group handover mechanism for Cooperative and Coordinated Mobile 
Femtocells technology in railway environment 

Rand Raheem *, Aboubaker Lasebae, Ali Raheem 

Faculty of Science & Technology, Middlesex University, London, United Kingdom   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
High-speed trains 
Mobile femto 
Donor eNB 
Group handover 
Signalling 
Mobility management 
Performance analysis 
Railways environment 

Recently, the Mobile Femto (MF) Technology has been debated in many research papers to be a promising so-
lution  that  will  dominate  future  networks.  This  small  cell  technology  plays  a  major  role  in  supporting  and 
maintaining  network  connectivity,  enhancing  the  communication  service  as  well  as  user  experience  for  pas-
sengers  in  High-Speed  Trains  (HSTs)  environments.  Within  the  railway  environment,  there  are  many  MF 
Technologies placed on HSTs to enhance the train passengers’ internet experience. Those users are more affected 
by  the  high  penetration  loss,  path  loss,  dropped  signals,  and  the  unnecessary  number  of  Handovers  (HOs). 
Therefore,  it is more appropriate  to serve those  mobile users  by the in-train femtocell technology than being 
connected  to  the  outside  Access  Points  (APs)  or  Base  Stations  (BSs).  Hence,  having  a  series  of  MFs  (called 
Cooperative and Coordinated MFs -CCMF) installed inside the train carriages has been seen to be a promising 
solution for train environments and future networks. The CCMF Technologies establish Backhaul (BH) links with 
the serving mother BS (DeNB). However, one of the main drawbacks in such an environment is the frequent and 
unnecessary number of HO procedures for the MFs and train passengers. Thus, this paper proposes an efficient 
Group HO mechanism that will improve signal connection and mitigate the impact of a signal outage when train 
carriages move from one serving cell to another. Unlike most work that uses Fixed Femtocell (FF) architecture, 
this work uses MF architecture. The achieved results via Matlab simulator show that the proposed HO scheme has 
achieved less outage probability of 0.055 when the distance between the MF and mobile users is less than 10 m 
compared to the signal outage probability of the conventional HO scheme. More results have shown that the 
dropping calls probability has been reduced when mobile users are connected to the MF compared to the direct 
transmission from the eNB. That is in turn has have improved the call duration of mobile UEs and reduced the 
dropping calls probability for mobile users who are connected to the MF compared to eNB direct connection UEs.   

1. Introduction 

Being  connected  to  wireless  broadband  services  has  risen  signifi-
cantly  with  the  high  deployment  of  smartphones,  tablets,  and  other 
mobile  devices.  Passengers  on  public  transportation  such  as  buses, 
trams, and trains make intensive use of these devices and they require to 
be connected to the internet from anywhere and at any time with any-
thing.  Studies  have  shown  that  mobile  broadband  users  are  growing 
10%  annually  and  it  was  120  million  in  2019.  On  the  other  hand, 
forecasts  have  shown  that  smartphone  users  will  reach  7.4  billion  in 
2025 which is 83% of all mobile subscriptions [1]. 

However,  passengers  on  public  transportation  especially  HST  pas-
sengers are the most who are suffering from the inadequacy of Quality of 
Service (QoS). There are so many reasons behind that and one of the 

main reasons is the well-shielded structure with coated windows that 
leads  to  high  penetration  loss  for  in  and  out  signals.  Thus,  all  User 
Equipments (UEs) who are inside public transportation and connected to 
the serving eNB via the wireless links are suffering from high Vehicular 
Penetration Loss (VPL) and signal degradation. 

Hence,  HSTs  are  considered  to  be  one  of  the  vital  transportation 
services in which they save time and effort. That is without neglecting 
the fact that HSTs are used all over the world such as Europe, China, and 
Japan with speeds exceeds 350 km/h [2]. As mentioned earlier, those 
well-shield carriages are more exposed to Doppler frequency shift, high 
VPL up to 40 dB, and low HO success rate. Therefore, many projects and 
studies have proven that there is a persistent need for seamless wireless 
connectivity  and  better  QoS  to  be  provided  to  train  passengers  in 
[3].  Hence, 
high-speed  environments  and 

future  networks 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail addresses: R.H.Raheem@mdx.ac.uk (R. Raheem), A.Lasebae@mdx.ac.uk (A. Lasebae), aliraheem@outlook.com (A. Raheem).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2022.100223 
Received 22 December 2021; Accepted 3 July 2022   

Array15(2022)100223Availableonline9July20222590-0056/CrownCopyright©2022PublishedbyElsevierInc.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NC-NDlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).R. Raheem et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 1. CCMFs scenario in HST environments.  

Communication Enablers for Twenty-twenty (2020) Information Society 
(METIS)  is  considered  to  be  one  of  the  few  projects  in  which  it  has 
considered the deployment of small cells technology inside HST envi-
ronments to improve vehicular UEs wireless connectivity. 

Therefore, this paper discusses the deployment of the CCMF Tech-
nologies  inside  the  HSTs  environment  to  improve  train  passengers’ 
signal quality and network connectivity. The CCMFs technology is seen 
to be a promising solution to overcome the issue of coverage in the high- 
speed railway environment. The CCMF technology is installed on trams, 
trains, and other large-spatial-dimensions vehicles. Hence Fig. 1 shows 
that the CCMFs themselves are connected with each other via the CrX2 
coordination interface. Having such a connection allows the high opti-
misation of group HO procedure and BH link connections in which both 
will be investigated further in this work. That is essential to maintain the 
data and voice services of mobile users inside the high-speed railway 
environment. 

While the main contribution of this paper is proposing an efficient 
mobility  management  scheme  in  which  it  improves  and  supports 
seamless mobility between the DeNB and other small cells technologies. 
In this framework, new rules are presented to support the HO procedure 
and  link  adaptation  that  maintain  signal  strength  and  quality  during 
UEs’ mobility together with the presented small cells mobility. One of 
these  rules  is  the  group  HO  procedure  for  all  train  passengers  when 
handing over the small cell technology from one Macrocell to another. 
Several  challenges  will  be  considered  here;  the  HO  process,  resource 
allocation, dropping calls probability, outage probability, and other UEs 
performance requirements. 

2. Literature review 

There are many studies that tackled the mobile relay HO procedure 
but very few studies tackled the MF HO procedure. In Ref. [5] the author 
has  discussed  the  mobile  relay  HO  issue  in  HSTs  environment.  The 
proposed  HO  scheme  relies  on  the  fact  that  the  train  travels  in  fixed 
paths. The author has shown that the proposed measurement procedure 
was  able  to  shorten  the  HO  time.  However,  the  proposed  solution  is 
limited to the fact that is not capable to survive in crowded train stations 
where UEs need to quickly be attached and de-attached from the mobile 
relays  after  the  users  get  on  or  get  off  the  train.  Other  studies  have 
focused on enhancing the HO performance of mobile relay by reducing 
the  HO  outage  probability  in  HSTs  environment  [6].  In  addition,  the 
author in Ref. [7] has focused on minimising the HO failure and link 

outage probability by proposing a mechanism that reduces the number 
of unnecessary HOs, HO failure, and link outage probability. The pre-
vious  solutions  have  considered  the  mobile  relay  which  is  limited  in 
terms  of  the  served  number  of  UEs  as  well  as  the  issue  of  the  severe 
interference  between  the  different  mobile  relays  and  Macrocells. 
Whereas, a HO authentication mechanism has been proposed by Ref. [8] 
in  which  it  has  reduced  the  HO  time  delay  while  providing  strong 
authentication  for  served  mobile  users.  The  previous  study  provided 
complex  solution  that  relies  on  authentication  keys  to  control  the 
number of HOs in HSTs environment. In contrast, the author in Ref. [9] 
has introduced a new HO scheme by proposing two antennas in order to 
minimise communication interruption during the HO procedure. In this 
study, the design and performance analysis of the proposed handover 
process  was  relatively  based  on  an  ideal  model  with  perfect  channel 
estimation. However, it is well known that accurate channel information 
is difficult to obtain in broadband wireless systems for HST. Therefore, 
this study was limited as it did not show how the channel estimation 
errors affect the performance of handover schemes. Another study has 
improved  the  HO  scheme  based  on  choosing  the  appropriate  power 
allocation [10]. The author has shown that the proposed scheme was 
able to reduce the HO delay at the cost of capacity where the capacity 
showed slight degradation. 

As mentioned earlier, most of the previous work that is concerned 
with improving the QoS of UEs inside HSTs was based on using mobile 
relays  in  such  an  environment  [11,12],  and  [13].  Other  studies  have 
discussed the challenges the mobile relay face in HSTs environment such 
as interference and HO-related problems [14,15]. 

However,  in  our  previous  work,  the  installation  of  the  MF  inside 
public transportation specifically buses has been discussed [16]. It was 
shown that the deployment of the MF inside buses has greatly improved 
the  vehicular  UE  experience  compared  to  other  solutions.  That  is 
because  MF  works  on  licensed  spectrum,  increases  network  capacity, 
and  shows  better  load  sharing,  voice  quality  and  data/multimedia 
experience. More work has been done to discuss mobility and interfer-
ence management for those vehicular cells [17,18]. In terms of mobility 
management, a group handover procedure has been introduced for all 
bus passengers when the bus moves from the coverage area of one eNB 
to another. The proposed solution has discussed the main concept of this 
HO scheme which is resource allocation. That is because handing over 
the MF itself from one eNB to another does not only dependent on the 
MF’s direction, speed, and channels availability but also on the Band-
width (BW) and Physical Resource Blocks (PRBs) availability in the next 

Array15(2022)1002232R. Raheem et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 2. Train movement between different coverage areas.  

Fig. 3. Handing over MF from the S DeNB to the T DeNB.  

cell.  The  proposed  solution  has  shown  a  significant  reduction  in  the 
signal outage probability, dropping and blocking calls probability, and 
improved the throughput of future networks in general. However, the 
previous studies were limited to the fact that the Doppler shift and speed 
on bus environment are completely different from the ones on the HSTs 
environment. The latter is more exposed to signal degradation because 
of the high speed of trains, which requires sufficient maintenance for 
UE’s signal especially when the coverage area changes rapidly in such an 
environment. Therefore, installing the MF in HSTs environment will be 
further discussed in this research paper. 

In contrast, in Ref. [4] we have introduced the CCMF technology in 
which has improved the signal quality and UEs internet experience in-
side high-speed railways environment. The achieved results have shown 
great improvement after deploying the CCMF technology in comparison 
to other technologies. The CCMFs is implemented on trains and other 
large-spatial-dimensions vehicles where those CCMFs are connected to 

one another through the CrX2 coordination interface. This allows high 
optimisation for the group HO procedure and BH link connection. In our 
previous work, the interference issue has been investigated between the 
Macrocells  and  the  deployed  small  cells  technologies.  The  proposed 
interference  scheme  was  based  on  controlling  the  eNB  and  the  MF 
transmission power, controlling the MF location distribution, and using 
the frequency reuse scheme for the worst-case scenarios. However, the 
mobility  aspect  which  is  the  HO  process  for  the  CCMF  has  not  been 
tackled  yet.  That  is  why  it  will  be  discussed  in  this  research  paper. 
Hence, this work will investigate the Group HO strategy and its impact 
in maintaining the UEs connectivity when the installed MF moves out of 
the coverage area of the serving eNB to the target eNB. 

3. Handover scenario and system model 

It has already been mentioned that maintaining connectivity inside 

Array15(2022)1002233R. Raheem et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 4. UEs group handover.  

Fig. 5. Proposed HO mechanism for MF with its attached UEs.  

Array15(2022)1002234R. Raheem et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

the HST environment is the most challenging issue especially with the 
increased  demand  on  using  such  a  transportation  system.  Thus,  pas-
sengers can be connected to those small cells technologies to enhance 
their  signal  quality  and  mitigate  the  number of  dropped  and  blocked 
connections. However, there is another challenge with this environment 
which  is  when  this  small  cell  moves  out  of  the  coverage  area  of  the 
serving eNB to another. The issue can be summarised by Fig. 2: 

However, to solve the above issue there are a couple of possible so-
lutions that can be discussed here. The first solution is by adjusting the 
transmission power [19]. The approach states that when the train enters 
the overlapped area between the serving eNB and the target eNB, the 
serving eNB increases its transmission power to delay the HO process. 
Using such an approach helps to avoid premature HOs until the train 
becomes closer to the target eNB. Hence, the target eNB starts increasing 
its transmission power while in turn, the serving eNB starts decreasing 
its  transmission  power  in  order  to  let  the  HO  process  take  its  place 
smoothly. 

On the other hand, the efficient coverage planning of the base sta-
tions along the railway track is an important aspect in order to improve 
the HO operation [20]. That can be facilitated by placing the MF on train 
carriages  in  their  correct  locations.  Since  the  available  transmission 
power of the mother BS is assumed to be 46dBm for the inter-BS spacing 
of 3.8 km [18], studies have proven that the required power to achieve a 
sufficient  QoS  by  train  passengers  can  exceed  the  46dBm  especially 
when the train is near the cell boundary. That is almost halfway between 
consecutive BSs. Thus, when the coverage planning process takes into 
account the presence of the MF together with the QoS requirements, this 
can significantly enhance the signal strength and internet connection for 
train  passengers.  That  can  only  be done  when  the  presented  MFs are 
positioned  in  their  right  locations  which  can  reduce  the  power  con-
sumption at the BS end. 

Hence,  the  CCMF  is  seen  to  be  a  promising  solution  for  the  high- 
speed  railway  environments  and  future  networks.  As  a  result,  it  is 
required to understand the HO mechanism and call maintenance of train 
passengers  when  the  train  moves  away  from  the  serving  eNB  to  the 
target eNB as shown in Fig. 3. Thus, main challenge of offering seamless 
HO  in  HST  and  future  networks  is  data  forwarding  from  the  Serving 
DeNB  (S  DeNB)  to  the  Target  DeNB  (T  DeNB).  As  mentioned  earlier, 
Fig. 3 illustrates the fact that when the MF leaves the coverage area of 
the S DeNB towards the T DeNB the HO process will take a place here to 
maintain  the  vehicular  UEs’  connection  who  are  connected  to  the 
serving the MF. 

However, the HO process, in this case, will not be per UE but it will 
be per a group of UEs connected to the serving MF as shown in Fig. 4. 
The group HO procedure is established when the signal strength –Signal 
to Interference and Noise Ratio (SINR) between the MF and the S DeNB 
drops. The chosen T DeNB depends on the train path which is usually 
fixed in a known direction. Added to that, the success of the HO pro-
cedure  depends  on  a  very  important  factor  that  cannot  be  neglected 
which is the availability of the PRB in the T DeNB. That means, in order 
to ensure the success of the HO procedure, the required PRB in the T 
DeNB must satisfy the handed-over MF with all its UEs. If that cannot be 
met,  then  the  Call  Admission  Control  (CAC)  in  this  case  allows  the 
release of some of the BW from the existing direct links of the Macro UEs 
by degrading their QoS to serve the coming MF. That is because the CAC 
policy permits the release of the required BW for the coming MF request 
where  in  turn  the  system  allows  a  maximum  (BWT  DeNB  –  BWrequired) 
reduction of the BW to complete the HO procedure and meet the coming 
MF resource demands. This HO procedure is accompanied by a group 
HO for all UEs inside the train carriage who are attached to the serving 
MF. 

In contrast, it is worth mentioning if the minimum required BW at 
the T DeNB is inadequate even after releasing some BW from the direct 
links of the existing Macro UEs, then the connection of the coming MF 

will be dropped, thus, the MF UEs connections will be dropped too. That 
is clearly due to the lack of a sufficient number of the PRB to accom-
modate the coming MF and its UEs. It is to be mentioned that there is 
always a possibility for the train passengers to be connected individually 
to the T DeNB via the direct links. Those UEs will be considered as new 
UEs, thus, they can establish a connection with any close by BS (MF or T 
DeNB).  The CAC  in  this  case  checks  whether  the  MF  coverage  in  the 
same carriage is still available or not. If the MF coverage is available, 
then the MF is the first choice to connect the UE to; otherwise, T DeNB is 
the second option to be connected to. However, this connection quality 
depends on three important factors; the VPL, path loss, and the speed of 
the  train.  That  means  the  connection  might  not  last  long  due  to  the 
previous three factors that can be could cause issues. 

On the other hand, Fig. 5 illustrates in detail the HO procedure when 
the MF is handed over from the S DeNB to the T DeNB. That is only when 
the number of the available PRB at the T DeNB is adequate to accom-
modate the coming MF with all its attached UEs. In this case, the HO 
procedure  is  going  through  three  main  phases  as  shown  below;  the 
preparation  phase,  the  execution  phase,  and  finally  the  completion 
phase.  Those  three  main  phases  themselves  include  sub-procedures 
within  them  in  order  to  ensure  the  success  of  the  HO  procedure  in 
HST environments. Thus, before moving into the first phase, it is to be 
pointed that the S DeNB configures and triggers the MF Measurements 
Control where in turn the MF replays with the required Measurements 
Report to complete the HO procedure successfully. 

3.1. HO preparation phase 

In this phase the S DeNB makes the decision based on the previous 
measurement  reports  and  whether  it  is  required  to  perform  the  HO 
procedures of the leaving MF towards the T DeNB. The S DeNB sends a 
HO Request message to the T DeNB. Once the request is received, the T 
DeNB performs an admission control check to decide whether to accept 
the coming MF or not. If yes, the T DeNB acknowledges the receipt of the 
HO  Request  message  after  reserving  the  required  resources  for  the 
coming MF. This phase does not end up here as the S DeND needs to 
inform  the  corresponding  MF  to  hand  over  by  the  Radio  Resource 
Control (RRC) connection reconfiguration command. 

3.2. HO execution phase 

Once the RRC connection reconfiguration command is received, all 
required information for the BH link reconfiguration between the MF 
and the T DeNB can be applied. At this phase, the MF is detached from 
the S DeNB and synchronise to the T DeNB. Thus, all packets will be 
forwarded  from  the  S  DeNB  to  the  T  DeNB.  The  RRC  connection 
reconfiguration command between the MF and the T DeNB is completed 
where the MF notifies the T DeNB about that via a message. This phase 
cannot be completed unless the required PRBs at the T DeNB are suffi-
cient to meet the MF with its UEs needs. 

3.3. HO completion phase 

To end up the HO procedure, the T DeNB sends a path switch request 
message  to the  Mobility Management  Entity  (MME). That  is essential 
because the MME communicates with the Serving Gateway (SGW) of the 
MF to switch the routing path. Once that is confirmed, the MME of the 
MF acknowledges the path switch request via a message to the T-DeNB. 
After receiving the path switch request Ack by the T DeNB, the latest 
sends a UE context release message to the S DeNB to release all S DeNB 
resources and make them available for other MFs and UEs. However, it is 
to be mentioned that the path switch of the MF is accompanied by a path 
switch of all UEs attached to the corresponding MF. In turn, the SGW 
forwards all UEs’ packets to the T DeNB which is necessary to maintain 

Array15(2022)1002235R. Raheem et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

their internet connection and signal quality. 

Hence, the MF HO algorithm in HSTs environment has been repre-

sented below:  

Algorithm. 1. MF HO with UEs Group HO 

1: 
2: 
3: 
4: 
5: 
6: 
7: 
8: 
9: 
10: 
11: 
12: 
13: 
14: 
15: 
16: 
17: 
18: 
19: 
20: 
21: 
22: 
24: 
25: 
26: 
27: 
28: 

Detect the MF SINR 
Request Measurement Report 
S DeNB Initiates MF HO Request 
T DeNB Receives MF HO Request 
If BW available at T DeNB≥MF BW required then 

Accept MF HO at the T DeNB 
T DeNB BW total= T DeNB BW total+ MF BW required 
Forward MF packets to the T DeNB 
Path switch of The MF to the T DeNB 
Group UE HO of MF served UE to the T DeNB 
S DeNB Releases the occupied MF Resources 

Else if BW available at T DeNB < MF BW required then 

Reject MF HO 
MF UEs detect the T DeNB signal 
Initiate a HO to the T DeNB 
T DeNB Receives UE HO Request 
If BW available at T DeNB≥UE BW Required then 

Accept UE HO at the T DeNB 
T DeNB BW total= T DeNB BW total+ UE BW required 
Path switch of The UE to the T DeNB 

Else if BW available at T DeNB < UE BW required then 

Reject UE HO 
If UE signal degrades again then 

Drop call 

End 

End 

End  

After the detailed illustration of the MF HO with all its attached UEs 
(group  HO),  now  it  is  vital  to  study  and  evaluate  the  impact  of  the 
proposed  HO  scheme  on  served  train  passengers.  The  proposed  HO 
procedure will be evaluated based on the occurrence of the signal outage 
and dropping calls probabilities in the HSTs environment. 

4. System level 

To create a clear evaluation and comparison between the achieved 
results, a mathematical model will be presented taking into account the 
transmission power of both, eNBs and MFs. Thus, there are two main 
transmission links here; the direct link between the eNB and the train 
passenger, and the access link between the MF and the train passenger. 
As mentioned earlier, the HST environment is more exposed to the high 
path-loss, VPL, fading, and weak SINR at the receiver end that is unable 
to support the required transmission rate of R bits per sec. Due to the 

previously  mentioned  factors  that  could  severely  affect  the  received 
SINR, a signal outage in the system could happen which is known as 
outage probability. Nowadays, systems’ main concern is to reduce the 
outage probability and its impact by maintaining the train passengers’ 
signal connections. Therefore, studying the impact of the proposed HO 
procedure with the use of the CCMF in HSTs environment is the main 
target of this section. Fig. 6 illustrates the possible HO scenario of our 
proposed approach in which it is required to maintain train passengers’ 
connection inside train carriages. As it can be shown below, the common 
case is to have the train passengers connected to the installed MF inside 
the train carriages. However, when the MF leaves the coverage area of 
the S DeNB towards the T DeNB, some worst-case scenarios are to reject 
the HO if the PRBs at the T DeNB are not adequate to accommodate the 
coming MF with its attached mobile users. Thus, the attached mobile 
users to the serving MF as highlighted in Fig. 6 will have the option to be 
connected individually to the T DeNB to maintain their signal connec-
tion and resist the outage probability that could take a place in this case. 
Hence, it is essential to calculate the outage probability of the pro-
posed  HO  mechanism  and  understand  its  impact  in  maintaining  the 
signal connection of served UEs. There are two main cases here; when a 
successful Group HO procedure takes a place and when a rejection from 
the T DeNB takes a place. The outage probability of a single-hop system 
when there is a direct link between the T DeNB and the train passenger 
UE can be given by the following equation: 

Poutage DIrect = Preceived(SINRRx ≤ SINRthreshold DIrect)

(1) 

The above case is when there is a HO rejection for the MF with all its 
attached UEs due to the inadequacy of the PRBs at the T DeNB. Thus, the 
UE will try to establish a HO connection with the T DeNB as its required 
BW is less than the MF required BW. The SINRRx, in this case, is the SINR 
at  the  receiver  Rx,  where  the  received  power  at  Rx  is  represented  by 
Preceived. The SINR threshold at the receiver Rx is represented by SINR-
threshold_Direct  which is required to support a given target rate over the 
direct link between the T DeNB and the vehicular UE. It is important to 
set an SINR threshold because it will give a clear indication of when the 
system  will be  outage. Hence, the  SINR threshold  of  the direct  trans-
mission  between  the  T  DeNB  and  the  train  passenger  (UE)  can  be 
calculated  by  the  following  equation  as  shown  in  our  previous  work 
[16]: 

SINRthreshold Direct = SINRthreshold MF = 2R (cid:0) 1

(2) 

R is the required transmission Rate at the UE’s end and it is in bits/ 
sec.  Likewise,  the  MF  in  the  CCMF  system  supports  the  full-duplex 
transmission  mode  of  the  DeNB.  As  a  result,  at  the  Femtocell  end, 
both the BH and the access links are supporting a given end-to-end R 

Fig. 6. Worst case scenario HO procedure.  

Array15(2022)1002236R. Raheem et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

bits/sec at the receiver Rx end similar to the direct transmission from the 
DeNB. Hence, the same SINR threshold will be used for both cases. 

The transmitter Tx has an average transmission power of Px, likewise, 
when the receiver Rx is at distance y from the transmitter Tx itself has a 
received power given by Precieved which can be calculated by [16]. 

Dropping Call Probability (Pmin, L) = P(Pr(L) < Pmin)

(8) 

Hence, it can be concluded that that HST UEs are more likely exposed 
to HO failure and dropping calls probabilities due to their high-speed 
and continuous movement from one coverage area to another. 

Precieved(y) = PxL(y)ψ|G|2

(3) 

5. Results and discussion 

The equation terms can be summarised by the following; L(y) is the 
path-loss  when  Rx  is  at  distance  y  from  Tx,  whereas  the  power  loss 
caused  by  the  shadowing  is  given  by  ψ  and  G  is  the  channel  gain. 
Nevertheless, it is worth mentioning that both SINR thresholds of direct 
and access links vary according to the various QoS requirements such as 
the available rate R bits/sec which can be calculated via the Shannon 
capacity theorem as follows [16]: 

R = BWeff log 2(1 + SINR)

(4) 

Here  the  BWeff  represents  the  BW  efficiency  that  is  offered  to  the 
served UEs while the SINR was more appropriate to be used rather than 
the SNR because of the consideration of the interference aspect in this 
case. That is actually because of the multiple access methods in which 
several transmitters can send information simultaneously over a signal 
communication  channel  especially  when  each  UE  is  surrounded  by 
many options to be connected to. This gives UEs the opportunity to share 
a band of frequencies that can easily cause interferences. However, an 
interferences mitigation scheme has already been discussed in our pre-
vious work [4]. 

Hence, since the SINR threshold of the direct and access links are 

equal, they both can be calculated via the following equation: 

SINRthreshold Direct = SINRthreshold MF =

(
BWeff (cid:0) 1
2

R

)

(5)   

Thus, the signal is outage when either the BH link or the access link is 
outage. The BH link can be outage when the T DeNB is unable to 
accommodate the coming MF due to the inadequacy of the required 
BW and PRBs. On the other hand, the access link can be outage when 
the  MF  itself  is  not  attached  to  any  eNB.  Both  cases  can  be  sum-
marised by the following:  

Pout = Precieved (min(SINRbackhual, SINRaccess) < SINRthreshold MF)

(6) 

Hence, if the outage probability value is high, then the number of 
dropped  calls/packets  is  high  too  because  of  the  positive  correlation 
between the two. Dropping calls probability is a key performance indi-
cator that is used by many service providers to measure the system QoS 
and the efficiency of the HO procedure. There are many other factors 
that play important role in increasing the number of dropped calls and 
these factors can be summarised by the VPL inside train carriages, path- 
loss,  and  shadowing.  In  fact,  the  shadowing  issue  is  caused  by  the 
obstacle between the transmitter and the receiver where this obstacle 
absorbs  the  power.  That  is  also  known  as  penetration  loss  which  is 
common in vehicular and indoor environments. On the other hand, the 
path-loss issue is caused by the dissipation of power that is radiated by 
the  transmitter  together  with  the  effects  of  the  propagation  channel. 
However, the used path-loss model in our HSTs environment scenario is 
the Microcell non-line-of-sight (NLOS) path-loss model that is given by: 

PL(L) = 34.53 + 38log 10(L)

(7)  

where  L  is  the  distance  between  the  transmitter  and  the  receiver. 
However, in wireless systems, there is a target minimum received level 
of Pmin, and whatever power below this set power threshold, the per-
formance will be unacceptable. Thus, dropping calls probability can be 
given by: 

The following section represents the achieved results of the signal 
outage  and  dropping  calls  probabilities  of  mobile  users  inside  HSTs’ 
environment.  The  results  will  create  a  clear  comparison  between  the 
signal  quality  of  UEs  who  are  served  by  either  the  direct  link  or  the 
access link transmissions. That is without neglecting the impact of the 
proposed HO procedure in the simulated environment. A Matlab simu-
lation tool has been used while Table 1 summarises the main parameters 
that have been assumed in this work: 

Fig. 7 represents the SINR value of mobile users inside and outside 
transceivers over distance. However, the SINR value in both situations is 
quite small because of the inter-cell interference (ICI) effect. When the 
mobile user is inside the train carriage, the SINR value is 0.69 due to the 
short  distance  which  is  up  to  1  m  between  the  mobile  user  and  the 
serving MF. On the other hand, the SINR value is 0.89 when the distance 
between the DeNB and the mobile user inside the train carriage is more 
than 1 m (outside transceivers). 

In contrast, Fig. 8 compares the outage probability of our proposed 
HO scheme and the conventional HO scheme, taking into account the 
distance gap between the transmitter and the receiver. In this work, the 
outage  probability  of  train  passengers  has  been  taken  into  account 
where the outage threshold value has been set to 6 dB. The achieved 
results show that the outage probability of our proposed HO scheme is 
very small when the distance is 10 m or less. That indicates the effec-
tiveness of the proposed HO scheme in reducing the outage probability 
especially when the distance between the mobile user and the serving 
base station is no larger than 10 m. 

Whereas, Fig. 9 illustrates the decrease in the outage probabilities of 
the  proposed  HO  in  comparison  to  the  conventional  HO  schemes  ac-
cording  to  the  outage  threshold  variance.  The  increase  in  the  outage 
threshold led to a decrease in the outage probability. Hence, the results 
show that the proposed HO scheme improved the signal connection and 
reduced  the  outage  probability  compared  to  the  conventional  HO 
scheme. 

On the other hand, Fig. 10 represents the impact of distance between 
the served UEs and the serving base stations on dropping calls proba-
bility. This comparison has been created to evaluate the advantage of 
being served by the installed MF inside train carriages and the impact of 
that on reducing the issue of dropping calls probability. There are many 
factors  influencing  the  number  of  dropping  calls  probability  in  HSTs 
environment  such  as  the  VPL  and  the  path-loss which  has  a  negative 
impact on the signal power over distance d. That makes the received 
signal power at Rx  less than the minimum power threshold Pmin  as in 

Table 1 
Simulated parameters.  

Used parameters 

MF Carrier Frequency 
MF Transmission Power 
DeNB Transmission Power 
MF Height 
SINR Threshold of Outside Transceivers 
SINR Threshold of MF 
No. of DeNBs 
System BW 
Train Speed 
VPL 
Path-loss Model in dB 
Minimum Required rate at the UE end 

Values 

1900 MHz 
24 dBm 
46 dBm 
2 m 
8 dB 
11 dB 
2 
10 MHz 
300 km/h 
40 
PL(L) = 34.53 + 38log 10(L)
2 bits per sec  

Array15(2022)1002237R. Raheem et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 7. (a) SINR of mobile users inside train vs. distance (b) SINR of outside transceviers vs. distance.  

Fig. 8. Outage probability vs. distance.  

Fig. 9. Outage probability vs. outage threshold.  

Array15(2022)1002238R. Raheem et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Fig. 10. Dropping calls probability vs. distance.  

Fig. 11. Dropping calls probability vs. call duration.  

(Pr(d)  < Pmin).  The  results  show  that  the  MF  achieves  less  dropping 
probability when the distance d between the mobile user and the serving 
base station is less than 500 m. That is because of the reasonable short 
distance  between  the  transmitter  and  the  receiver  which  makes  the 
(Pr(d) > Pmin). However. The dropping calls probability value increases 
after the 500 m until it reaches its maximum at 1000 m. That occurs 
because of the BH link variation when the installed MF inside the HSTs 
environment  moves  closer  to  the  edge  of  the  serving  macrocell.  As  a 
result, the proposed HO scheme takes a place to hand over the MF from 
the S DeNB to the T DeNB which is accompanied by a UEs group HO in 
order to main the MF and its UEs connection. 

In contrast, Fig. 11 demonstrates the correlation of call duration and 
dropping  calls  probability.  This  correlation  shows  clearly  that  call 
duration has a positive impact on mobile users’  performance and the 
QoS.  Call  duration  or  mean  call  holding  time  represents  the  time  in 
which the mobile station consumes to complete a call connection h = A
λ 
where A is a traffic intensity and λ is the call arrival rate. As a result, the 
call arrival rate varies with call duration the same way it varies with the 
call dropping probability. That makes a conclusion that calls dropping 
probability decreases with the positive increase in the call duration. In 

fact, calls last longer when the quality of the connection is good because 
of the strong signal between the mobile user and the serving BS. Hence 
installing  MF  inside  train  carriages  has  a  positive  impact  in  boosting 
vehicular  UEs  signal  connection, overcoming  the  path-loss issue,  VPL 
problem, and mitigating the generated interference because of the weak 
signals. 

6. Conclusion 

Public transportation has dominated people’s life as people always 
look for fast and cheap means of transportation. HSTs are considered to 
be  one  of  the  main  means  of  transportation  in  which  they  can  serve 
many users and save their money and time. Providing internet connec-
tion  inside  train  carriages  is  the  future  of  public  transportation  and 
future networks. Therefore, the vehicular network is seen to be a new 
type  of  wireless  network  that  made  an  appearance  along  with  the 
development of both wireless technologies and the automotive industry. 
However, the vehicular network itself comes with implications and de-
pendencies  like  any  other  technology.  Therefore,  providing  internet 
connection inside train carriages via the CCMF has been seen to be a 
promising solution despite the challenges accompany this solution due 

Array15(2022)1002239R. Raheem et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

to the high-speed railway environment. Consequently, HO is one of the 
main  aspects  in  HSTs  to  guarantee  the  seamless  connectivity  and 
communication of served UEs inside train carriages. In fact, in a high- 
speed  moving  CCMF  environment,  HO  can  occur  more  frequently, 
therefore, providing an effective HO procedure to mitigate the outage 
and dropping calls probabilities were the main target of this work. The 
proposed HO procedure considered the process of handing over the MF 
itself from one DeNB to another accompanied by a group UEs HO for all 
attached  UEs  to  the  serving  MF.  The  achieved  results  showed  the 
reduction in the outage and dropping calls probabilities of the proposed 
HO scheme compared to the conventional HO scheme. 

Declaration of competing interests 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 

Acknowledgment 

The  authors  would  like  to  thank  all  those  who  contributed  to 
accomplish this work. The Faculty of Science and Technology at Mid-
dlesex University played an important role in backing up this work until 
it is completed. 

References 

[1] Ericsson. Ericsson mobility report. https://www.ericsson.com/mobility-report; 

2019. 

[2] Ai B, He R, Zhong Z, Guan K, Chen B, Liu P, et al. Radio wave propagation scene 
partitioning for high-speed rails. Hindawi, Int. J. Antennas Propag. 2012;2012:1–7. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/815232. 

[3] Shift2Rail. Rails proejcts. accessed on 03/01/2021, avaliable at: http://www.shift 

2rail.org. 

[4] Raheem R, Lasebae A, Petridis M, Raheem A. Cooperative and coordinated mobile 
femtocells technology in LTE vehicular environment: mobility and interference 
management, IEEE 35th  international conference on advanced information 
networking and applications (AINA). Toronto, Canada: Ryerson University; 2021. 

[5] Pan M, Lin T, Chen W. An enhanced handover scheme for mobile relays in lte- 

highspeed rail networks. IEEE Trans Veh Technol 2015;64(2):743–56. https://doi. 
org/10.1109/TVT.2014.2322374. 

[6] Qian X, Wu H, Meng J. A dual-antenna and mobile relay station based handover in 
distributed antenna system for high-speed railway. In: Seventh international 
conference on innovative mobile and internet services in ubiquitous computing; 
2013. p. 585–90. https://doi.org/10.1109/IMIS.2013.103. 2013. 

[7] Liu Z, Fan P. An effective handover scheme based on antenna selection in 

ground–train distributed antenna systems. IEEE Trans Veh Technol 2014;63(7): 
3342–50. 

[8] Cao J, Ma M, Li H, Fu Y, Niu B, Li F. Trajectory prediction-based handover 

authentication mechanism for mobile relays in lte-a high-speed rail networks. In: 
2017 IEEE international conference on communications (ICC); 2017. p. 1–6. 
[9] Tian L, Li J, Huang Y, Shi J, Zhou J. Seamless dual-link handover scheme in 

broadband wireless communication systems for high-speed rail. IEEE J Sel Area 
Commun 2012;30(4):708–18. 

[10] Liu Z, Zhou E, Fan P, Hao L. Tradeoff of capacity and handover performance in 
high speed railway wireless communications. In: 2016 IEEE 83rd vehicular 
technology conference. VTC Spring); 2016. p. 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
VTCSpring.2016.7504508. 

[11] Van Phan V, Horneman K, Yu L, Vihriala J. Providing enhanced cellular coverage 
in public transportation with smart relay systems. In: Proc. Vehicular networking 
conference; 2010. p. 301–8. 

[12] Li W, Zhang C, Duan X, Jia S, Liu Y, Zhang L. Performance evaluation and analysis 
on group mobility of mobile relay for LTE advanced system. Proc. Vehicular 
Technol. Conf. 2012:1–5. 

[13] Sui Y, Papadogiannis A, Yang W, Svensson T. Performance comparison of fixed and 
moving relays under co-channel interference. In: Proc. Globecom workshops. GC 
Wkshps); 2012. p. 574–9. 

[14] Sui Y, Vihriala J, Papadogiannis A, Sternad M, Yang W, Svensson T. Moving cells: a 
promising solution to boost performance for vehicular users. IEEE Commun Mag 
2013;51:62–8. 

[15] Sui Y, Papadogiannis A, Svensson T. The potential of moving relays-A performance 
analysis. In: Proc. IEEE 75th vehicular technology conference. VTC Spring); 2012. 
p. 1–5. 

[16] Raheem R, Lasebae A, Aiash M, Loo J, H Colson R. Mobile femtocells utilisation in 

LTE vehicular environments: vehicular penetration loss elimination and 
performance enhancement”. ELSEVIER Journal on Vehicular Communications; 
2017. 

[17] Raheem R, Lasebae A, Aiash M, Loo J, H Colson R. Interference management and 
system optimisation for femtocells technology in LTE and future 4G/5G networks. 
In: Advances in communications: reviews’ book series. vol. 1. Barcelona, Spain): 
IFSA Publishing; 2017. 

[18] Raheem R, Lasebae A, Aiash M, Loo J. Mobility management for vehicular user 
Equipments in LTE/mobile femtocell networks. Int J Inf Syst Serv Sect (IJISSS) 
2017;9:60–87. https://doi.org/10.4018/ijisss.2017100105. 

[19] Lu Y, Xiong K, Fan P, Zhong Z, Ai B. The effect of power adjustment on handover in 
high-speed railway communication networks. IEEE Access 2017;5:26237–50. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2775044. 

[20] Yaacoub E, Alsharoa A, Ghazzai H, Alouini MS. Seven challenges for 

communication in modern railway systems. Front. Commun. Netw. 2021. https:// 
doi.org/10.3389/frcmn.2020.619527. 

Array15(2022)10022310