Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Array

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/array

Who watches the new watchmen? The challenges for drone digital forensics
investigations
Evangelos Mantas a, Constantinos Patsakis b,c,∗
a University of Oxford, OX1 2JD Oxford, United Kingdom
b University of Piraeus, 80 Karaoli & Dimitriou str, 18534 Piraeus, Greece
c Athena Research Center, Artemidos 6, Marousi 15125, Greece

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
UAV
UAS
Drones
Digital forensics
Investigation
Standardisation

The technological advance of drone technology has augmented the existing capabilities of flying vehicles
rendering them a valuable asset of the modern society. As more drones are expected to occupy the airspace
in the near future, security-related incidents, either malicious acts or accidents, will increase as well. The
forensics analysis of a security incident is essential, as drones are flying above populated areas and have also
been weaponised from radical forces and perpetrators. Thus, it is an imperative need to establish a Drone
Digital Forensics Investigation Framework and standardise the processes of collecting and processing such
evidence.

Although there are numerous drone platforms in the market, the same principles apply to all of them; just
like mobile phones. Nevertheless, due to the nature of drones, standardised forensics procedures to date do not
manage to address the required processes and challenges that such investigations pose. Acknowledging this
need, we detail the unique characteristics of drones and the gaps in existing methodologies and standards,
showcasing that there are fundamental issues in terms of their forensics analysis from various perspectives,
ranging from operational and procedural ones, and escalate to manufacturers, as well as legal restrictions.
The above creates a very complex environment where coordinated actions must be made among the key
stakeholders. Therefore, this work paves the way to address these challenges by identifying the main issues,
their origins, and the needs in the field by performing a thorough review of the literature and a gap analysis.

1. Introduction

A few years ago, drones were exclusively used by government and
military organisations, but the ever-evolving technology made them
accessible to the public. What was labelled as a ‘‘technology of the fu-
ture’’, quickly become a technology of today, as drones integrated to the
needs of the market rapidly. Drones evolved from toy machines used by
numerous flight enthusiasts to machines that can undertake operations
on everyday tasks. From seemingly simple applications like high-level
quality infrastructure inspections, and everyday goods deliveries to life-
saving Search and Rescue (SAR) missions, drones have established their
value to the society. The revolutionary use of drones comes with side
effects as malicious actors have also evolved to incorporate drones in
their modus operandi as they are cheap, reliable and easy to modify
to carry payloads (e.g. drugs, explosive devices). Over the last five
years, drones have been used to disrupt airport operations,1 attempted

high-value persons assassinations,2 and used in attacks against industry
complexes3 to name a few. The number of malicious acts is expected
to rise since perpetrators are becoming more acquainted with this new
technology.

The need to address this emerging technology has pushed Digital
Forensics Science to further specialise in handling incidents involving
drones and their supporting equipment or devices. Since this need is
relatively new, there is a limited amount of information and specialisa-
tion on the matter, and as there is no standardised practice to conduct a
forensic investigation around drones, the investigator relies on already
established procedures, relevant to other digital devices, that may not
be applicable to a drone. Furthermore, the presence of a large number
of different devices, that support the operation of a drone expands the
complexity of the investigation, as the forensics expert will have to

∗ Corresponding author at: University of Piraeus, 80 Karaoli & Dimitriou str, 18534 Piraeus, Greece.

E-mail addresses: emantas000@gmail.com (E. Mantas), kpatsak@unipi.gr (C. Patsakis).

1 https://www.forbes.com/sites/grantmartin/2019/01/08/londons-heathrow-airport-briefly-closed-following-possible-drone-sighting/.
2 https://www.bbc.com/news/world-latin-america-45073385.
3 https://www.nytimes.com/2019/09/14/world/middleeast/saudi-arabia-refineries-drone-attack.html.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2022.100135
Received 29 June 2021; Received in revised form 3 October 2021; Accepted 22 February 2022

Array14(2022)100135Availableonline11March20222590-0056/©2022TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierInc.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NC-NDlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).E. Mantas and C. Patsakis

handle the supporting devices as well as to find and correlate evidence
regarding the drone operation.

This work focuses on explaining the reason behind the need for a
standardised procedure by identifying the related devices needed to be
examined and the evidence stored in them. Therefore, we review the
related literature, highlighting key differences with traditional digital
forensics operations and the challenges that these introduce. We argue
that since both drone accidents and malicious acts will become in-
creasingly frequent in the near future, a forensics framework to handle
such incidents should be set in a timely manner. In this regard, our
work performs a thorough literature review which covers the work in
both academic and ‘gray’ literature as it spans to, e.g. international
standards. Based on this, our gap analysis illustrates the needs in the
field and serves as a guideline for both academic and practitioners in
the field.

The rest of this manuscript is organised as follows. First, we present
the related work by first providing an overview of the drone and
the most relevant forensics tools for drones. Then, in Section 3, we
discuss which are the primary sources for evidence in a drone and
their types, to proceed with a generic overview of the cases that a
forensics investigator would have to face. To facilitate her task, we
accompany the latter with a comprehensive and prioritised list of
evidence for each case. In Section 4.1, we first present the relevant
forensic models and standards to discuss the primary challenges in the
forensics investigation in the form of a gap analysis afterwards. The
key differences of drones and their particularities indicate that we are
currently missing not only the needed tools but also the procedures
to address the upcoming forensics cases. The article then concludes
and streamlines some key findings and open issues for the further
development of the field.

2. Related work

The goal of this section is to acquaint the reader with the drone and
the existing tools to collect forensic evidence from a drone. Therefore,
we briefly provide an overview of a drone and proceed to present some
relevant tools and their scope.

2.1. Overview of a drone

Unmanned Aerial Vehicles are commonly acknowledged as drones
in everyday life. It is important to make a distinction between the sys-
tems with autonomous capabilities and the hobbyist flying machines;
the capabilities of which rely only on the pilot’s skills. Since these
radio-controlled (RC) machines require minimal and basic hardware to
fly, usually a ‘flight board‘ to receive and process the signal to spin
the motors, they do not offer any tangible digital forensics. Therefore,
this work focuses on drones with autonomous capabilities. The primary
components of a drone are the following:

• Flight Controller: The most critical component of a drone since
it contains a variety of sensors (e.g. accelerometer, gyroscope)
and software, or as widely know as the autopilot, to allow the
execution of autonomous commands and more complex flight
scenarios. The flight controller can also receive input from sensors
(e.g. lidar, infrared) and adjust the flight path to avoid collision
with nearby objects without any human interaction.

• Companion Computer: The flight controller can be directly con-
nected to a small on-board companion computer (e.g. Raspberry
Pi, Asus Tinker-board) that augments the drones’ capabilities even
further, running a real-time Operating System (OS). A task like
an object avoidance can be executed by combining the on-board
range-finding sensors connected on the companion computer and
provide that feedback to the flight controller. Companion comput-
ers are expected to be found on makeshift/DIY flying machines or
very sophisticated commercial drones to handle demanding tasks,
such as object avoidance and 3D object reconstruction.

• Electronic and Hardware Components: Electronic speed con-
trollers (ESC), power distribution board, battery, propellers and
motors, are the essential components to provide power, lift and
propulsion.

• GPS Receiver: Used to provide the location of the drone and
enables features such as Return To Home/Land (RTH/RTL) and
autonomous mission’s flight path.

• Radio Frequency Receiver: Used to receive control signals from
the ground-based transmitter, either the pilot or a ground control
station (GCS).

• Body: The main fuselage of the UAV used to protect and house

all the components.

• Payload-Sensors: As the industry becomes more relied on drones,
cameras and sensors (e.g. lidar, range-find sensor) are deployed
on drones becoming an essential part of the system since these
are the ones offering the main functionality.

2.2. Drone forensics tools

The need to forensically investigate drones has sparked great inter-
est among cybersecurity researchers. Early work focused on identifying
the crucial segments related to a drone investigation [1]. In their work
Kao et al. [2] and Yousef et al. [3,4] have used specific models of drone
maker DJI as case studies to analyse evidence recorded in drone flights.
The same approach, to use a particular drone model from another
popular manufacturer, Parrot Bebop, was used in the work of Kamoun
et al. [5]. In their research, Clark et al. [6] used the DJI Phantom III
as their case study to create an open-source tool (DROP) to extract
data from the drone, that is stored in an encrypted, encoded, and
proprietary file. Since the release of the research, DROP has been used
as the default tool for the analysis of DJI log files, as there is currently
no other tool available in the market. In our previous work [7], we
focused on describing techniques to extract data from drones with
Ardupilot flight open-source firmware, developing an open-source tool
that is agnostic to the type of the vehicle model or type, extracting
data from the MAVLink messages transmitted on the drone. It must
be highlighted that most of the drone forensics researches focus on
flying vehicles that are popular on the market, running on proprietary
software, and although they provide a solution to conduct a forensics
investigation, their methodology, or parts of the methodology, cannot
be standardised. The techniques described in the research may soon
become obsolete or irrelevant due to the changes drone manufactures
will most likely make in their future products.

3. The drone and evidence sources

In this section, we highlight the primary components of a drone that
can be used as sources for extracting evidence. Then, we proceed to
pinpoint the cases in which a forensics investigation will be required
and prioritise, which are the most relevant evidence that an investigator
would have to look for per case.

3.1. Drone from the forensic expert’s perspective

The growth of drone technology has introduced the use of UAVs to a
number of applications in the private and military sector. Drones that
deliver payloads (e.g. medical supplies or everyday goods) or drones
conducting surveillance over combat areas, use a variety of sensors
and systems to communicate and receive commands from the ground
operators. From laptops and mobile devices to directional antennas and
5G towers to name a few, the operation of a drone relies on a system, the
Unmanned Aerial System (UAS). Therefore, the digital forensics expert
must focus on the whole UAS and not only the flying vehicle. The key
components of the UAS (see Fig. 1), which may also come in the form
of a swarm, are the following:

Array14(2022)1001352E. Mantas and C. Patsakis

Fig. 1. Components of an Unmanned Aerial System (UAS).

• Unmanned Aircraft (UmA): The flying vehicle as described in
the previous section, is probably the most critical component
since the whole system exists to assist the drone’s operation and
its autonomous capabilities. It should also be noted that another
or multiple flying vehicles may be part of the same UAS, which
is described as a swarm.

• Ground Control Station (GCS): Ground Control Station is the
ground-based software and hardware that provides communica-
tion and enables the remote control of the drone. GCS software
can be installed on systems on fixed locations (e.g. military air-
bases) or in portable systems such as laptops and mobile phones.
The acquisition of the GCS device is of great significance since
it contains most of the flight data and can be linked with an
individual. There are commercially available drones that come
equipped with controllers with proprietary software to control the
drone, a hybrid device combining the analogue RF control and the
digital interface of a mobile platform, the acquisition of which can
also contain considerable evidence.

• Communication Data-Link (CDL): Data links are mainly used for
UAV control, video transmission from the on-board camera and
telemetry providing information on the location of the vehicle
or other sensor values. Each data link broadcasts on a different
radio-frequency (RF) wavelength with 4 GHz and 900 Mhz mainly
being used for UAV control, 3-4–5 GHz for video transmission and
400–900 Mhz for telemetry.4 Small UAVs (sUAV) may also use
Bluetooth and WiFi communications to execute all the previous
operations, but their flight radius is significantly reduced.

All these interconnected components store data related to the drone
operation or serve them to other devices. These data can be classified
in the following types:

• Flight logs and predefined flight missions: As mentioned be-
fore, the flight controller, is responsible for the autonomous ca-
pabilities, has another function during the flight. It generates a
log that contains information about critical sensors like the GPS
position and altitude, resulting in a reconstruction of the flight
path, providing valuable information about the drone activity to
the forensics investigator. Moreover, they contain key equipment
data and error logs. For instance, battery and signal statistics

which along with other error messages may point to a malfunc-
tion. The pilot of the drone also can create a fight mission that can
be loaded on the flight controller directly. This file can provide
information about previous flights that were not stored or deleted,
or even scheduled flights.

• Media: Drones equipped with cameras offer a vast source of
images and video footage captured during the flight. The ac-
quisition of such media can indicate the target of the drone’s
mission (e.g. spying on the industrial or military complex) and the
areas affected by the drone’s flight. These multimedia may con-
tain frames of the drone operator, footages before the collision,
resulting in a quicker identification by the forensics investigator.
• Sensor or other payload logs: The payload of a drone is not lim-
ited to cameras only. Drones are becoming part of our everyday
life and undertake operations that require advanced hardware on
board (e.g. 3D reconstruction of the ground, infrastructure inspec-
tion). Although this kind of equipment captures large quantities
of data, they may not have any significant forensic value to the
investigation, as data collected are to be utilised for a specific
business operation.

The presence of a large variety of devices also provides a large
source of evidence collection. Each device in the UAS will most likely
have a storage unit where the drone forensics investigator can uncover
details about the activity of the drone and its operator. The presence
of multiple evidence on different devices means that if the drone or
a device of the UAS is rendered unrecoverable due to, e.g. a damage
or anti-forensics techniques5 (e.g. encrypted internal drone memory),
there is a high possibility that other evidence can be retrieved. The
most common devices that can contain evidence of a drone flight are
described below:

• Drone Internal Storage: The drone’s internal on-board storage
contains, although in a limited amount due to hardware limi-
tations, as it rarely exceeds tens of GBs, flight logs and media
captured during the flight. Usually, the internal memory serves
as an alternative or ‘‘backup’’ location to store data if removable
storage is not present.

• On-board Removable Storage: The widespread need to capture
a large amount of data can be satisfied by using removable media

4 https://www.911security.com/learn/airspace-security/drone-

5 https://blog.eccouncil.org/6-anti-forensic-techniques-that-every-cyber-

fundamentals/drone-communication-data-link.

investigator-dreads/.

Array14(2022)1001353E. Mantas and C. Patsakis

Fig. 2. Evidence Distribution on UAS devices.

like the SD card. Provided with the fact that storage capacities of
micro SD cards have exceeded the TB mark, the low price per byte
ratio has established them as the dominant data storage solution
in UAVs. Most of the drones have an SD card slot to save images
and video footage recorded during the flight or even the ‘‘hard
drive’’ of the companion computer.

• Companion Computer Storage: As mentioned before, compan-
ion computers are running a real-time OS. This may contain
digital evidence as ‘‘raw’’ information of drones activity, like the
execution of flight-mission scripts and transmission of data to
other devices.

• Mobile Devices: Mobile GCS applications provide the ability
to control a drone or receive a payload (e.g. video stream of
the drone’s on-board camera) via wireless connection (e.g. WiFi,
Bluetooth) and should also be considered as a prospective data
source that can be directly linked to the pilot.

• Network Packets: The monitoring and capturing of packets from
the UAS network, can lead to the discovery of numerous payloads
or devices and servers that the fight data are stored, as an addi-
tional source of evidence that could not be otherwise obvious to
the forensic investigator.

• Cloud Storage: There is a currently increasing trend in UAV
technology, where manufacturers allow their clients to store their
logs and images on their servers. Data storage outsourcing to
third parties’ servers, internal UAS cloud, and backup servers,
due to the demand to reduce local storage media, should also be
considered during a UAS forensics investigation.

An indicative list of the devices and the evidence found on a typical
UAS is illustrated in Fig. 2.

3.2. Cases for forensics investigation

It is deemed necessary to outline the cases that a digital forensic
investigation would be required, to highlight which evidence might be
available and which ones could be more more relevant for each case.
The most ‘‘benign’’ cases involve accidents where the forensic in-
vestigator should determine its causes. It is clear that even a small
malfunction, due to the altitude that a drone may have and the dif-
ficulty to balance once something starts falling from the sky, severe
damages would be suffered by the drone. Moreover, while one may not
care about the damage to the drone and its payload per se, insurance
issues due to the caused damages may require the investigation of the
accident. It should be noted that weather issues due to sudden and local
phenomena or even collisions with a bird or another drone fall into the
accident category and have to be investigated. In such cases, the most
relevant evidence would be the flight logs and media captured, since

Table 1
High level description of drone forensic investigation cases.

Evidence source

Colour

Fuselage*
GCS Device*
Flight Logs
Media
Sensors
On-board Computer
Payload
Network Packet Logs

(a) Colour coding of evidence sources. Note(*): Related physical evidence

Case

Sources priority

Collision/Crash land
Illegal Area Surveillance
Ordnance/Payload Delivery
Cyber-attack (Victim)
Cyber-attack (Actor)
Weather related accident

(b) Prioritisation of evidence sources according to the case.

(eur

they would be available on the pilot’s GCS device (e.g. accident in a
delivery flight).

Going a step further, we have to consider cases of malicious physical
acts either from the drone or towards it. On the one hand, we consider
physical attacks towards the drone that include but are not limited to,
physical damage or theft of the drone or its payload. On the other
hand, we consider acts where the drone is used to perform malicious
physical acts which include, among others interception, surveillance,
theft, delivery of illegal products, and use of armoury.

Finally, we consider digital attacks to and from the drone [8]. Dig-
ital attacks towards the drone can be considered jamming, command
injection, electromagnetic pulse (EMP), denial of service (e.g. flooding
a network interface), and data leakage through the interception of a
vulnerable protocol. Of specific interest can be considered the malware
infection of the drone due to the existence of, e.g. a vulnerable interface
or service. Moreover, we have to also consider firmware backdoors as
more and more supply chain attacks are becoming more relevant [9].
On the other side, the drone can be used to launch a digital attack,
e.g. infiltrate a wireless network, perform a denial of service of an
unprotected service or partially disrupt it.

Using the collected evidence, the investigator has firstly to assess the
nature of the incident and whether it is an offence, e.g. whether it is an
accident or a malicious act. Based on the scene under investigation, the
collected evidence and the visible incurred damages, the investigator

Array14(2022)1001354E. Mantas and C. Patsakis

has to assess the actual impact as further damages may have been
caused. The evidence will allow her to estimate when and where the
incident occurred but also to extract some key locations of interest,
e.g. from where the drone was launched and where it was heading
to. The scheduled flight and the payload may also denote the drone’s
purpose. For the attribution, the investigator also has to consider the
stored data (images, videos), metadata (emails, registered accounts,
stored WiFi), hardware tags, as well as wet evidence (fingerprints,
DNA) to assess the possible owner and controller of the drone. Clearly,
the above highlight the strong connection of the digital evidence with
the physical ones which act rather complementary.

To summarise the evidence collection sources, in Table 1, we high-
light and prioritise the most relevant evidence sources per case. The
table clearly shows how the generic cases we discussed earlier differ as
the investigator has to look for different evidence.

4. Challenges and gaps for drone digital forensics

There is a constant challenge to stay up to date with the rapid
changes in the latest technologies. Drones are beginning to shape
tomorrow’s society, used by many individuals for both personal and
professional purposes. The challenge of carrying out digital forensics
on drones and associated devices as part of the UAS, is to identify flight
routes, possible malfunctions, collisions, and associated media (pictures
and videos) contained within the system’s devices. These may facilitate
the investigator to understand the mission of the drone, whether the
operation was successfully performed, the people or assets that were
affected by it, and the reasons behind possible damage or collision.
The findings derived from electronic evidence must follow a standard
set of guidelines to ensure that the investigation is not challenged in
a court of law [10]. Moreover, the border-less nature should also be
considered due to cloud storage (e.g. evidence on a server hosted in a
third country). In fact, as indicated by NIST, cloud forensics are also
facing many challenges [11] and a draft mapping of, e.g. ISO 27037
is not that simple.6 Additionally, the provision of the evidence from a
cloud provider or a third party, in general, is not necessarily granted,
as shown in the case of Apple and the San Bernardino shooting case.7
Note that even if the cloud service provider is willing to cooperate
the data may be stored across different servers and countries. The
presence of multiple devices and various formats on a UAS requires
a high level of expertise from the forensic’s experts that take part in
the investigation since each device requires different acquisition and
examination techniques.

4.1. Relevant standards, practices and challenges

Standards are a vital necessity to ensure conformance and mutual
compliance across the geographical and jurisdictional border. There are
currently numerous standards and established practices provided by
organisations worldwide using accepted methods. The technical details
on how to forensically approach the investigation differs, depending on
the device. The analysis of electronic evidence is typically categorised
into the following phases: identification, collection, acquisition, preser-
vation and disposal, although the exact phases naming may vary due
to the usage of different forensic model that each organisation finds
appropriate for their needs.

Currently, there are several models and methodologies regarding
the handling of evidence and digital forensic procedures during an in-
vestigation. These include the DFRWS model [12], the Enhanced Digital
Investigation Process Model (EDIP) [13], the Analytical Crime Scene

6 https://downloads.cloudsecurityalliance.org/initiatives/imf/Mapping-

the-Forensic-Standard-ISO-IEC-27037-to-Cloud-Computing.pdf.

7 https://edition.cnn.com/2016/02/16/us/san-bernardino-shooter-phone-

apple/index.html.

Fig. 3. Applicability of standards and guidelines to the investigation process classes
and activities.

Procedure Model (ACSPM) [14], the integrated digital forensic process
model of Kohn et al. [15], the Systematic digital forensic investiga-
tion model (SRDFIM). [16], and the advanced data acquisition model
(ADAM) [17]. In general, law enforcement agencies follow variants of
the ACPO (Association of Chief Police Officers) guidelines [18].

The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) has re-
leased a series of standards to assist in this effort by providing the
family of ISO 27000, that focus on information security standardisation
procedures. In what follows, we present the most relevant standards
about digital forensics investigation of drones as described in Fig. 3
derived from ISO/IEC 27041:2015 [19].

• ISO/IEC 27035: This is a three-part standard that provides or-
ganisations with a structured and planned approach to the man-
agement of security incident management covering a range of
incident response phases

• ISO/IEC 27037:2012: This standard provides general guidelines
about the handling of the evidence of the most common digital
devices and the circumstances including devices that exist in various
forms, giving the example of an automotive system [20] that uses
many sensors that a drone does. This means that although the
framework for the supporting devices of a drone exists in the
ISO standard, the handling of the actual flying vehicle is not yet
established.

Array14(2022)1001355E. Mantas and C. Patsakis

• ISO/IEC 27038:2014: Describes the digital redaction of informa-
tion that must not be disclosed, taking extreme care to ensure that
removed information is permanently unrecoverable.

• ISO/IEC 27040:2015: Provides detailed technical guidance on
how organisations can define an appropriate level of risk miti-
gation by employing a well-proven and consistent approach to
the planning, design, documentation, and implementation of data
storage security.

• ISO/IEC 27041:2015: Describes other standards and documents
to provide guidance, setting the fundamental principles ensuring
that tools, techniques and methods, appropriately selected for the
investigation.

• ISO/IEC 27042:2015: This standard describes how methods and
processes to be used during an investigation can be designed and
implemented to allow correct evaluation of potential digital evi-
dence, interpretation of digital evidence, and effective reporting
of findings.

• ISO/IEC 27043:2015: It defines the key common principles and
processes underlying the investigation of incidents and provides
a framework model for all stages of investigations.

• ISO/IEC 27050: This recently revised standard guides non-
technical and technical personnel to handle evidence on electron-
ically stored information (ESI).

• ISO/IEC 17025:2017: This standard describes the general re-
quirements for the competence of testing and calibration lab-
oratories, applying to all organisations performing laboratory
activities, regardless of the number of personnel.

• ISO/IEC 30121:2015: Provides a framework for organisations to
strategically prepare for a digital investigation before an incident
occurs, to maximise the effectiveness of the investigation.

ETSI is a European Standards Organization that produces standards
for ICT systems and services that are used all around the world,
collaborating with numerous organisations. In 2020 ETSI published TS
103 643 V1.1.1 (2020-01) [21], a set of techniques for assurance of
digital material in a legal proceeding, to provide a set of tools to assist
the legitimate presentation of digital evidence.8

The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has
released guidelines for organisations to develop forensic capability, based
on the principles of forensic science in the aspect of the application of
science to the law but should not be used on digital forensic investi-
gations due to subjection to different laws and regulations, as clearly
stated on their manual. The scope on NIST guidelines is incorporating
forensics into the information system life cycle of an organisation. The
most relevant guidelines are 800-86 [22] for Integrating Forensic Tech-
niques into Incident Response and 800-101 [23] for Mobile Device
Forensics.

The Scientific Working Group on Digital Evidence (SWGDE) is an
organisation engaged in the field of digital and multimedia evidence
to foster communication and cooperation as well as to ensure quality and
consistency within the forensic community. SWGDE has released a number
of documents to provide the current best practices on a large variety of
state of the art forensics subjects. Nonetheless, none of them is targeting
nor addressing the particularities of drone forensics.

Nevertheless, in none of the aforementioned standards is there any
reference to drones. While someone could oversee this omission as
the procedures could cover the procedures needed for UAV forensic
investigations. However, for the collection of forensic evidence from
a UAV one cannot always access the data and may need to exploit
the device to gain access to them. As will be discussed in the next
paragraphs, such processes are not foreseen by any standard. Moreover,
the contradicting records in the log files of the UAV and the GCS;
also discussed in the following paragraphs, are not considered by any

of the standards mentioned above. Therefore, while the equipment
and the preparation of a forensic lab that would investigate a drone
are foreseen, the particularities of drones are not covered by existing
standards.

Finally, INTERPOL recently released an overview of drones and
associated devices and guidance for digital forensic investigators re-
sponsible for the acquisition, examination, analysis, and presentation
of the digital evidence from the drone [24]. This work tried to gap
the knowledge of law enforcement officers on this state of the art
forensics topic and is the first official organisation attempt towards a
standardised procedure.

4.2. Challenges and gaps in established procedures and current standard
limitation

Due to the nature of a drone, it is apparent that it is a system that
significantly differentiates from traditional devices that an investigator
would have to perform digital forensics. Firstly, it is a cyber–physical
system; therefore, the physical part introduces many issues in the
investigation. This can be manifested by various means, e.g. the sensors
may have significant differences due to calibration or accuracy as in
the case of the GPS sensor. To highlight this significant issue, the
following should be considered. The accuracy of the GPS depends on
the sensor’s technology.9 A Standard GPS or has an accuracy of 1.5
meters, a Differential GPS 40 centimeters where in the case of RTK 1
centimeter. This deviation means that the GCS does not report the exact
location of the UAV. In a case of a catastrophic event (e.g. collision
with a nearby object or extreme weather conditions) the drone operator
can only assume the position of the drone, as reported by the GCS, and
the data for the forensic investigation cannot be precisely evaluated.
The accuracy of the sensor is not the only problem regarding satellite
navigation systems. Drones are susceptible to GPS spoofing [25–28],
meaning that the validity and integrity of the GPS signal can be in
question during an investigation.

As previously mentioned, the UAS consists of multiple devices, and
it is not always clear which one would be available during a forensic
investigation. For instance, the UAV may have been collected by the
incident responder but may not have access to the GCS device either
because it was destroyed or not found during the investigation. The
inverse may also apply, that is the UAV cannot be recovered, and the
investigator has access only to the GCS device. Therefore, there is no
full access to possible evidence sources. Despite the lack of a source
of evidence, a big challenge is to determine which source should be
trusted in the case that the two sources have contradictory or missing
logs. Note that the differences may stem from various reasons as the
problem is amplified by the lack of proper authentication mechanisms.
Since in most UAVs the commands are not authenticated via crypto-
graphic primitives one may craft the log files in any of the two devices.
Even if this is not the case, the differences from the sensors (see the
discussion above for the differences in GPS) introduce further issues
for the investigator.

Currently, there are also numerous drone models that lack essential
security features that may hinder the forensic investigation, into for-
mally presenting the case. The lack of encryption and authentication
on commercially available products is a profound example. Due to
their absence, the received commands are not authenticated, and their
source can be questioned. Therefore, it is not evident who issued a
command to the drone, that in the case of an autonomous mission could
significantly deviate from the expected flight path or pattern. On the
contrary, when there is encryption used on the device, the key may
not always be available, so the acquisition from forensics tools might
not be possible.

8 https://www.swgde.org/documents/published.

9 https://marxact.com/support/what-is-the-difference-between-

standalone-differential-gps-and-real-time-kinematic/.

Array14(2022)1001356E. Mantas and C. Patsakis

The latter issue with encryption leads to another challenge. To
collect the evidence from a drone that lacks accessible removable
storage devices, or they are encrypted, similar to mobile devices, one
may need to exploit a vulnerability to gain access to the data. This
implies tampering of the digital evidence introducing issues for the
chain of custody of the evidence. The nature of the exploit and the need
to, e.g. ‘‘root’’ the device may significantly alter the stored information
and careful examination of the tools and methods is necessary to allow
the presentation of the findings in a court of law. Clearly, such practices
violate the first principle of ACPO, which clearly states that:

‘‘No action taken by law enforcement agencies or their agents should
change data held on a computer or storage media which may subse-
quently be relied upon in court.’’

One has also to consider the diversity of the platforms. Unlike
mobile phones where there are two main platforms, Android and iOS,
and can be considered a well-established market the drone market
might have a big player (DJI) which enjoys the biggest market share;
more than 70%, nevertheless, the rest is significantly fragmented.
Therefore, there are plenty of different platforms which imply the need
for various forensics tools. Furthermore, the different scope of many
of the drones as well as their big numbers suggest that despite the
fragmentation this heterogeneity is expected to continue, so there is no
foreseen interoperability of the forensics tools. It is worth noticing that
the recent ban on Chinese manufactured drones may lead to significant
market changes.10

One very challenging parameter for drone forensics has to do with
live forensics. While Adelstein [29] stressed the need for live forensics,
we have to acknowledge the additional difficulties and limitations of
performing live digital forensics in a drone. Contrary to ‘‘traditionally’’
compromised devices where the adversary will have integrated evasion,
persistence and anti-analysis mechanisms, in a drone the adversary
may have installed additional physical mechanisms, so the drone may
physically react, e.g. consider it being armoured, or try to fly away.
Beyond that, since the drone is remotely controlled; even via the cloud,
kill switches or other such mechanisms are expected to continue being
relevant during the investigation. To this end, to capture a drone, it
is advised to approach it from a non-visible angle and use a non-
tampering measure such as a coat or net. Next, the drone should be
turned off without tampering any possible wet evidence on it.

Since there is no standardised procedure to conduct a digital foren-
sics investigation on drones, researchers have to resolve to already
established practices that apply to similar devices. This raises the
following question: What kind of device is a drone or relevant to, to
select a method to proceed with the forensics triage. A valid argument
would be that a drone has many similarities with a mobile phone
regarding the hardware (e.g. processor architecture) and the sensors
(e.g. GPS receiver, accelerometer). It should be noted here that there
is also no standard for handling mobile digital forensics case, yet an
initiative has recently started by the FORMOBILE H2020 project.11

To acquire the needed data, the investigator will have to resolve to
the techniques illustrated in Fig. 4. Typically to logically image a mobile
device, the investigator has to turn on the device. If this method is
applied to a drone, there is a high risk to alter or erase the existing
data of the UAV’s internal memory [30]. As stated in [6], turning on
the drone will erase the previously recorded flight log, resulting in
the loss of evidence and alteration of the investigation. Although the
investigator followed the procedure correctly, the result may render the
whole investigation useless due to misconceptions about the drone’s in-
ternal operations. Since the storage of data on the drone itself is highly
volatile, extreme caution and preparation for the acquisition should

10 https://www.ainonline.com/aviation-news/aerospace/2020-08-17/us-

nears-law-banning-chinese-drones.
11 https://formobile-project.eu/.

take place. Therefore, the investigator should take into consideration
which is the device from which she has to collect evidence and under
which mode it allows their extraction to prevent tampering with them.
This example raises another concern about the technical knowl-
edge of the investigators tasked with acquiring data from the drone.
Although the investigators are acquainted with procedures to handle
different kind of devices, the cognitive and human factors [31] coupled
with the lack of expertise on the drones’ technical details, that comes on
the standardisation of the process, is of great importance. When deemed
necessary to switch on the device, it is advised that the corresponding
environment has Faraday shielding to prevent network signals from or
to the drone. If this is not possible, then jamming devices or aluminium
foils must be used to prevent incoming and outgoing network traffic
from the drone.

Moreover, there are several legal and ethical aspects that underpin
such a forensic investigation and may introduce several restrictions
for the investigator. For instance, depending on the jurisdiction, the
investigator may not be allowed to use the stored credentials in the
drone to collect further evidence.

5. Conclusions

Due to the continuous adoption of UAVs in various domains from
shipping and delivery to agriculture, and from disaster management
and smart city monitoring to search and rescue operations, the skies
are being populated continuously with more and more flying vehicles.
The fact that UAVs can save both time and costs while offering novel
services implies that this trend will continue. Moreover, we have al-
ready witnessed their malicious usage in various acts, both physical
and digital. Based on the above one can easily understand that the
increase in the numbers of drones coupled with their exploitation from
adversaries is going to soon make digital forensics investigations on
drones a norm. Insurance companies, law enforcement agencies, secu-
rity firms and individuals will have to extract evidence from a drone
to investigate a case. Nonetheless, as already discussed in this work,
a UAV is very different compared to traditional computing devices. In
fact, its physical nature, its mobility, and duality; in terms of control,
create a very complex environment. The latter aspects are not covered
by existing standards, further perplexing the investigations.

We argue that it is a high time for the corresponding stakeholders
to acknowledge these issues and collaborate to develop some baseline
principles that will facilitate the investigations in the near future. The
challenges are multiple and cannot be solved individually with many of
them requiring further steps from the manufacturers. A typical example
can be considered the use of cryptographic primitives to authenticate
the received commands from the GCS. It is straightforward that this
measure increases the overall security of a drone, preventing many
command injection attacks; nevertheless, it provides the guarantees
of the audit trail for the forensic investigator. Further unification of
interfaces from the manufacturers may also facilitate the development
of forensic tools that address the needs for more platforms.

Several commonalities of UAVs and mobile phones in terms of ex-
traction of evidence require a more holistic approach from the forensics
investigators for both cases. As discussed, one may need to exploit
some vulnerability to gain access to such devices to gain access to
the evidence which violates the principles of ACPO and many existing
standards. This highlights a critical issue in the collection of digital
evidence as it questions the chain of custody of the evidence. Evidently,
it opens the door for exploitation for multiple perspectives if it is not
correctly addressed. For instance, one may use it to render the evidence
useless or one may use it to implant evidence. Evidently, the latter
indicates that a legal perspective is deemed necessary. Notably, we have
also identified jurisdiction issues that require the legal approach.

Based on our gap analysis, we believe that the development of a
standard for drone forensics is necessary and timely. The aforemen-
tioned challenges require several fundamental changes in the drones

Array14(2022)1001357E. Mantas and C. Patsakis

Fig. 4. Data acquisition techniques.

per se and the established forensics procedures and more coordinated
efforts towards this direction. To this end, we prioritise the harmonisa-
tion of manufacturers with common best practices from other platforms
that will pave the way for procedures and tools could be established
and developed.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the European Commission under the
Horizon 2020 Programme (H2020), as part of the projects Cyber-
Sec4Europe, Greece (Grant Agreement no. 830929) and LOCARD, Greece
(Grant Agreement no. 832735). The content of this article does not
reflect the official opinion of the European Union. Responsibility for the
information and views expressed therein lies entirely with the authors.

References

[1] Kovar D, Dominguez G, Murphy C. UAV (aka drone) forensics. 2016, URL
https://integriography.files.wordpress.com/2016/06/uav-forensics-ts16-final-
distribution.pdf.

[2] Kao D-Y, Chen M-C, Wu W-Y, Lin J-S, Chen C-H, Tsai F. Drone foren-
sic investigation: DJI spark drone as a case study. Procedia Comput Sci
2019;159:1890–9, Knowledge-Based and Intelligent Information & Engineering
Systems: Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference KES2019.

[3] Yousef M, Iqbal F. Drone forensics: A case study on a DJI mavic air. In: 2019
IEEE/ACS 16th international conference on computer systems and applications.
2019, p. 1–3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/AICCSA47632.2019.9035365.

[4] Yousef M, Iqbal F, Hussain M. Drone forensics: A detailed analysis of emerging
DJI models. In: 2020 11th international conference on information and commu-
nication systems. 2020, p. 066–71. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICICS49469.2020.
239530.

[5] Kamoun F, Bouafif H, Iqbal F. Towards a better understanding of drone forensics:
A case study of parrot AR drone 2.0. Int J Digit Crime Forensics 2019;12:1–23.
http://dx.doi.org/10.4018/IJDCF.2020010103.

[6] Clark D, Meffert C, Baggili I, Breitinger F. DROP (drone open source parser) your
drone: Forensic analysis of the DJI phantom III. Digit Investig 2017;22:S3–14.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.diin.2017.06.013.

[7] Mantas E, Patsakis C. GRYPHON: Drone forensics in dataflash and telemetry
logs. In: Attrapadung N, Yagi T, editors. Advances in information and computer
security. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2019, p. 377–90.

[8] Yaacoub J-P, Salman O. Security analysis of drones systems: Attacks, limitations,

and recommendations. Internet Things 2020;100218.

[10] McKemmish R. When is digital evidence forensically sound? In: IFIP international

conference on digital forensics. Springer; 2008, p. 3–15.

[11] Herman M,

Iorga M, Salim AM, Jackson RH, Hurst MR, Leo R, Lee R,
Landreville NM, et al. Tech. rep., National Institute of Standards and Technology;
2020.

[12] Palmer G, et al. A road map for digital forensic research. In: First digital forensic

research workshop, Utica, New York. 2001, p. 27–30.

[13] Baryamureeba V, Tushabe F. The enhanced digital investigation process model.

Digit Investig 2004.

[14] Bulbul HI, Yavuzcan HG, Ozel M. Digital forensics: An analytical crime scene

procedure model (ACSPM). Forensic Sci Int 2013;233(1):244–56.

[15] Kohn M, Eloff M, Eloff J. Integrated digital forensic process model. Comput Secur

2013;38:103–15, Cybercrime in the Digital Economy.

[16] Agarwal A, Gupta M, Gupta S, Gupta SC. Systematic digital forensic investigation

model. Int J Comput Sci Secur (IJCSS) 2011;5(1):118–31.

[17] Adams R, Hobbs V, Mann G. The advanced data acquisition model (ADAM):
forensic practice. J Digit Forensics Secur Law

for digital

A process model
2013;8(4):25–48.

[18] Williams J. ACPO good practice guide for digital evidence. 2012, Metropolitan

Police Service, Association of Chief Police Officers, GB.

[19] ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 27 Information security, cybersecurity and privacy protection.
Information technology — Security techniques — Guidance on assuring suitabil-
ity and adequacy of incident investigative method. ISO/IEC 27041:2015, Geneva,
CH: International Organization for Standardization; 2012.

[20] Joint Technical Committee ISO/IECJTC. Information technology — Security tech-
niques — Guidelines for identification, collection, acquisition and preservation of
digital evidence. ISO/IEC 27037:2012, Geneva, CH: International Organization
for Standardization; 2012, URL https://www.iso.org/standard/44381.html.
[21] European Telecommunications Standards Institute. Techniques for assurance of
digital material used in legal proceedings - ETSI TS 103 643 V1.1.1 (2020-01).
2020, Techniques for Assurance of Digital Material Used in Legal Proceedings,
ETSI, URL https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_ts/103600_103699/103643/01.01.
01_60/ts_103643v010101p.pdf.

[22] Kent K, Chevalier S, Grance T, Dang H. Tech. rep., National Institute of Standards

& Technology; 2006.

[23] Ayers R, Brothers S, Jansen W. Guidelines on mobile device forensics, csrc. 2014,

URL https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-101/rev-1/final.

[24] INTERPOL. Framework for responding to a drone incident for first respon-
ders and digital forensics practitioners. 2019, https://www.interpol.int/content/
download/15298/file/DFL_DroneIncident_Final_EN.pdf.

[25] Tippenhauer NO, Pöpper C, Rasmussen KB, Capkun S. On the requirements for
successful GPS spoofing attacks. In: Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on
computer and communications security. 2011, p. 75–86.

[26] Kerns AJ, Shepard DP, Bhatti JA, Humphreys TE. Unmanned aircraft capture and

control via GPS spoofing. J Field Robotics 2014;31(4):617–36.

[27] Gaspar Ja, Ferreira R, Sebastião P, Souto N. Capture of uavs through gps

spoofing. In: 2018 global wireless summit. IEEE; 2018, p. 21–6.

[28] Arteaga SP, Hernández LAM, Pérez GS, Orozco ALS, Villalba LJG. Analysis of the
GPS spoofing vulnerability in the drone 3Dr solo. IEEE Access 2019;7:51782–9.
[29] Adelstein F. Live forensics: diagnosing your system without killing it first.

Commun ACM 2006;49(2):63–6.

[30] Arshad H, Jantan AB, Abiodun OI. Digital forensics: Review of issues in scientific

validation of digital evidence. J Inform Process Syst 2018;14(2).

[9] Europol. Internet organised crime threat assessment. European Union Agency for

[31] Sunde N, Dror IE. Cognitive and human factors in digital forensics: Problems,

Law Enforcement Cooperation (Europol); 2020.

challenges, and the way forward. Digit Investig 2019;29:101–8.

Array14(2022)1001358