ArtificialIntelligenceinGeosciences3(2022)86–100
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences
journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-geosciences
Advanced geochemical exploration knowledge using machine learning:
Prediction of unknown elemental concentrations and operational
prioritization of Re-analysis campaigns
Steven E. Zhanga,b, Julie E. Bourdeaua,b, Glen T. Nwailab,*, Yousef Ghorbanic
aGeological Survey of Canada, 601 Booth Street, Ottawa, Ontario, K1A 0E8, Canada
bWits Mining Institute, University of the Witwatersrand, 1 Jan Smuts Ave., Johannesburg, 2000, South Africa
cDepartment of Civil, Environmental and Natural Resources Engineering, Luleå University of Technology, SE–971 87, Luleå, Sweden
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: In exploration geochemistry, advances in the detection limit, breadth of elements analyze-able, accuracy and
Machine learning precision of analytical instruments have motivated the re-analysis of legacy samples to improve confidence in
Re-purposing legacy data geochemical data and gain more insights into potentially mineralized areas. While a re-analysis campaign in a
Advanced exploration knowledge
geochemical exploration program modernizes legacy geochemical data by providing more trustworthy and
Canada
higher-dimensional geochemical data, especially where modern data is considerably different than legacy data, it
Geochemical data
is an expensive exercise. The risk associated with modernizing such legacy data lies within its uncertainty in
return (e.g., the possibility of new discoveries, in primarily greenfield settings). Without any advanced knowl-
edge of yet unanalyzed elements, the importance of re-analyses remains ambiguous. To address this uncertainty,
we apply machine learning to multivariate geochemical data from different regions in Canada (i.e., the Churchill
Province and the Trans-Hudson Orogen) in order to use legacy geochemical data to predict modern and higher
dimensional multi-elemental concentrations ahead of planned re-analyses. Our study demonstrates that legacy
and modern geochemical data can be repurposed to predict yet unanalyzed elements that will be realized from
re-analyses and in a manner that significantly reduces the latency to downstream usage of modern geochemical
data (e.g., prospectivity mapping). Findings from this study serve as a pillar of a framework for exploration
geologists to predictively explore and prioritize potentially mineralized districts for further prospects in a timely
manner before employing more invasive and expensive techniques.
1. Introduction hereon refer to outdated geochemical data as ‘legacy’ geochemical data,
although aside from specific changes in the analytical methodology,
Geochemical exploration necessitates the methodical collection, such data is identical to current geochemical data in terms of the
processing and analysis of collected samples. In large exploration pro- requirement of manual labour during data generation. Within the data
grams (regional or national, decadal programs), this process takes time generation portion of geochemical exploration, the methodology expe-
on the order of years to decades to map significant portions of target rienced drastic changes mainly in the analytical aspects relative to the
areas. Coincidentally, the evolution of analytical instruments has been sampling and processing methods, as analytical instruments have
roughly decadal from research to development, to deployment en masse improved substantially in accuracy and precision, detection limits and
(Balaram, 2021). This overlapping of timescales of advances in analyt- the breadth of analyzable elements (Cohen et al., 2010; Balaram, 2021).
ical instrumentation and the operationalization of large exploration At the moment, there is still further on-going research to adopt new
programs unfortunately means that, in a cyclical fashion, geochemical techniques, such as Raman spectroscopy; and a move towards instru-
data becomes outdated and resampling and/or re-analyses are required. ment miniaturization (Balaram, 2021). The cyclical modernization of
Outdated geochemical data is data that is analytically no longer the geochemical exploration data is necessary in some cases, for example, to
state-of-the-art (e.g., less analyzed elements than modern data). We add additional elements that was absent in legacy data. However,
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: glen.nwaila@wits.ac.za (G.T. Nwaila).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiig.2022.10.003
Received 19 May 2022; Received in revised form 30 October 2022; Accepted 31 October 2022
Availableonline5November2022
2666-5441/©2022TheAuthors. PublishingservicesbyElsevierB.V.onbehalfofKeAiCommunicationsCo. Ltd. ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCC
BY-NC-NDlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).S.E. Zhang et al. A r t i fi c i a l I n t e l l i g e n c e i n G e o s c i e n ces3(2022)86–100
Fig. 1. Simplified geological map of Canada with the location of the lake sediment datasets used in this study. The dataset corresponding to the southeastern
Churchill Province (shaded area labelled 1) is located in Labrador. Included in the southeastern Churchill Province is the location of the Mistatin Batholith (in red).
The dataset corresponding to the southwestern Churchill Province and Trans-Hudson Orogen (shaded area labelled 2) is located in Saskatchewan.
accomplishing this task using solely manual re-sampling and/or In general within geochemical sampling, there exists a practice to
re-analysis is costly and maybe untimely for some elements. However, sample more material than strictly necessary, in anticipation of sample
predictive data generation could be used to guide modernization of reuse and therefore avoiding re-sampling, in part motivated by perpet-
geochemical exploration data, and for some uses, even substitute for ual improvements in analytical capability. Re-analysis campaigns are
actual primary data. necessary to provide state-of-the-art (modern) data and result in a high
Large regional and national geochemical survey programs are a key and sustained operational cost to geochemical exploration programs,
source of geochemical data. For example, the Geo-mapping for Energy especially at the national level. However, since samples are unchanged
and Minerals (GEM) program (Lebel, 2020; Geological Survey of Can- between subsequent analyses (where sufficient remnant material exists),
ada, 2022) is a Canadian national survey program that was initially they provide an unprecedented opportunity to leverage machine
conceived in 2008 to provide modern, publicly available geoscience learning to predict elemental concentrations ahead of re-analysis cam-
knowledge of northern Canada to support increased exploration for re- paigns to aid campaign planning through target prioritization. This
sources (now known as the GEM-GeoNorth program [2020–2027]). enables better resource allocation and planning, which is even more
Similar programs exist worldwide. For example, the Council for Geo- crucial where exploration programs have particular and immediate
science in South Africa conducted a series of geochemical surveys that focus directions – e.g., for the discovery of deposits containing critical
lasted into the early 2000s and are now expanding the survey using raw materials. For this application, where legacy data do not contain
modern methods that better cover trace elements and particularly elements belonging to a list of critical raw materials, machine learning,
energy-transition and battery metals (Council for Geosciences, 2022). legacy geochemical data and modern geochemical data can be used to
Viewing the GEM program as a prototype, the downstream purpose of predict into unknown areas, or areas of interest that were previously
the data resulting from these programs seems to be: construction of targeted for exploration of mineral deposits. In addition to prioritiza-
digital maps; provision of information that may be relevant to assess tion, this can aid in the early detection of potentially relevant chemical
mineralization potential; and provision of information necessary to signatures associated with mineral deposits, even before elements
make informed decisions on general land use (GEM-GeoNorth, 2022). belonging to the chemical signatures are physically analyzed.
Depending on the natural landscape of the region being surveyed and This proof-of-concept study uses lake sediment data from the GEM
the capability of the surveyor, many types of sample media could be program. Lake sediment geochemical data has been generated for de-
available, such as: bulk rock, lake sediment, glacial till and water. Each cades to explore surficial geology in Canada, because of its good spatial
type of media has its strengths and weaknesses, collection and pro- coverage. Re-analyses have to date, produced two fully modernized
cessing methodology. A primary decision criterion in choosing sample datasets in 2016 and 2021 respectively: a portion of the southeastern
media is its abundance and accessibility within a target area. For every Churchill Province in Labrador (McCurdy et al., 2016); and a portion of
type of sample media, in general, the resulting data (including legacy the southwestern Churchill Province and Trans-Hudson Orogen in Sas-
data) is produced by applying a highly rigorous and standardized katchewan (Bourdeau et al., 2021, 2022). Initial sampling was con-
methodology from collection to instrumental analysis. This greatly aids ducted in 1978 and 1982 (southeastern Churchill Province), and 1984
data usage, including data fusion. and 1986 (southwestern Churchill Province and Trans-Hudson Orogen).
87S.E. Zhang et al. A r t i fi c i a l I n t e l l i g e n c e i n G e o s c i e n ces3(2022)86–100
Table 1
Details for geochemical datasets used in this study.
OPEN YEAR NTS NUMBER RE- ELEMENTS
REPORT AREAS OF ANALYSIS ANALYZED
NUMBER SAMPLES
557 1978 013L, M 1,425 Ag, As, Co, Cu, F,
559 1978 014D 1,001 Fe, Hg, LOI, Mn,
560 1978 023I, J 1,239 Mo, Ni, Pb, U, Zn
904 1982 023I, J 430
1359 1986 074-A, 1,286 Ag, As, Au, Cd,
B, G and Co, Cu, Fe, Hg,
H LOI, Mn, Mn, Mo,
Ni, Pb, Sb, U, V,
Zn
1643 1984 064-E, 1,177 Ag, As, Au, Ba,
074A Br, Cd, Ce, Co, Cr,
and H Cs, Eu, Fe, Hf, Ir,
La, Lu, Mo, Na,
Ni, Rb, Sb, Sc, Se,
Sm, Sn, Ta, Tb,
Te, Th, U, W, Yb,
Zn, Zr
8026 2016 014D, 3,441 557, 559, Ag, Al, As, Au, B,
013M 560, 904 Ba, Be, Bi, Ca, Cd,
and L, Ce, Co, Cr, Cs, Cu,
023I and Dy, Er, Eu, Fe, Ga,
J Gd, Ge, Hf, Hg,
Ho, In, K, La, Li,
Lu, Mg, Mn, Mo,
Fig. 2. Sample locations from the southeastern Churchill Province dataset,
Na, Nb, Nd, Ni, P,
located in Labrador. Pb, Pd, Pr, Pt, Rb,
Re, S, Sb, Sc, Se,
Sm, Sn, Sr, Ta,
Tb, Te, Th, Ti, Tl,
Tm, U, V, W, Y,
Yb, Zn, Zr
8837 2021 074-A, 1,286 1359 Ag, Al, As, Au, B,
B, G and Ba, Be, Bi, Ca, Cd,
H Ce, Co, Cr, Cs, Cu,
Dy, Er, Eu, Fe, Ga,
Gd, Ge, Hf, Hg,
Ho, In, K, La, Li,
Lu, Mg, Mn, Mo,
Na, Nb, Nd, Ni, P,
Pb, Pd, Pr, Pt, Rb,
Re, S, Sb, Sc, Se,
Sm, Sn, Sr, Ta,
Tb, Te, Th, Ti, Tl,
Tm, U, V, W, Y,
Fig. 3. Sample locations from the southwestern Churchill Province and Trans- Yb, Zn, Zr
Hudson Orogen dataset, located in northeastern Saskatchewan. 8871 2022 064-E, 1,177 1643 Ag, Al, As, Au, B,
074A Ba, Be, Bi, Ca, Cd,
and H Ce, Co, Cr, Cs, Cu,
As part of a re-analysis campaign in the 1990s, the southeastern
Dy, Er, Eu, Fe, Ga,
Churchill Province in Labrador area was also re-analyzed. In this
Gd, Ge, Hf, Hg,
fashion, the GEM program intends to re-analyze its collection of lake Ho, In, K, La, Li,
sediment samples to modernize its surficial geochemical data. However, Lu, Mg, Mn, Mo,
GEM does not currently make use of predictive prioritization in its Na, Nb, Nd, Ni, P,
Pb, Pd, Pr, Pt, Rb,
program execution in any capacity and targets that may be of interest to
Re, S, Sb, Sc, Se,
a modern economy (e.g., mineral deposits containing critical raw ma- Sm, Sn, Sr, Ta,
terials) are best prioritized on a partial basis of a-priori knowledge of the Tb, Te, Th, Ti, Tl,
geology of target areas (knowledge-driven). To the best of our knowl- Tm, U, V, W, Y,
Yb, Zn, Zr
edge, there is no geochemical exploration program that is currently
performing predictive data generation.
Aside from differences in scientific data quality, a primary structural interesting, such as critical raw materials. In comparison, the newest
difference between the legacy and modern geochemical datasets (of lake sediment geochemical datasets from GEM now contain 65 elements,
sediments or otherwise) lies in the former’s lack of a breadth of ele- ranging from lithophiles, siderophiles and chalcophiles (e.g., McCurdy
ments. For example, between 1970 and 1980s, lake sediment et al., 2016). Analysis and downstream modelling for exploration using,
geochemical analysis at the Geological Survey of Canada data routinely for example, elemental maps, elemental ratios, multivariate and artifi-
contained up to 14 elements and did not include any of the rare earth cial intelligence approaches are all limited by the sparsity of elements
elements. Similarly, for geochemical data that was generated by the available in legacy geochemical datasets. If probable data containing
Council for Geoscience in the 2000s, a common configuration is 23 el- concentrations of currently unavailable elements were available in an
ements (e.g., van Rooyen et al., 2004). This makes it impossible to area, it could be leveraged to perform many tasks, such as creating
leverage such legacy geochemical data to understand the national dis- relatively simple elemental maps. This is a task suitable for predictive
tribution of unanalyzed trace elements, many of which have become
88S.E. Zhang et al. A r t i fi c i a l I n t e l l i g e n c e i n G e o s c i e n ces3(2022)86–100
Table 2
Comparison of precision between older (1984–1986) and newer (2021) geochemical data for the southwestern Churchill Province and Trans-Hudson Orogen, located
in northeastern Saskatchewan. LDL =lower detection limit, and RSD =relative standard deviation. All elemental means, unless otherwise stated, are given in ppm. The
method to calculate precision is detailed in McCurdy and Garrett (2016).
Element 1984–1986 data via AAS 2020–2021 data via ICP-MS
Elemental mean Percentage censored LDL RSD (%) Elemental mean Percentage censored LDL RSD (%)
Ag 0.24 95.42 49.22 0.01 0 13.62
As 8.39 58.17 4.08 4.71 21.97 14.15
Au 100 0.00 37.88 67.67
Cd 0.37 43.79 26.42 0.51 0 6.38
Co 7.28 2.61 11.65 8.13 0 3.56
Cu 14.31 0 8.00 14.06 0 3.62
Fe (%) 5.15 0 7.48 5.17 0 4.29
Hg 0.01 0 11.05 0.01 0 14.11
Mn 911.42 0 21.22 480.56 1.52 6.89
Mo 4.09 55.56 21.39 3.24 0 4.40
Ni 13.52 0 6.10 17.36 0 4.55
Pb 7.53 90.2 6.85 3.31 0 7.66
Sb 0.25 94.12 9.43 0.08 8.33 41.33
U 8.24 1.31 8.65 7.74 0 4.27
V 38.24 2.61 9.96 37.45 0 4.45
Zn 100.73 0 7.72 101.53 0 5.14
sufficient, such that predicted elemental concentration maps provide
Table 3 advanced exploration knowledge that could be used for operational
Random forest parameter grid. prioritization and other downstream uses. We expect that our approach
PARAMETER RANGE would be generalizable to other environments and exploration cam-
paigns, provided that legacy and modern data both exist and that they
MAXIMUM DEPTH 5, 7, 9, 11, unlimited
can be repurposed and fused to provide a training dataset.
MAXIMUM FEATURES 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, unlimited
MINIMUM SAMPLES PER SPLIT 3, 4, 5, 6, unlimited
MINIMUM SAMPLES PER LEAF 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 2. Data and analytics methods
2.1. Data source and description
modelling using machine learning. In the past, various machine learning
algorithms have been demonstrated to be able to predict elemental
The GEM program internally plans sampling and re-analysis using
concentrations (Zhang et al., 2021a, 2022). In particular, for our pur-
spatial areas that are defined by the National Topographic System
pose, machine learning algorithms can be used to model the relation-
(NTS), which is a Natural Resources Canada standard (https://www.
ships between elements for matching samples in old and new
nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/geography/topographic-information/map
geochemical datasets. The models can then be deployed to infer prob-
s/national-topographic-system-maps/9767). The southeastern Churchill
able concentrations of yet unanalyzed elements in other areas ahead of
Province lake-sediment dataset contains samples that are located in
their actual re-analyses.
Labrador, encompassing parts of NTS 014D, 013M and L, 023I and J
In this study, we examine the feasibility of predicting elemental
(Figs. 1 and 2). The southwestern Churchill Province and Trans-Hudson
concentrations in areas with legacy data ahead of their re-analysis using
Orogen lake-sediment dataset are located in northeastern Saskatch-
machine learning, legacy and modern geochemical datasets. We show
ewan, encompassing parts of NTS 064E, 074A, B, G and H (Figs. 1 and
that a range of elements can be predicted with a range of performance
3).
profiles (measured using metrics). In addition, the spatial concordance
Data for a total of 6,558 samples are available across the two survey
between the predicted and actual elemental concentrations are gener-
areas and was used for this proof-of-concept study, with a spatial
ally substantially better than that in the variable domain and should be
Fig. 4. Model selection performance summary – CoD (R2) score per element for each NTS zone for the best model. Elemental order is arranged by the averaged metric
score from lowest to highest. Elements that are found in all of the older datasets are shown in bold orange text (includes Pb, Mo, Ag, Hg, Mn, Ni, Zn, Co, Cu, Fe
and U).
89S.E. Zhang et al. A r t i fi c i a l I n t e l l i g e n c e i n G e o s c i e n ces3(2022)86–100
Fig. 5. Predicted versus actual for zone 013M for elements: Cu (a); Y (b); Gd (c); and Er (d). The CoD (R2) and MedAE metric scores are shown in the scatter plots.
The STD (standard deviation) and median values are shown in the histograms.
Fig. 6. Final testing performance summary – CoD (R2) scores for all predicted elements per zone. Elements that are found in all of the older datasets are shown in
bold orange text (includes Pb, Mo, Ag, Hg, Mn, Ni, Zn, Co, Cu, Fe and U).
resolution of roughly 1 sample per 13 km2 (Friske and Hornbrook, re-analyses performed from 2016 to 2022 used the same prepared ma-
1991). Legacy geochemical analyses were conducted for 14–34 ele- terial pulps and were conducted at Bureau Veritas in Vancouver. Pulped
ments, whereas the modern analyses contain 65 elements (data de- samples were digested using a modified aqua regia solution (1:1:1, HCl:
scriptions are summarized in Table 1). Collected lake sediment samples HNO3:H2O). Digested samples were analyzed using an inductively
for all analyses were air-dried, milled and sieved ((cid:0) 80 mesh). coupled plasma-mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) (McCurdy et al., 2016;
Geochemical analyses performed from 1978 to 1986 were conducted by Bourdeau et al., 2021, 2022). Quality assurance and quality control
Chemex Labs. Limited (now ALS Global) in Vancouver. All elements (QA/QC) was achieved in the re-analyzed datasets by using reference
were determined via atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) with a materials, field duplicates and analytical duplicate samples (McCurdy
smaller portion (up to 1,176 samples) also subjected to instrumental and Garrett, 2016). The older datasets did not contain analyses of
neutron activation analysis (INA). However, a vast majority of the an- certified reference materials, which implies that their accuracy could not
alyses for all elements analyzed using INA were below the detection be estimated, however precision can be compared between the older and
limit, such that the two least-affected elements – U and Fe, only con- newer datasets as presented in Table 2. Digitized datasets are open
tained 136 and 165 unique values. The loss on ignition (LOI) was source and can be obtained from the Canadian Geochemical Surveys
determined via thermogravimetry, and U was determined via INA Database at: https://geochem.nrcan.gc.ca/. The legacy and modern
(delayed counting). Geochemical analyses performed in 1984 (OF 1643) geochemical data was fused on a per sample basis to construct a dataset
were conducted by Barringer Magenta Ltd. In Ontario. Geochemical for predictive modelling.
90S.E. Zhang et al. A r t i fi c i a l I n t e l l i g e n c e i n G e o s c i e n ces3(2022)86–100
Fig. 7. Final testing performance summary – MAPE scores for all predicted elements per zone. Elements that are found in all of the older datasets are shown in bold
orange text (includes Pb, Mo, Ag, Hg, Mn, Ni, Zn, Co, Cu, Fe and U).
2.2. Geological context
The data used in this study is intended to capture surficial
geochemical variations of the sampled regions. Here, we provide a high-
level description of the geological context to assist with the evaluation of
predicted data aside from purely performance metrics. The southeastern
Churchill Province is located in Labrador (Fig. 1) and has been inter-
preted as an elongate sliver of Archean to early-Proterozoic continental
crust that was accreted between the colliding Superior (west) and North
Atlantic (east) cratons during the Paleoproterozoic (James et al., 1996;
James and Dunning, 2000; Wardle et al., 2002; Corrigan et al., 2018).
Lithologies consist primarily of para- and ortho-gneisses, migmatites
and low-to medium-metamorphic grade supracrustal and plutonic rocks.
Subsequently, Mesoproterozoic-aged intrusions of variable composition
(anorthosite-gabbro-troctolite, granite and syenite) intruded in the area
(Hammouche et al., 2012). Notably, the Mistastin Batholith (1.4 Ga), is
locally highly enriched in Rare Earth Elements [REEs], Zr, Y ±Be, Nb, U
and Th (Hammouche et al., 2012). One of these zones of enrichment is
hosted by the Misery Lake peralkaline syenite (1409.7 ±1.2 Ma; David
et al., 2012; Hammouche et al., 2012) and most notably by the Strange
Lake peralkaline complex (1240 ±2 Ma), which has indicated mineral
resources of 278 Mt at 0.93% total REE oxide (Miller, 1990; Gowans
et al., 2014; Zajac, 2015; McClenaghan et al., 2017, 2019). Glacial
erosion during the Wisconsin glaciation remobilized large volumes of
Fig. 8. Model selection versus cross-validation CoD (R2) scores for all predicted REE-ri ch debris towards the northeast, forming a dispersal train that can
elements. The dotted line is the 1:1 line. Points plotting below the line indicate
be detected in excess of 50 km down the ice (McClenaghan et al., 2017,
a loss in cross-validation performance relative to model selection and
2019 and references therein; Zhang et al., 2022). However, the legacy
vice versa.
data prior to the 2016 re-analysis did not contain analyses of REEs.
The southwestern Churchill Province and Trans-Hudson Orogen is
located in northeastern Saskatchewan (Fig. 1). The southwestern
Churchill Province is characterized by Archean gneisses, granitoids and
Fig. 9. Maps of the elemental concentration of Ni in the southwestern Churchill Province and Trans-Hudson Orogen region were created from (a) predicted con-
centrations (ppm), and (b) actual concentrations (ppm).
91S.E. Zhang et al. A r t i fi c i a l I n t e l l i g e n c e i n G e o s c i e n ces3(2022)86–100
Fig. 10. Maps of the elemental concentration of Ni in the southeastern Churchill Province region were created from (a) predicted concentrations (ppm), and (b)
actual concentrations (ppm).
Fig. 11. Maps of the elemental concentration of Y in the southwestern Churchill Province and Trans-Hudson Orogen region were created from (a) predicted con-
centrations (ppm), and (b) actual concentrations (ppm).
supracrustal rocks that were overlain by Paleoproterozoic supracrustal 2.3. Machine learning workflow
sequences (Card et al., 2007; Eglington et al., 2013). The province hosts
several mineral deposits, notably in Au (Ithingo Lake deposit) and Fe To the best of our knowledge, no studies exist that specifically
(Nyberg Lake and Ithingo Lake deposits) (Saskatchewan Geological examined the feasibility to predict higher dimensional geochemical data
Survey, 2018). The Churchill Province is separated from the Superior from lower dimensional and legacy geochemical data. However, there
Province to the southeast by the Paleoproterozoic Trans-Hudson Orogen have been attempts to use machine learning and auxiliary/ancillary data
(1.83–1.80 Ga; Corrigan et al., 2005). The Trans-Hudson Orogen itself is to predict geochemical elemental concentrations for the purpose of
a collage of juvenile supracrustal belts, continental margin sediments mapping (e.g., Kirkwood et al., 2016) and resource estimation (Nwaila
and re-activated rocks from the Archean Superior and Churchill prov- et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021b). For our purpose, we adopt and
inces (Hoffman, 1988; Corrigan et al., 2005; Yeo and Delaney, 2007). A repurpose a ML-based workflow that is suitable for our task, which was
number of base-metal (e.g., Cu–Zn, Pb–Zn, Fe, Cu–Ni-Platinum Group developed by Zhang et al. (2021a, 2022). In its original formulation, it
Elements [PGE], and REEs) occurrences are found in the Trans-Hudson used major and minor elements to predict trace elemental concentra-
Orogen (Yeo and Delaney, 2007; Saskatchewan Geological Survey, tions, and in that context, the ML workflow was designed to reconstruct
2018). These basement rocks are overlain by the Paleoproterozoic to trace elemental concentrations on a per-element basis. The linear
Mesoproterozoic Athabasca Group rocks (1.75–1.5 Ga; Cumming and reconstruction error (prediction residual) was used to detect geochem-
Krstic, 1992; Rainbird et al., 2007; Ramaekers et al., 2007). The strati- ical anomalies, primarily for a greenfield setting to delineate potential
graphic areas immediately above or below the unconformity between exploration targets in an unsupervised fashion. In this study, we
the basement and Athabasca Group rocks is well known for Athabasca repurpose the ML workflow to generate advanced exploration knowl-
unconformity-type uranium deposits (Jeanneret et al., 2016). Legacy edge in the form of elemental concentrations of elements that have yet to
geochemical data for this region similarly did not contain many ele- be analyzed in a brownfield setting (in the sense that legacy data exists).
ments, such as the REEs. Hence, the key predictive modelling portions of the workflow are similar
to those in Zhang et al. (2021a, 2022), with the exception of the choice
of features for machine learning algorithms and a removal of data
92S.E. Zhang et al. A r t i fi c i a l I n t e l l i g e n c e i n G e o s c i e n ces3(2022)86–100
Fig. 12. Maps of the elemental concentration of Y in the southeastern Churchill Province region were created from (a) predicted concentrations (ppm), and (b) actual
concentrations (ppm).
Fig. 13. Maps of the elemental concentration of Gd in the southwestern Churchill Province and Trans-Hudson Orogen region were created from (a) predicted
concentrations (ppm), and (b) actual concentrations (ppm).
reconstruction-based anomaly detection. The modified ML workflow et al. (2021a, 2022).
uses elements that were analyzed in the legacy analyses (analyzed be- The features and targets used in this study are all the elements that
tween 1970 and 1980) as features and elements in the modern analyses are over 95% complete (<5% missing values) in the legacy and new
as targets. Instead of systematically exploring all feasible machine analyses. From the legacy analyses, the features are: Hg, Fe, Mn, Ni, U,
learning algorithms, of which there are many (e.g., Zhang et al., 2021a, Co, Zn and Cu. The targets from the new analyses are: Cr, Dy, V, Tm, P,
2022), we choose to focus on the tuning and results of the random forest Th, Ni, Ti, Cs, Al, Na, Nb, Zn, Ce, Tl, Be, Co, Mg, Ag, Y, Rb, Sr, Ga, Fe, Er,
algorithm (Ho, 1995; Breiman, 1996a, b; Kotsiantis, 2014; Freund and Yb, U, Ca, Mn, Se, Mo, Cd, Pr, Sm, Gd, S, Hg, Nd, Eu, Ba, Sc, K, Pb, Cu, Zr,
Schapire, 1997; Sagi and Rokach, 2018). We base our selection on the Li, Tb, Lu, La and Ho. From the datasets, all analyses are used in their
fact that random forest was demonstrated to offer generally good and raw form (either wt% or ppm). We imputed the features using a k-
often the best performance for exactly this task relative to many other nearest neighbours imputer following Zhang et al. (2021a). The target
algorithms (Zhang et al., 2021a, 2022). For a full discussion around the elements are not imputed. Where data is missing in the targets, those
random forest algorithm, and the other suitable algorithms that were data points are not used for prediction nor mapping. For model selection
explored, see Zhang et al. (2021a, 2022). For our task, some of the and tuning, we employed 4-fold cross-validation using a grid search
desirable properties of the random forest algorithm were summarized in (Table 3). Our metric of choice to perform model selection and tuning is
Zhang et al. (2021a), which include a feature space that is devoid of the coefficient of determination (CoD or R2). However, we also
native geometry and therefore makes no a-priori demands on the employed the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE; e.g., de Mytte-
embedding space of the geochemical data. As such, it was empirically naere et al., 2016) and the median absolute error (MedAE) to profile
demonstrated that for the task of the prediction of trace elements, the prediction performance. To assess predictive modelling performance in
random forest algorithm generally exhibited comparable performance the spatial domain, we use spatial cross-validation, where the data is
across a large number of elements using both centered log divided into zones along existing NTS boundaries; the target elements in
ratio-transformed data and raw data, and in many cases, raw data pro- each zone are predicted using data from the other zones and both var-
duced better results across a range of metrics (Zhang et al., 2021a, iable domain performance metrics and maps are used to understand
2022). Therefore, we choose to use raw data for predictive modelling. prediction performance. Segmentation by NTS zones is similar to how
Model construction follows the methodology as established by Zhang the GEM program plans surveys and re-analysis campaigns. Therefore,
93S.E. Zhang et al. A r t i fi c i a l I n t e l l i g e n c e i n G e o s c i e n ces3(2022)86–100
Fig. 14. Maps of the elemental concentration of Gd in the southeastern Churchill Province region were created from (a) predicted concentrations (ppm), and (b)
actual concentrations (ppm).
Fig. 15. Maps of the elemental concentration of Er in the southwestern Churchill Province and Trans-Hudson Orogen region were created from (a) predicted
concentrations (ppm), and (b) actual concentrations (ppm).
spatial cross-validation using this method resembles how predictive validation is roughly congruent with those of model selection (Fig. 6).
modelling ahead of re-analyses would be operationalized. Without using spatial cross-validation (e.g., data splitting is random
from all NTS zones), the performance is generally substantially closer to
3. Results those of model selection (Fig. 6). In general, there is a reduction in
overall performance and a tendency of some zones to predict better than
Model selection results demonstrate that the best-predicted elements others across a range of elements, such as zone 074A for most of the
are the elements that overlap between the legacy and modern predicted rare earth elements (Fig. 6). Zone 023J was the least pre-
geochemical analyses. In contrast, the other elements are predicted with dictable on average across many elements, such as the rare earth ele-
a variable CoD (R2) depending on the element and the NTS zones ments (Fig. 6). This is because zone 023J contains an abundance of data
(Fig. 4). Some elements are predicted poorly (CoD (R2) <0.3; e.g., Sr that is chemically quite dissimilar to those in the other zones. Therefore,
and S). Some zones consistently predict worse across some elements, models trained on data from zones exclusive of zone 023J did not
such as zone 013M and elements: Ho; Eu; Sm; Gd; Nd; Pr; Er; Dy; Tb; Y; generalize well to zone 023J. This behaviour is also observed using the
Ce and Yb. This zone is known to contain some rare earth element- MAPE metric (Fig. 7). For most of the elements except for Th, Mo and Zr,
bearing geochemical anomalies associated with the Mistastin Batholith the weighted averages of MAPE for all other elements are below 1
(McClenaghan et al., 2017, 2019 and references therein). As such, a (Fig. 7). This indicates that the median error for most elements is, on
reduction in prediction performance is expected, and indeed, data average lower than their concentration values. To better understand the
reconstruction performance was used to identify mineralization anom- performance expectations, such as model generalizability, we examined
alies (Zhang et al., 2021a, 2022). Results from testing using spatial the change in the CoD (R2) scores between model selection and cross-
cross-validation show that prediction of various elements at the NTS validation phases (Fig. 8). Some elements (e.g., Cd, Cs, Cr, Nb and Na)
zone level is generally possible. In particular, predicted concentrations exhibited a relatively significant loss in performance in cross-validation
of the rare earth elements in zone 013M tend toward under-prediction relative to model selection (Fig. 8).
(Fig. 5). This same behaviour was observed in Zhang et al. (2022). Most maps produced using predicted elemental concentrations
The prediction performance observed through spatial cross- exhibit variably resemblant patterns to the actual elemental
94S.E. Zhang et al. A r t i fi c i a l I n t e l l i g e n c e i n G e o s c i e n ces3(2022)86–100
Fig. 16. Maps of the elemental concentration of Er in the southeastern Churchill Province region were created from (a) predicted concentrations (ppm), and (b)
actual concentrations (ppm).
Fig. 17. Maps of the elemental concentration of Zn in the southwestern Churchill Province and Trans-Hudson Orogen region were created from (a) predicted
concentrations (ppm), and (b) actual concentrations (ppm).
concentration maps (Figs. 9–20). The degree of spatial concordance is Since the purpose of the legacy and re-analyzed geochemical data is
high for elements that were contained both in the legacy and modern primarily for regional mapping, the assessment of prediction perfor-
datasets, such as Ni (Figs. 9 and 10). In fact, in the Strange Lake region mance can also occur in the image domain. The image domain contains
(southeastern Churchill Province), the maps of the predicted and actual the gridded data and the blocks in the grid have been estimated using
elemental concentrations are qualitatively indistinguishable (Figs. 9 and interpolation. In contrast to performance assessments of raw predicted
10). In the southwestern Churchill Province and Trans-Hudson Orogen data in the variable domain, the gridding and interpolation process, such
region, the Ni maps are qualitatively similar, but the prediction suggests as that employed in this proof-of-concept, is more suitable to understand
a higher concentration in the central region of the map (Fig. 9). How- the performance of our approach, where mapping is an anticipatable
ever, predicting concentrations of elements that already exist in legacy downstream activity (e.g., prospectivity mapping). However, the
data is less interesting than predicting currently unknown elemental gridding and interpolation process introduces two additional mecha-
concentrations. For rare earth elements, the degree of spatial concor- nisms that may alter performance relative that of the raw predicted data.
dance is generally good qualitatively because zones known to be One mechanism is the error incurred by interpolation, which strongly
enriched in some elements are predicted to be as such (Figs. 11–16). In depends on the interpolation approach used. The other mechanism is the
particular, in the southeastern Churchill Province region, locations of spatial averaging effect of estimating a single block from multiple
known rare earth element-bearing anomalies such as the Strange Lake adjacent supporting points. This is expected to increase the performance
peralkaline complex and Misery Lake peralkaline syenite (Mistatin of the predicted data when measured in the image domain, if the pre-
Batholith), as well as their dispersal trains are predicted to be enriched dicted data exhibits a residual that is substantially symmetrical around
in those elements (Figs. 12, 14 and 16). For base metals, the degree of zero (such that averaging over a random sample tend to converge to the
spatial concordance depends on the elemental overlap between the mean, or nearer to zero) and some amount of spatial correlation exists
legacy and modern datasets and, in some cases, such as for Zn and Pb, (otherwise mapping is unwarranted). The symmetry of the residuals is
the spatial concordance is quite good in the southeastern Churchill generally observable but is more significant for some elements than
Province region (Figs. 18 and 20), but poorer in portions of the south- others (e.g., Cu in Fig. 5 relative to the other elements). In general, there
western Churchill Province and Trans-Hudson Orogen region (mainly is a significant improvement of all metrics when measured in the image
the west half; Figs. 17 and 18). domain relative to that of the raw predicted data (Figs. 21–23). The
95S.E. Zhang et al. A r t i fi c i a l I n t e l l i g e n c e i n G e o s c i e n ces3(2022)86–100
Fig. 18. Maps of the elemental concentration of Zn in the southeastern Churchill Province region were created from (a) predicted concentrations (ppm), and (b)
actual concentrations (ppm).
Fig. 19. Maps of the elemental concentration of Pb in the southwestern Churchill Province and Trans-Hudson Orogen region were created from (a) predicted
concentrations (ppm), and (b) actual concentrations (ppm).
difference can be measured through the relative difference (image (Figs. 9–20). High CoD (R2) scores in the variable domain (predicted
domain score minus raw predicted-data score, divided by the raw versus actual concentrations for the raw predicted data) typically
predicted-data score). The relative difference for: the CoD (R2) metric is translated into predicted concentration maps that were consistent to
about 42.21%; the MAPE metric is about (cid:0) 69.24%; and the MedAE nearly identical with the actual concentration maps (Figs. 9–20,
metric is about (cid:0) 37.83%. This implies that the MAPE metric experi- compared with metric scores in Figs. 21–23). In the image domain
enced the most improvement, followed by the CoD (R2) metric. (gridded and interpolated predicted data versus that of the ungridded
Furthermore, for the MAPE and MedAE metrics and with the exception data), all metric scores were generally substantially improved relative to
of Mn (Figs. 22 and 23), all elements systematically improved in the that in the variable domain (Figs. 21–23). This highlights the positive
image domain relative to the same metrics evaluated on the raw pre- impact of spatial correlation and local averaging, which seems to
dicted data. This implies that predicted geochemical data is generally generally favour the rendering of maps using predicted data in our case.
suitable for mapping. As the CoD (R2) score (in all domains) decrease, there is a general loss of
spatial concordance between the predicted and actual elemental maps
4. Discussion (e.g., Ni in Fig. 10 compared with Pb in Fig. 19). At lower values of CoD
(R2), two key mechanisms contribute to discrepancies between the
This study shows that it is possible to predict elemental concentra- predicted and actual concentration maps. These are: (1) under- or over-
tions for a range of elements in areas where legacy geochemical data prediction of concentration hotspots (e.g., Fig. 18, the western half of
exist, but the corresponding modern data is absent. Cross-validation can the map) and; (2) prediction of concentration hotspots that are not
be used to anticipate prediction performance using a variety of metrics present in the actual concentration maps (e.g., Fig. 16, the lower western
in the variable domain (Figs. 6–8). Elements to be predicted that are portion of the map). However, (2) appears to be less common in our
present in training data generally predict better in any given area than results and in cases where seemingly false-positive hotspots are present
elements that are non-existent in training data (Figs. 6 and 7). This is no for some elements, the locations are important for other similar elements
surprise, as information regarding such an element is more direct than (e.g., Fig. 16, the lower western portion of the map compared with
the inference of presently unanalyzed elements. Therefore, predicted Fig. 12b, the same region showing a small enrichment in Y). In this
elemental concentration maps vary quantitatively in their accuracy sense, much of the occurrences of (2) are better characterized as
96S.E. Zhang et al. A r t i fi c i a l I n t e l l i g e n c e i n G e o s c i e n ces3(2022)86–100
Fig. 20. Maps of the elemental concentration of Pb in the southeastern Churchill Province region were created from (a) predicted concentrations (ppm), and (b)
actual concentrations (ppm).
Fig. 21. Comparison of the CoD (R2) metric scores on a per-element basis between the raw predicted data and the mapped data. Elements that are found in all of the
older datasets are shown in bold orange text (includes Pb, Mo, Ag, Hg, Mn, Ni, Zn, Co, Cu, Fe and U).
multivariate/multi-elemental concentration hotspots, for which some of areas that do not feature modern multi-element geochemical analyses,
the elements are very low in concentration. In any case, it is clear that particularly where an entire group of elements (e.g., the rare earth el-
because the predicted concentration maps generally bear a spatial ements) are missing but are important operationally.
resemblance to the actual concentration maps, such maps could be used Prediction performance is highly dependent on the quality of the
to plan re-analyses or even additional sampling campaigns (Figs. 9–20). training data and particularly its relationship with the target region. In
In addition, the predicted and actual hotspots are nearly always of the general, to maximize prediction performance, the training data should
same order of magnitude, which is quantitatively supported by the encompass data that is as representative of the target region as possible
MAPE metric scores (nearly always less than 100%, see Fig. 7), which to increase model generalizability (e.g., the class imbalance problem).
implies that advanced targeting decisions could be made using predicted Additionally, for algorithms that cannot extrapolate beyond the target’s
concentration maps, in lieu of waiting for the areas to be re-analyzed. numerical range (such as the random forest algorithm and in general,
This may be particularly important for time-sensitive elements, such tree-based algorithms), the training data should ideally contain ranges
as those belonging to the critical raw materials. In any case, multivariate of data along each feature and target that entirely overlap with those of
concentration maps are likely to be generally more robust than single the deployment dataset. This may be less relevant for qualitative uses of
elemental maps, as stacking of several maps would attenuate spatial the prediction outputs (e.g., a geochemical hotspot is found, but its exact
disagreements amongst the elements and enhance hotspots that are concentration is not important). In the context of geochemical data, this
common across the elements. For much of the rare earth elements, their implies that the compositions of the testing samples should be covered in
geochemical behaviour is comparable. Therefore, grouping them abundance in the training samples. In the case of lake sediment samples,
together to generate final multivariate elemental maps is a good use of this further implies that the parent rocks from which the sediment was
the prediction results. This will be useful for advanced exploration of derived should be adequately covered in the training dataset. In other
97S.E. Zhang et al. A r t i fi c i a l I n t e l l i g e n c e i n G e o s c i e n ces3(2022)86–100
Fig. 22. Comparison of the MAPE metric scores on a per-element basis between the raw predicted data and the mapped data. Elements that are found in all of the
older datasets are shown in bold orange text (includes Pb, Mo, Ag, Hg, Mn, Ni, Zn, Co, Cu, Fe and U).
Fig. 23. Comparison of the MedAE metric scores on a per-element basis between the raw predicted data and the mapped data. Elements that are found in all of the
older datasets are shown in bold orange text (includes Pb, Mo, Ag, Hg, Mn, Ni, Zn, Co, Cu, Fe and U).
words, prediction and training using contrasting compositions of sam- and depending on the impact of the discrepancies, data corrections may
ples, e.g., training on sediment samples derived from parental igneous have to be carried out prior to integrating such data into the training
rocks and testing on sediment samples derived from conglomerates, is data.
unlikely to produce optimal performance. There are several classes of For the optimization of prediction performance, geological and
factors that can contribute to significant losses in prediction perfor- geochemical knowledge of target areas may be vital in creating effective
mance in this manner: (1) scientific factors; and (2) data factors. Sci- training datasets. However, as the amount of data increases due to more
entific factors include the abundance of relationships (e.g., types of data becoming modernized through re-analyses, then the geological and
minerals in samples) between the target elements and the features. For geochemical knowledge should become less relevant, and a more or
example, an element is found in spatially disparate stoichiometries in complete data-driven approach could be used instead. We anticipate
samples that vary at a spatial scale roughly the size of the NTS zones (a that as more training data becomes available through re-analyses, model
type of mineral spatial non-stationarity through e.g., the distribution of generalizability and prediction performance should generally improve.
parent lithologies). In this case, in the worst case, there are unique re- The high degree of comparability between datasets through standard-
lationships between the targets and features within each zone and ized practices in data generation (e.g., sampling, instrumentation and
generalization to unknown zones is critically dependent on having suf- analytical standards) makes this type of approach possible. Although
ficient types of relationships captured in the training data. Data factors Zhang et al. (2021a) demonstrated that prediction of elemental con-
include under-sampling of key relationships for some elements and class centrations are generally reliable even using a secondary dataset with
imbalance issues. To some extent, all of these issues can be reduced in unknown and impossible-to-level data, further investigation of the im-
their impacts through increasing the diversity of the training data pacts of systematic data levelling issues may be necessary (although
through the availability of more re-analyses. Sourcing more data beyond the scope and data availability of this study). Data levelling in
through other sources external to GEM, such as provincial, academic and our application is less important or completely irrelevant between the
private industry data may also be a means to augment the diversity of features and targets (e.g., levelling between strictly legacy and modern
the training data. However, discrepancies between sample collection, datasets) but is more important for building a robust training database
preparation and analysis methods should ideally be taken into account (e.g., levelling between legacy datasets). Thankfully, the open data
98S.E. Zhang et al. A r t i fi c i a l I n t e l l i g e n c e i n G e o s c i e n ces3(2022)86–100
nature of the analyses facilitates the comprehension of sampling and enable the generation of advanced probable knowledge of target areas.
analytical methodologies. This should be as applicable for GEM data as it An effect of this advanced knowledge is that it can potentially make
is for similar data, wherever conditions are met (e.g., fusable legacy and future upstream exploration activities, such as data generation more
modern datasets). The availability of common standards enables data targeted and fit-for-purpose for downstream data analysis. This would
levelling in the future, where its effects are intolerable. Where the pre- obviously facilitate timely resource discoveries, which is important for
dicted elemental concentration maps are used qualitatively (e.g., to plan critical raw materials. Additionally, focusing on targeted areas may lead
re-analysis or sampling campaigns) instead of quantitatively (e.g., to to the detection of fainter geochemical anomalies, which increases the
substitute for re-analyses in an exploration campaign or to be used with probability of resource discovery. Although knowledge derived using
scientifically reductive methods downstream), quantitative matching of predicted data is unlikely to be as accurate or selective as those using
data levels may be unnecessary depending on the application context actual data, the accuracy of predicted data is only likely to improve as
and the extent of its impacts. more modern data becomes available for training. As data is becoming
The ability to generate a-priori knowledge regarding previously the currency of digital societies, then in the manner of financial dis-
unknown elemental concentrations in new areas is the most significant counting, advanced knowledge available now may be worth more than
finding of this study. We demonstrated that where previous analyses more accurate knowledge that is available later.
exist in the form of legacy data, it is possible to anticipate the elemental
concentrations of many unanalyzed elements with sufficient accuracy in Funding
the spatial domain to be widely applicable. Where exploration programs
were sufficiently regimental to have had standardized sampling and This study was supported by a Department of Science and Innovation
analysis methodology, and some implementation of a data repository (DSI)-National Research Foundation (NRF) Thuthuka Grant (Grant UID:
that facilitates the use of particularly legacy data, the legacy data and 121973), and DSI-NRF CIMERA.
modern data are a key program asset that enables predictive oper-
ationalization. Our finding implies that re-analysis campaigns and
Declaration of competing interest
exploration for time-sensitive elements (e.g., critical raw materials)
could become prioritized based on anticipated elemental concentrations
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
and current exploration priorities. For example, in the search for rare
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
earth elements, it is possible to sequentially target areas (both for further
the work reported in this paper.
downstream prospectivity mapping or for detailed field study and
sampling) based on a rank-order of their anticipated rare earth
Acknowledgements
elemental concentrations. This effectively reduces the time to discover
new mineral deposits by reshaping the exploration pipeline to become
The data used in this study are open source and are hosted at the
more predictive in a target- and data-driven manner. In this case,
Canadian Database of Geochemical Surveys Portal: https://geochem.nrc
geological knowledge of target areas is an asset but not a requirement, as
an.gc.ca/cdogs/content/main/home_en.htm, an open-source portal
the decision to target is data-driven. However, geoscientific knowledge
managed by Natural Resources Canada (NRCan). The authors would
is indispensable for interpreting and verifying relevant geochemical
also like to thank two anonymous reviewers for providing insightful
hotspots in predicted elemental maps. In some situations, aside from
comments that have greatly improved the readability and scope of this
exploration prioritization, advanced geochemical data through predic-
manuscript. The authors thank Dr. Hua Wang for editorial handling.
tive modelling may be the only form of modern geochemical data, and
such data is better than legacy data alone. This would be the case in
References
circumstances satisfying one or more of: (1) the time to modernize data
in an area of interest is too long for a practical purpose; (2) there is Balaram, V., 2021. Current and emerging analytical techniques for geochemical and
insufficient material remaining for another re-analysis and/or re- geochronological studies. Geol. J. 56, 2300–2359. https://doi.org/10.1002/gj.4005.
sampling is no longer possible (e.g., due to changes in land use; Bourdeau, J.E., Day, S.J.A., Zhang, S.E., 2022. Regional Lake Sediment Geochemical
Data from Northeastern Saskatchewan (NTS 064-E, 074-A and H): Re-analysis and
geopolitics; environmental, social and governance factors); (3) there is QA/QC Evaluation, vol. 8871. Geological Survey of Canada, Open File, p. 19.
no additional resource to execute another re-analysis campaign; (4) https://doi.org/10.4095/329875.
probable rather than known concentrations are adequate for down- Bourdeau, J.E., McCurdy, M.W., Day, S.J.A., Garrett, R.G., 2021. Regional Lake Sediment
Geochemical Data from North-Central Saskatchewan (NTS 074-A, B, G, and H): Re-
stream uses of data; and (5) re-analysis is contingent on more
analysis Data and QA/QC Evaluation, vol. 8837. Geological Survey of Canada, Open
geochemical information becoming available in target areas. File, p. 14. https://doi.org/10.4095/329204.
Breiman, L., 1996a. Bagging predictors. Mach. Learn. 24 (2), 123–140. https://doi.org/
10.1007/BF00058655.
5. Conclusion Breiman, L., 1996b. Stacked regressions. Mach. Learn. 24 (1), 49–64. https://doi.org/
10.1007/BF00117832.
Predictive data generation can play a pivotal role in the moderni- Card, C.D., Pan˘a, D., Portella, P., Thomas, D.J., Annesley, I.R., 2007. Basement rocks to
the Athabasca basin, saskatchewan and alberta. In: Jefferson, C., Delaney, G. (Eds.),
zation of exploration programs by providing probable data in advance of
EXTECH IV: Geology and Uranium EXploration TECHnology of the Proterozoic
actual data. We have demonstrated that by using legacy data, modern Athabasca Basin, Saskatchewan and Alberta, vol. 588. Geological Survey of Canada,
data and leveraging the extensive standardization of data and its gen- Bulletin, pp. 69–87. https://doi.org/10.4095/223745.
Cohen, D.R., Kelley, D.L., Anand, R., Coker, W.B., 2010. Major advances in exploration
eration processes within existing geochemical survey programs, it is
geochemistry, 1998-2007 Geochem. Explor. Environ. Anal. 10, 3–16. https://doi.
possible to generate probable and often quantitatively or qualitatively org/10.1144/1467-7873/09-215.
reliable modern data. In this manner, our proposed method not only Corrigan, D., Hajnal, Z., N´emeth, B., Lucas, S.B., 2005. Tectonic framework of a
Paleoproterozoic arc–continent to continent–continent collisional zone, Trans-
extracts additional value from otherwise outdated (legacy) data, but also
Hudson Orogen, from geological and seismic reflection studies. Can. J. Earth Sci. 42,
serves to assist with both upstream data generation and downstream 421–434. https://doi.org/10.1139/e05-025.
data usage. For exploration geochemistry, the rate-limiting step is data Corrigan, D., Wodicka, N., McFarlane, C., Lafrance, I., Rooyen, D.V., Bandyayera, D.,
generation. This context is mismatched with the data-hungry and Bilodeau, C., 2018. Lithotectonic framework of the core zone, southeastern Churchill
province, Canada. Geosci. Can. 45 (1), 1–24. https://doi.org/10.12789/
automation capacity of data-driven techniques, which are becoming key geocanj.2018.45.128.
downstream consumers of exploration data and can quickly exhaust Council for Geosciences, 2022. Annual Report, 2021/22. Council for Geosciences,
existing data. In this case, our method serves to enable data users, such Replublic of South Africa, p. 162.
Cumming, G.L., Krstic, D., 1992. The age of unconformity-related uranium
as prospectivity mappers, with valuable and timely information that
mineralization in the Athabasca Basin, northern Saskatchewan. Can. J. Earth Sci. 29,
otherwise may be completely absent or may be untimely. This would 1623–1639. https://doi.org/10.1139/e92-128.
99S.E. Zhang et al. A r t i fi c i a l I n t e l l i g e n c e i n G e o s c i e n ces3(2022)86–100
David, J., Simard, M., Bandyayera, D., Goutier, J., Hammouche, H., Pilote, P., Leclerc, F., McClenaghan, M.B., Paulen, R.C., Kjarsgaard, I.M., Averill, S.A., Fortin, R., 2017.
Dion, C., 2012. Datations U-Pb effectu´ees dans les provinces du Sup´erieur et de Indicator Mineral Signature of the Strange Lake REE Deposit, Quebec and
Churchill en 2010-2011. Minist`ere des Ressources Naturelles. Qu´ebec, p. 33. RP Newfoundland and Labrador, vol. 8240. Geological Survey of Canada, Open File,
2012-01. p. 50. https://doi.org/10.4095/306239.
de Myttenaere, A., Golden, B., Le Grand, B., Rossi, F., 2016. Mean absolute percentage McCurdy, M.W., Amor, S.D., Finch, C., 2016. Regional Lake Sediment and Water
error for regression models. Neurocomputing 192, 38–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/ Geochemical Data, Western and Central Labrador (NTS 13-L, 13-M, 14-D, 23-I, and
j.neucom.2015.12.114. 23-J). Geological Survey of Canada, Open File 8026, p. 14. https://doi.org/10.4095/
Eglington, B.M., Pehrsson, S.J., Ansdell, K.M., Lescuyer, J.L., Quirt, D., Milesi, J.P., 298834.
Brown, P., 2013. A domain-based digital summary of the evolution of the McCurdy, M.W., Garrett, R.G., 2016. Geochemical data quality control for soil, till and
Palaeoproterozoic of North America and Greenland and associated unconformity- lake and stream sediment samples. Geological Survey of Canada, Open File 7944, 40.
related uranium mineralization. Precambrian Res. 232, 4–26. https://doi.org/ https://doi.org/10.4095/297562.
10.1016/j.precamres.2013.01.021. Miller, R.R., 1990. The Strange Lake pegmatite–aplite-hosted rare-metal deposit,
Freund, Y., Schapire, R.E., 1997. A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning Labrador. In: Current Research. Newfoundland Department of Mines and Energy,
and an application to boosting. J. Comput. Syst. Sci. 55 (1), 119–139. https://doi. pp. 171–182. Report 90-1.
org/10.1006/jcss.1997.1504. Nwaila, G.T., Zhang, S.E., Frimmel, H.E., Manzi, M.S.D., Dohm, C., Durrheim, R.J.,
Friske, P.W.B., Hornbrook, E.H.W., 1991. Canada’s national geochemical reconnaissance Burnett, M.S., Tolmay, L.C., 2019. Local and target exploration of conglomerate-
programme. In: Transactions of the Institution of Mining and Metallurgy, Section B. hosted gold deposits using machine learning algorithms: a case study of the
Applied Earth Science, vol. 100, pp. B47–B56. Witwatersrand gold ores, South Africa. Nat. Resour. Res. 29, 135–159. https://doi.
GEM-GeoNorth, 2022. Geoscientific Research in Canada’s North: GEM-GeoNorth from. org/10.1007/s11053-019-09498-1.
https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/resources/federal-programs/geomapping Rainbird, R.H., Stern, R.A., Rayner, N., Jefferson, C.W., 2007. Age, provenance, and
-energy-minerals/18215. (Accessed 9 May 2022). regional correlation of the Athabasca Group, Saskatchewan and Alberta, constrained
Geological Survey of Canada, 2022. Geological survey of Canada: report on results and by igneous and detrital zircon geochronology. In: Jefferson, C., Delaney, G. (Eds.),
delivery 2020-2021. Natural Resources Canada 137. https://doi.org/10.4095/ EXTECH IV: Geology and Uranium EXploration TECHnology of the Proterozoic
328919. Athabasca Basin, Saskatchewan and Alberta, vol. 588. Geological Survey of Canada,
Gowans, R.M., Lewis, W.J., Shoemaker, S., Spooner, J., Zalnieriunas, R.V., 2014. NI-43- Bulletin, pp. 193–209. https://doi.org/10.4095/223761.
101 Technical Report on the Preliminary Economic Assessment (PEA) for the Strange Ramaekers, P., Jefferson, C.W., Yeo, G., Collier, B., Long, D.G.F., Catueanu, O.,
Lake Property, Quebec, Canada. Micron International Limited for Quest Rare Bernier, S., Kupsch, B., Post, R., 2007. Revised geological map and stratigraphy of
Minerals Ltd., p. 258 the Athabasca group, saskatchewan and alberta. In: Jefferson, C., Delaney, G. (Eds.),
Hammouche, H., Legouix, C., Goutier, J., Dion, C., 2012. G´eologie de la r´egion du lac EXTECH IV: Geology and Uranium EXploration TECHnology of the Proterozoic
Zeni. Minist`ere des Ressources Naturelles Qu´ebec, p. 35. RG 2012-02. Athabasca Basin, Saskatchewan and Alberta, vol. 588. Geological Survey of Canada,
Ho, T.K., 1995. Random decision forests. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International Bulletin, pp. 155–191. https://doi.org/10.4095/223754.
Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition. Montr´eal, pp. 278–282. https:// Sagi, O., Rokach, L., 2018. Ensemble learning: a survey. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Data Min.
doi.org/10.1109/ICDAR.1995.598994. Knowl. Discov. 8 (4), e1249. https://doi.org/10.1002/widm.1249.
Hoffman, P.F., 1988. United plates of America, the birth of a craton: early Proterozoic Saskatchewan Geological Survey, 2018. Resource Map of Saskatchewan, 2018 Edition.
assembly and growth of Laurentia. Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 16, 543–603. Saskatchewan Ministry of the Economy, Saskatchewan Geological Survey,
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ea.16.050188.002551. Miscellaneous. Report 2018-1.
James, D.T., Connelly, J.N., Wasteneys, H.A., Kilfoil, G.J., 1996. Paleoproterozoic Van Rooyen, R.C., Elsenbroek, J.H., Balt, T.O., 2004. Regional Geochemical Map Series,
lithotectonic divisions of the southeastern Churchill Province, western Labrador. 1:1,000,000, vol. 2528. Council for Geosciences, Pretoria, p. 2.
Can. J. Earth Sci. 33, 216–230. https://doi.org/10.1139/e96-019. Wardle, R.J., James, D.T., Scott, D.J., Hall, J., 2002. The southeastern Churchill
James, D.T., Dunning, G.R., 2000. U–Pb geochronological constraints for Province: synthesis of a Paleoproterozoic transpressional orogeny. Can. J. Earth Sci.
Paleoproterozoic evolution of the Core zone, southeastern Churchill province, 39, 639–663. https://doi.org/10.1139/e02-004.
northeastern Laurentia. Precambrian Res. 103, 31–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/ Yeo, G.M., Delaney, G., 2007. The wollaston supergroup, stratigraphy and metallogeny
S0301-9268(00)00074-7. of a paleoproterozoic wilson cycle in the trans-hudson orogen, saskatchewan. In:
Jeanneret, P., Gondlaves, P., Durand, C., Trap, P., Marquer, D., Quirt, D., Ledru, P., 2016. Jefferson, C., Delaney, G. (Eds.), EXTECH IV: Geology and Uranium EXploration
Tectono-metamorphic evolution of the pre-athabasca basement within the TECHnology of the Proterozoic Athabasca Basin, Saskatchewan and Alberta, vol.
wollaston-mudjatik transition zone, saskatchewan. Can. J. Earth Sci. 53, 231–259. 588. Geological Survey of Canada, Bulletin, pp. 89–117. https://doi.org/10.4095/
https://doi.org/10.1139/cjes-2015-0136. 223746.
Kotsiantis, S.B., 2014. Integrating global and local application of naive bayes classifier. Zajac, I.S., 2015. John jambor’s contributions to the mineralogy of the Strange Lake
Int. Arab J. Inf. Technol. 11 (3), 300–307. peralkaline complex, quebec–labrador, Canada. Can. Mineral. 53, 885–894. https://
Kirkwood, C., Cave, M., Beamish, D., Grebby, S., Ferreira, A., 2016. A machine learning doi.org/10.3749/canmin.1400051.
approach to geochemical mapping. J. Geochem. Explor. 167, 49–61. https://doi. Zhang, S.E., Bourdeau, J.E., Nwaila, G.T., Corrigan, D., 2022. Towards a fully data-driven
org/10.1016/j.gexplo.2016.05.003. prospectivity mapping methodology: a case study of the Southeastern Churchill
Lebel, D., 2020. Geological Survey of Canada 8.0: mapping the journey towards Province, Qu´ebec and Labrador. Artif. Intell. Geosci. 2, 128–147. https://doi.org/
predictive geoscience. In: Hill, P.R., Lebel, D., Hitzman, M., Smelror, M., 10.1016/j.aiig.2022.02.002.
Thorleifson, H. (Eds.), The Changing Role of Geological Surveys. The Geological Zhang, S.E., Nwaila, G.T., Bourdeau, J.E., Ashwal, L.D., 2021a. Machine learning-based
Society, London, Special Publication, pp. 49–69. https://doi.org/10.1144/SP499- prediction of trace element concentrations using data from the Karoo large igneous
2019-79. province and its application in prospectivity mapping. Artif. Intell. Geosci. 2, 60–75.
McClenaghan, M.B., Paulen, R.C., Kjarsgaard, I.M., 2019. Rare metal indicator minerals https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiig.2021.11.002.
in bedrock and till at the Strange Lake peralkaline complex, Quebec and Labrador, Zhang, S.E., Nwaila, G.T., Tolmay, L.C., Frimmel, H.E., Bourdeau, J.E., 2021b.
Canada. Can. J. Earth Sci. 56 (8), 857–869. https://doi.org/10.1139/cjes-2018- Integration of machine learning algorithms with gompertz curves and kriging to
0299. estimate resources in gold deposits. Nat. Resour. Res. 30, 39–56. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11053-020-09750-z.
100