Array17(2023)100266
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/array
Automatic optimization model of transmission line based on GIS and
genetic algorithm
Yuancun Qina,1, Zhaozheng Lib,1, Jieyu Dingc, Fei Zhaod,*, Ming Mengd
aYunnan Appraisal Center for Ecological and Environmental Engineering, Kunming 650228, China
bInstitute of International Rivers and Eco-Security, Yunnan University, Kunming 650500, China
cSchool of Resources and Environmental Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China
dSchool of Earth Sciences, Yunnan University, Kunming 650500, China
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: At present, the planning of transmission lines mainly relies on human decision-making and lacks intelligence.
Transmission line This paper combines the advantages of GIS in processing spatial data with the advantages of genetic algorithm to
Path optimization explore the optimization method of transmission line planning. The combination of GIS and genetic algorithm
GIS
can minimize the interference of human factors and quickly solve the path planning problem of transmission
Genetic algorithm
lines. According to the theoretical model of genetic algorithm, this study constructs the transmission line opti-
mization model based on genetic algorithm, and realizes the Add-ins plug-in development of the transmission
line planning model based on genetic algorithm with the help of C # language. Taking 500 kV overhead
transmission line about 150 km from Jiantang Substation (starting point) in Shangri-La County to Tai’ an
Substation (ending point) in Lijiang as an example, two groups of experiments are designed under the conditions
of considering traffic single factor and comprehensive multi-factor respectively. It is obtained that the path
optimization effect of genetic algorithm is the best under the condition of comprehensive multi-factor, which
proves the rationality and superiority of the model constructed in this study.
1. Introduction problem of transmission lines. At present, there are few studies on this
problem [7–10]. It is representative that the improved ant colony al-
Genetic algorithm is a method to search the optimal solution by gorithm is combined with GIS, and the distance unit is taken as the cost
simulating the natural evolution process. This algorithm converts the condition of transmission line construction, which automatically gives
solving process of the problem into the process of crossover and muta- the reasonable planning of power grid transmission lines in short dis-
tion of chromosome genes in similar biological evolution, and can tance [11]. The grid value searched by this scheme is converted from the
quickly obtain better optimization results when solving complex cost index, which will change with the change of geographical and time
combinatorial optimization problems. Therefore, it is widely used in conditions, and is uncertain, so there are shortcomings. This study will
optimal transmission, path planning and other fields. consider the geographical conditions of natural formation (such as
The current transmission line planning mainly relies on experienced topography, rivers and lakes, nature reserves, floating ice, meteorology,
professionals through map data and field survey, which requires a lot of seismic belt, etc.) and social conditions of artificial formation (such as
time and material costs. GIS can obtain and analyze the data related to transportation, land use types, regional planning, etc.). These factors
the region such as topography, meteorological environment and land determine the difficulty of reasonable planning of power grid path and
use types, which is helpful to solve the problems such as location se- the construction cost of transmission lines. The shortest path is not
lection and path optimization [1–6]. But it lacks intelligence and needs necessarily the most reasonable path, and seeking the most reasonable
leadership and decision-making. path is the purpose of this study.
The combination of GIS and genetic algorithm can minimize the In this paper, the geographical factors and human factors that affect
interference of human factors and quickly solve the path planning the transmission line planning are graded and quantified, and then
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: vwobai@163.com (F. Zhao).
1 Yuancun Qin and Zhaozheng Li as co-first authors，These authors contributed equally to this work.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2022.100266
Received 21 November 2022; Accepted 5 December 2022
Availableonline7December2022
2590-0056/©2022TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierInc.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).Y. Qin et al. A r r a y17(2023)100266
weighted according to the importance, and then transformed into the design specification⟫ [12], combined with the regional characteristics of
grid cost value. The genetic algorithm is used to construct the path Yunnan design index system as shown in Table 1.
optimization model that conforms to the characteristics of power grid
transmission line planning. Combined with GIS, the Add-ins plug-in 2.1.2. Determination of index weights by analytic hierarchy process
module is developed by C# and ArcObjects components on ArcGIS Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) is a comprehensive evaluation
platform. Taking the whole process of about 150 km 500 kV trans- method combining qualitative and quantitative analysis of influencing
mission line planning from Jiantang substation in Shangri-La to Tai ’ an factors. According to the opinions of power grid experts, the judgment
substation in Lijiang as an example, two groups of conditions and two matrix of each factor is obtained, and the importance weights of
algorithms of power grid line planning experiments are carried out. One different target schemes or factors are obtained, as shown in Table 2.
group only considers the single factor cost of traffic. The other group
considers the comprehensive cost after the superposition of multiple 2.2. Transmission line planning model based on genetic algorithm
influencing factors, and uses the genetic algorithm model constructed in
this paper and Dijkstra algorithm in ArcGIS to plan the transmission line Genetic Algorithm (GA) embodies the ’ survival of the fittest, sur-
path. It is concluded that the path optimized by genetic algorithm is the vival of the fittest ’ evolutionary rules in the algorithm [13], the popu-
best when considering various factors. lation iteration based on genetic selection, crossover, mutation
operation, from each generation update to obtain better groups, and
2. Transmission line optimization model based on genetic finally get the optimal solution to meet the requirements. Transmission
algorithm line planning is to find an optimal path or the closest optimal solution.
The optimal solution here is the problem that requires solutions in
The optimization model is divided into two parts (Fig. 1). The first theory or in the equation. Refer to the existing transmission line selec-
part is the establishment of the evaluation index system and the deter- tion method [14].The idea is as follows:
mination of the weight. Then, the genetic algorithm is used to develop The first step is to encode the path for genetic operation;
the Add-ins plug-in of the transmission line planning model, and the In the second step, generate the path initial solution, each initial
plug-in is used for actual planning. solution represents a planning line, get a set of initial population, so that
the algorithm began to search;
The third step, combined with the requirements of transmission line
2.1. Evaluation index system of transmission line planning selection, considering its target requirements, scientific design fitness
function;
2.1.1. Establishment of index system The fourth step is to design genetic operators that are convenient for
Transmission line path planning area is divided into grids. In the solving and optimizing transmission lines;
area, the influence factors involved are transformed into cost to repre- The last step, output the optimal path.
sent, and the influence degree of each influence factor is determined.
After superposition, the cost value falls into each grid, so that all grids in 2.2.1. Coding strategy
the planning area have grid values. The transmission line is simplified as a line segment composed of a
Transmission path planning needs to be fully considered, and strive series of points, which are located on the vertical lines perpendicular to
to maximize the economic benefits of the scheme. At the same time, it the SE of the line segment. The solution required for the transmission
also needs to consider the safety and stability of the line, the conve- line planning is a line that knows the optimal starting and ending points.
nience of engineering construction and maintenance and the environ- Therefore, the coordinates of each point (xS, yS), (X1, Y1), (X2, Y2) …
mental friendliness. Therefore, it is necessary to comprehensively (Xn, Yn), (xE, yE) can be used as linear genes. The lines composed of
consider the topographic and geological conditions, traffic, land use, these genes are chromosomes or individuals to be solved. Due to the
disaster points, mining areas, military areas, important facilities, nature complex conditions and large amount of calculation involved in solving
reserves, scenic spots and urban planning areas and other factors, and transmission lines, the genetic operator will be designed by a
classify and quantify the factors and indicators affecting the line plan- knowledge-based operator. The operator is not only a numerical
ning. In this paper, 500 kV overhead transmission line planning as an expression but also carries spatial and attribute information, so the
example, according to the ⟪100 kV–750 kV overhead transmission line floating-point coding method is used to encode genes. Floating-point
coding is easy to design knowledge-based genetic operators for special
problems, and can deal with decision variables with complex con-
straints. It can represent a larger number, obtain higher precision values,
and improve the efficiency of the algorithm.
2.2.2. Generation of initial populations
When the genetic algorithm is applied to the optimization of trans-
mission lines, it is first necessary to construct individuals with alleles, so
as to construct the plane linear model of transmission lines suitable for
solving (Fig. 2).
The study area is divided by a regular grid of a certain size. It is
assumed that point S (XS, YS) is the starting point of the line and point E
(XE, YE) is the end point of the line. It is assumed that the generation of
the line does not produce a backturning curve. Connect the line segment
SE, and divide the line segment SE into N equal parts at a certain dis-
tance, (x1, y1). (x2, y2), …, (xn, yn) are equally spaced points on the
line. Make the vertical lines L1、L2 ….Ln of SE through the equally
spaced points. Thus, the line optimization process of the transmission
line is transformed into finding the location of the intersection points
with the line on each vertical line. For example, randomly select points
Fig. 1. Experiment process. (X1, Y1), (X2, Y2) …, (Xn, Yn), connect these points successively from
2Y. Qin et al. A r r a y17(2023)100266
Table 1
500 kV transmission line path selection index system.
500 kV transmission Avoid factors habitation, adverse geological zone, disaster hotspots, mining area, protected areas, scenic spot and so on
line selection The indicator influence index factor Indicator factor grading score
index system system of non- factor 1 2 3 4 5
avoidance factor terrain Elevation (1/ 1000–1500 m 1500m–3500 m 3500m–5000 m >5000 m
3)
altitude 0–20 m 20–150 m More than 150 m
difference
(1/3)
Slope (1/3) 0–5◦ 5–15◦ 15–25◦ 25–35◦ More than
35◦
land use land-use type Unused grassland, garden woodland residential land, water area
wasteland cultivated land
Traffic Distance 40–3000 m 3000–6000 m 6000–9000 m 9000–12000 m ≤40 m or
from road ≥12000 m
Icing Icing hazard Slightly ice- Lightly ice- Moderately ice Heavy icing
level covered areas covered areas covered areas (6–9 areas (>9 mm)
(0–3 mm) (3–6 mm) mm)
Filthy Pollution I II III IV
hazard level
seismic Seismic ≤VI VII VIII ≥IX
intensity intensity
grade
Note: The score is 0 when the icing danger level is free icing areas (0 mm).
Table 2
Impact factor weight judgment matrix.
Factor tearrain land use Traffic Filthy Icing seismic intensity weight
Terrain 1 3 1 3 3 3 0.291
land use 1/3 1 1/4 1/2 3 1/2 0.088
Traffic 1 4 1 4 3 3 0.320
Filthy 1/3 2 1/4 1 1 1/2 0.092
Icing 1/3 1/3 1/3 1 1 1/2 0.072
seismic intensity 1/3 2 1/3 2 2 1 0.137
n∈[1,2,⋯,n],m∈[1,2,⋯,m] (1)
The selection of random points on the vertical line is the key to
generate lines. According to the basic requirements of transmission line
selection, this model is not in the avoidance area, as shown in Fig. 3 (a).
The initial line generation method is as follows: Firstly, connect the stop
point S and E to generate the line segment SE between the two points,
and take the equidistant point set (x1, y1), (x2, y2), …, (xn, yn) on the
line segment according to a certain distance dm, then generate the
vertical line L1, L2, …, Ln of the line segment through the equidistant
point, and finally take any point in the value range of the vertical line,
which cannot be in the avoidance zone. The value range of the vertical
line segment can be determined by the research range or by setting the
corridor range of a certain distance. Combining the point sets and the
starting and ending points on each vertical line is an initial individual
λ1=(XS, YS), (X11, Y11), (X21, Y21), …, (Xn1, Yn1), (XE, YE). Similarly,
an initial population P(0) is generated according to this process which
composed of m individuals λ1,λ2, …,λm.
2.2.3. Construction of fitness function
Fig. 2. Transmission line plane model.
The fitness function plays a decisive role in the evolution of genetic
the starting point (xS, yS) to the end point (xE, yE) to form an initial line. algorithm and finding the optimal solution. Theoretically, it is consid-
Initial population is composed of a series of initial routes, let λ be a ered that the shortest line segment between two points is the optimal, as
route composed of a set of points, P(0) is the initial population, n is the shown in the SE line segment in Fig. 3. However, the planning and se-
number of equally spaced points, m is the population size, then the lection of transmission lines cannot only consider the goal of the shortest
initial population can be expressed as line, because the complex terrain makes it difficult to construct and
P(0)=(λ ,λ,⋯,λ ) maintain the lines between two points, and it is also possible to cross the
1 m
terrain of ecologically sensitive areas, lakes or cliffs. In this way, the
⎧ ⎫
⎪⎪⎨[(x S,y S),(x 11,y 11),(x 21,y 21),⋯,(x n1,y n1),(x E,y E)], ⎪⎪⎬ planned lines will be more expensive or impossible to construct in terms
[(x ,y ),(x ,y ),(x ,y ),⋯,(x ,y ),(x ,y )], of construction and maintenance. The optimization problem in this
= S S 12 12 22 22 n2 n2 E E
⎪⎪⎩⋯, ⎪⎪⎭ study is to find the optimal transmission line. Since the line is composed
[(x S,y S),(x 1m,y 1m),(x 2m,y 2m),⋯,(x nm,y nm),(x E,y E)], of points, the points can be regarded as the set of the best points found on
3Y. Qin et al. A r r a y17(2023)100266
Fig. 3. Genetic model,(a) Initial line generation,(b) Parent individuals before crossover,(c) Subbands generated after a sigle crossover,(d) Parent individuals before
mutation,(e) Subbands generated after a sigle mutation,(f) Generate new individuals after improving mutation.
the L1, L2, …, Ln vertical lines passing through the equidistant points on lines λi, λj in the group, and compare their fitness values. The higher
SE. The optimization problem of transmission line planning is regarded fitness value F is retained and then the subsequent genetic operation is
as the problem of minimizing the total cost of the line, and the influence carried out, and the lower is directly eliminated.
factors involved are transformed into cost to represent. The cost value is
dropped into each grid, and the points along the line are selected ac- (2) Cross
cording to a certain accuracy (the model is selected according to the grid
size of the layer) to obtain the cost value of the grid corresponding to the The design of the crossover operator is similar to that in binary
point. The grid cost value carried by these points is the grid cost passed coding, The superior genes are retained to the offspring through cross-
by the line, and the sum of points is the total cost of the line. The lower over. In transmission line planning, that is to say, the lines passing
the total cost of the line, the better the target. According to the principle through the low cost segments are retained while the high cost regional
of the lowest total line cost, the fitness function is defined as: segments are abandoned. The operation of single-point crossing is
/ shown in Fig. 3(b) and (c). Randomly select two linear individuals in the
∑N (cid:0) )
F=1 value x g,y g (2) population λi and λj to obtain the coding of their linear point sets,
1 λ =[(x ,y ),(X ,Y ),(X ,Y )…(X ,Y ),(x ,y )]
i S S 1i 1i 2i 2i ni ni E E
In the formula, N =[l/D], g∈[1,2 … N], l is the length of λ of the [ (cid:0) ) (cid:0) ) (cid:0) ) ]
transmission line, D is the size of the grid, and N is the number of points λ j= (x S,y S), X 1j,Y 1j , X 2j,Y 2j … X nj,Y nj ,(x E,y E) (3)
along the route. Value (xg,yg) is the raster cost value corresponding to
Random generation of a mutation point k = random[1,n], Genes
the point taken along the road.
from the two fathers are then swapped at the point of mutation to create
a new individual:
2.2.4. Genetic operator design
[ (cid:0) ) (cid:0) ) ]
λ′ i= (x S,y S),(X 1i,Y 1i),(X 2i,Y 2i)…(X ki,Y ki), X(k+1)j,Y(k+1)j … X nj,Y
nj
,(x E,y E)
(1) Selection
[ (cid:0) ) (cid:0) ) (cid:0) ) (cid:0) )
In this paper, the selection strategy of random competition is adop-
λ′ j= (x S,y S), ]X 1j,Y
1j
, X 2j,Y
2j
… X kj,Y
kj
, X(k+1)i,Y(k+1)i …(X ni,Y ni),
ted. A pair of individuals are randomly selected at each time, and then (x E,y E)
the two individuals are allowed to compete. The better individuals enter (4)
the next generation, and the inferior individuals are directly eliminated.
This not only ensures that the better individual can be inherited, but also
(3) Variation
retains the diversity of the population, and it is easier to evolve to the
optimal solution. In this model, the individual fitness value F is used for
Mutation operation is to change the value of the gene site. The mu-
random competitive selection. The operation is to randomly select two
4Y. Qin et al. A r r a y17(2023)100266
tation operator design of transmission line profile is similar to binary influence factor obtained after preprocessing. According to the existing
code mutation, which regards the point set that constitutes the profile as research, when the DEM resolution is 150 m, the calculation time effi-
gene, and the mutation operation is to carry out mutation on these point ciency is higher and the loss of terrain information is less [15]. There-
sets. Mutation not only increases the diversity of the population, but also fore, the grid resolution of each layer is set to 150 m.
evolves to produce individuals that avoid high cost zones. Fig. 3 (d)–(c)
is the schematic of linear single-point variation. The idea is to randomly 3.4. Experiment and analysis of transmission line path optimization based
select a parent individual in the population and randomly generate a on genetic algorithm
point k =random[1,n] with a mutation location on the individual. On
the vertical line Lk that the random point k(xk,yk) passes through, a In order to explore the robustness of the genetic algorithm model
point (x’ki,y’ki) that is not in the avoidance area is randomly generated. constructed in this paper, as well as the selection and optimization of the
Then change the point (xki,yki) on the original mutation site to the overhead transmission line path, two algorithms are selected for path
changed point (x’ki,y’ki). Thus the mutation operation is completed to optimization experiments under different conditions. The starting point
obtain a new individual: of the experimental line is Jiantang substation, and the end point is
λ′ i=[ (x S,y S),(X 1i,Y 1i),(X 2i,Y 2i)…(cid:0) X′ ki,Y k′ i) …(X ni,Y ni),(x E,y E)] (5) T toa i c’a an
rr
s yu b os ut ta t ti won o. gT rh oe
u
g pe sn oe ft ic
e
xa plg eo rir mith em
nt
sa n cd
o
nD si ij dk es rtr ina
g
a l tg ho er i sth inm
g
la er e
fa
u cs te od
r
However, the mutation of a single point is often unable to generate a influence and multi-factor comprehensive influence of traffic. ArcGIS is
new individual line that completely bypasses the high-cost region, and 10.2 version.
the mutation position is very abrupt, which makes it difficult for genetic
operation to search for the optimal solution. Therefore, in order to make 3.4.1. Experiment 1: consider only traffic path optimization
the algorithm converge to the optimal solution better, this paper im-
proves the mutation operation, as shown in Fig. 3 (f). The improved ① Optimization of transmission line path by genetic algorithm.
mutation operator design is to randomly generate two points S =
random[k-r,k] and E =random[k,k +r] on both sides of the mutation bit When only the traffic factor is considered, the pre-processed road
k with a certain step size in the range of r (the points here are calculated score needs to be processed again. The avoidance area in the road score
as equally spaced points). If the starting and ending points S and E are in map is assigned as “9999′′to facilitate genetic operation. The probability
the range of the inclusion of R value, then S =random[1,k], E =random of crossover and mutation is set by referring to literature [16], and the
[k,k +d]; Connect the point (Xsi,Ysi) on the vertical line Ls over S to the parameter setting is shown in Table 3.
point (X’ki,Y’ki) after mutation, A new individual λ′i is formed by
connecting the constructed line point (Xei,Yei) on the vertical line Le ② Dijkstra algorithm is used to optimize the path of transmission
over the point e and the mutated point (X’ki,Y’ki), lines.
[ ( )
λ′ i= (x S,y S),(X 1i,Y 1i),(X 2i,Y 2i),⋯,(X si,Y si), X (′ s+1)i,Y (′ s+1)i , The path analysis function of ArcGIS is realized based on Dijkstra
algorithm. Therefore, referring to the technical route of existing
(cid:0) ) ( ) ]
⋯, X k′ i,Y k′ i ,⋯, X (′ e(cid:0)1)i,Y (′ e(cid:0)1)i ,(X ei,Y ei),⋯,(X ni,Y ni)(x E,y E) (6) r ae ns ae la yr sc ish inli t Ae rr ca Gtu Ir Se . [17,18], we can directly optimize the cost path
The line formed in this way is relatively flat, and can better avoid the
3.4.2. Experiment 2: path optimization considering synthesis factors
high cost area.
On the basis of Table 1, the weight value of each influencing factor is
obtained by analytic hierarchy process, and the path optimization under
3. Example experiment analysis
the comprehensive factor is carried out after the comprehensive cost is
calculated by grid superposition.
3.1. Overview of the study area
① The path optimization of the genetic algorithm takes into account
The study area is concentrated in the northwest of Yunnan Province,
the comprehensive cost, and the parameters are set according to
which shows the terrain characteristics of Yunnan Province. The area is
Table 4.
less suitable for planning ultra-high voltage transmission lines and has
② Dijkstra algorithm considers the path optimization of compre-
typical characteristics. The planning object is about 150 km 500 kV
hensive cost, which is consistent with the method ② in Experi-
overhead transmission line from Jiantang substation (starting point) to
ment 1, and finally obtains the optimization path of
Taian substation (ending point) in Shangri-La county.
comprehensive cost.
3.2. The implementation of the model algorithm
After considering the comprehensive cost, the transmission line path
optimized by the two algorithms is shown in Fig. 5. From the graph, it
In this study, the ArcGIS desktop application program of ESRI Cor-
can be seen that the two paths bypass the avoidance area and distribute
poration was adopted as the host program of the plug-in, combined with
in the low cost area. It shows that the designed genetic algorithm model
its ArcObjects object-oriented component library, using C# as the
is reasonable and feasible and has robustness.
development language, and developed the Add-Ins plug-in of the
transmission line path planning model of genetic algorithm under the
3.5. Result analysis of optimization path
Windows operating system.
3.5.1. Results and data analysis
3.3. Data preprocessing Fig. 6 shows the comparison between the four optimized paths and
the established lines. Set the constructed path as scheme I, the optimized
The main work of data preprocessing includes: raster data correction, path of the genetic algorithm and Dijkstra algorithm considering the
thematic electronic map data and satellite image data preparation, comprehensive cost are respectively the II and the III, and the optimized
unified coordinate system, etc. According to Table 1, the impact factors path of the genetic algorithm and Dijkstra algorithm considering the
were reclassified and assigned according to scores of 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. traffic factor are respectively the IV and the V.
Fig. 4 series is the grid layer of 500 kV transmission line path Comparison results of the five schemes are shown in Table 5. The
5Y. Qin et al. A r r a y17(2023)100266
Fig. 4. Study area impact factor rating value map (1) Elevation value map,(2) High difference value map,(3) Slope value map,(4) Topographic features value map,(5)
Landuse value map,(6) Road value map,(7) Seismic intensity value map,(8) Ice value map,(9) Pullution rating value map,(10) Avoidance area distribution map.
Table 3
Parameter setting for genetic algorithm operation considering traffic factor.
Cost grid Corridor width (m) Interval (m) Number of lines Genetic algebra Crossover probability Mutation probability Mutation step (m)
Road score chart.Tif 10000 500 200 100 0.5 0.1 30
Table 4
Parameter setting for genetic algorithm operation considering integrated cost.
Cost grid Corridor width (m) Interval (m) Number of lines Genetic algebra Crossover probability Mutation probability Mutation step (m)
cost.Tif 10000 500 200 100 0.5 0.1 30
“line comprehensive cost value” refers to the total cost value (dimen- 2) Comparing the comprehensive cost value of the line: III <IV <II <V
sionless) obtained from starting point to end point by summing up the < I, it can be seen that after the algorithm optimization, the
line length of each scheme in ArcGIS10.2 according to the program of comprehensive cost value of the path decreases significantly, which
“element to raster” → “raster to point” → “value extraction to point” on is far lower than the initial cost value.
the comprehensive cost layer. This value is used to uniformly measure 3) By comparing the number of grids in the avoidance area (one): III <
the cost value of each line in the comprehensive cost. The function of IV <II <V <I, it shows that the existing path is unreasonable in
“Comprehensive cost value of the line after removing the contained planning. After genetic algorithm optimization, the path can well
collision avoidance zone grid” is to remove the large-value grid value bypass the avoidance area, while the optimization results of Dijkstra
with the collision avoidance zone grid value set as “9999′′, so as to algorithm have certain defects and cannot well bypass the avoidance
facilitate the comparison of the comprehensive cost difference of the line area.
without the collision avoidance zone. 4) The comprehensive cost values of the lines after removing the grid of
According to the result table of the path scheme in Table 5, it can be the avoidance zone in the lines are compared: III <V <IV <II <I.
seen that: Except III, the comprehensive cost values of other schemes are
similar, indicating that the genetic algorithm is intelligent.
1) Comparing the total length of each path: II <IV <V <III <I, it can
be seen that the path length optimized by the two algorithms is In summary, we can make the following judgments:
shorter than that of the built line, and the path length obtained by
Scheme II is the shortest.
6Y. Qin et al. A r r a y17(2023)100266
Fig. 5. Optimization path considering comprehensive cost. Fig. 6. Comparison diagram of test results and built path.
1) There are some unreasonable places in the planning of the built lines,
such as passing through more shelter zones, which will affect the Table 5
surrounding environment; the path length and cost are too high, Comparison table of path plan results.
resulting in unnecessary waste. Comparative I II III IV V
2) When the genetic algorithm constructed in this study is used to
length (m) 147904 143112 147930 143382 144645
optimize the transmission line path, it can effectively bypass the Cost 251790 31736 11429 21694 121662
shelter areas such as residential areas, disaster points, nature re- Number of avoidance 25 3 1 2 12
serves, scenic spots and ecologically sensitive areas, making the zones
Cost (no-avoidance zone) 1815 1739 1430 1696 1674
power grid path more reasonable, reducing the impact on human life
and ecological environment, and helping people and nature coexist
harmoniously. However, the Dijkstra algorithm cannot achieve the 2) It can be seen from the ① area that the path optimized by genetic
above results. algorithm (scheme II) chooses to cross the mountain, completely
3) The optimization of genetic algorithm can shorten the length of bypassing the urban area and considering the development trend of
power grid path, reduce the comprehensive cost, improve the the town; as far as possible to avoid human activity areas, the impact
economy and practicability of transmission lines, and reduce un- on the lives of local residents will be minimized and planning is
necessary waste of human and material resources. reasonable; III basically bypasses the town, but the planning path
4) When only the single factor of traffic is considered, the results ob- through the flat area, waste a lot of land for development, unfavor-
tained by either genetic algorithm or Dijkstra algorithm are not ideal. able for the future development of the town, the lack of long-term
Therefore, we need to establish a comprehensive and objective vision; both programmes IV and V chose to cross directly through
evaluation system. Under the premise of synthesizing many factors, urban areas, which affected the daily lives of the local population
the algorithm is applied to optimize, so as to obtain the reasonable and resulted in unnecessary cost increases and lack of rationality.
results as far as possible. 3) It can be seen from region ② that the main difference between the
four optimized lines and the built lines is the selection of river
3.5.2. Combined image analysis crossing points (Jinsha River). The lines optimized by genetic algo-
rithm cross the river near Tai ‘an substation (which is reasonable in
1) The overall trend of the four optimized lines is similar to that of the theory). The river crossing point of Dijkstra optimization path is in
existing lines, and the differences are mainly concentrated in local the north of II, and the river crossing point of the built line is the
areas, such as ①② area in Fig. 6. furthest from Tai ‘an substation. The selection of river crossing points
needs to consider the river width and certain engineering
7Y. Qin et al. A r r a y17(2023)100266
construction requirements. According to the actual situation, the Projects [grant number 202001BB050030].
river crossing point of I is reasonable.
References
According to the comprehensive calculation data results and the
image analysis of the path, the path chosen by this experiment scheme II [1] Sun Hong. Path optimization of ultra-high voltage transmission lines based on GIS
technologys. Hohhot: Inner Mongolia Normal University; 2010.
is the optimal one in theory, it can effectively bypass the avoidance zone,
[2] Singh S, Behera SN. Development of GIS-based optimization method for selection
can search a path with the shortest length and can weigh the factors that of transportation routes in municipal solid waste management. Adv Waste Manag
have an impact on the transmission line planning, and it is relatively 2019 pp 319–331.
[3] Du P, Hu H. Optimization of tourism route planning algo-rithm for forest wetland
scientific and reasonable.
based on GIS. J Discrete Math Sci Cryptogr 2018;21(2):283–8.
[4] Yuan Shaoxiong, Huang Guangqing, Chen Wenyin, et al. Site-scale constructed
4. Conclusion wetland site selection based on GIS spatial analysis. Geospat Inf 2018;105(5). 9,54-
57,66.
[5] Liu Xiaolin, Wen Chengjie, Zhang Jiangshui. Analysis of spatial location selection
In order to realize automatic power grid path optimization, this study using GIS. Geomat Spatial Inf Technol 2010;33(4):19–21.
combines genetic algorithm with GIS, and designs a transmission line [6] Yang Jia. Research on road route optimization system based on GIS platform.
optimization model based on genetic algorithm by analyzing the Chongqing: Chongqing Jiaotong University; 2008.
[7] Xu Ting, Sheng Ming, Lou Cairong. Logistics distribution center’s allocation based
application of GIS and artificial intelligence in the field of power grid on GIS and ant colony algorithm. Sci Surv Mapp 2010;33(4):19–21.
path optimization. At the same time, the Add-ins plug-in development of [8] Li Xiaobao, Yang Kuo, Hu Mengjin. Evaluation of transmission line path scheme
transmission line planning model based on genetic algorithm is realized based on GIS and fuzzy analytic hierarchy process. Electr Eng Abstr 2017;(3):26–9.
[9] Torre TDL, Feltes JW, Roman TGS, et al. De-regulation, privatization, and
by C # language. Taking 500 kV overhead transmission line about 150
competition: transmission planning under uncertainty. IEEE Trans Power Syst
km from Jiantang Substation (starting point) to Tai ’an Substation 2002;14(2):460–5.
(ending point) in Shangri-La County as the planning object, the model is [10] Ye Yali. Research and development of highway intelligent line selection and
decision support system. Xian: Chang’an University; 2010.
verified and discussed, and the rationality and superiority of the model
[11] Su Haifeng, Yang Kuo, Liang Zhirui. Automatic route planning of transmission lines
are finally proved. based on improved ant colony algorithm. Electr Power Automat Equipm 2016;36
Due to the lack of knowledge about power grid erection, there may (12):109–14.
[12] Code for design of 110kV~750kV overhead transmission line: GB50545-2010.
be omissions in considering the cost problem, so the evaluation index
Beijing: China Planning Press; 2010.
system of transmission lines can be further discussed. At the same time, [13] Aventze T. Intelligent GIS: location decisions and strategic planning. J Retailing
because the analytic hierarchy process depends on expert opinions to Consum Serv 1998;50(5):257–8.
[14] Chen Zhongwei, Peng Kangbo, Huang Lai, Wang Yichao, Wu Xiaozhong, Xie Jiang,
determine the weight, the next step can refer to the idea of multi-
Hou Yiling, Xiao Zhenfeng, Civilization transmission line selection methods and
objective genetic algorithm to optimize, reduce the influence of systems [P].Beijing : CN107480373B, 2020-11-06.
human subjectivity on the experiment, improve intelligence. [15] Xie Fei. Research on the relationship between integrated terrain complexity and
Finally, the following results are obtained: grid resolution based on DEM. Kuming: Yunnan University; 2017.
[16] Dijk SV, Thierens D, Berg MD. Using genetic algorithms for solving hard problems
in GIS. GeoInformatica 2002;6(4):381–413.
(1) The transmission line optimization model based on genetic al- [17] Zhou Qinfang. Research on the selection of 500kV transmission line path based on
gorithm is designed. According to the structural characteristics of GIS-Tuoba hydropower station to Taian substation as example. Kuming: Yunnan
University; 2012.
genetic algorithm, the floating-point coding method is used to
[18] Zhang Chao, Li Xin, Zhao Xiangwei. Transmission line path planning based on
design the appropriate genetic operator, and the planar linear improved Dijkstra algorithm [J].Power Surv Design, 2022 (02): 1-5.DOI :
model of transmission line is constructed after considering the 10.13500/j.dlkcsj.issn1671-9913.2022.02.001.
generation mode of initial population and the fitness function.
Develop the Add-ins plug-in. With the help of C # language, a
Yuancun Qin received a M.S. degree from Yunnan University,
plug-in that can realize the optimization function of genetic al-
Kunming, China, in 2018. She is currently an engineer in
gorithm is developed. Yunnan Appraisal Center for Ecological and Environmental
(2) The superiority of genetic algorithm in power grid path optimi- Engineering, Kunming, China. Her main research interests
include geospatial information applications and intelligent
zation is discussed with examples. Taking 500 kV overhead
GIS. Email: qycynkm@163.com
transmission line about 150 km from Jiantang Substation (start-
ing point) in Shangri-La County to Tai’ an Substation (ending
point) in Lijiang as an example, two groups of experiments are
designed under the conditions of considering traffic single factor
and comprehensive multi-factor respectively. It is obtained that
the path optimization effect of genetic algorithm is the best under
the condition of comprehensive multi-factor, which proves the
rationality and superiority of the model constructed in this study.
Zhaozheng Li received a B.S. degree from Yunnan University,
Declaration of competing interest Kunming, China, in 2021. He is currently pursuing an M.S.
degree at School of International Institute of River and
Ecological Security, Yunnan University, Kunming, China. His
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial main research interests include spatial data matching and
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence pattern recognition. Email: a769268749@163.com
the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China [grant number 51467022], the Yunnan Fundamental Research
8Y. Qin et al. A r r a y17(2023)100266
JieYu Ding received a B.S. degree from Yunnan University, Ming Meng is currently a professor in the School of Earth Sci-
Kunming, China, in 2020. She is currently pursuing an M.S. ences, Yunnan University, Kunming, China. His main research
degree in cartography and geography information system at interests include spatial information visualization, intelligent
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. Her research interests geographic information system and intelligent map. E-mail:
include geographic information visualization. Email: mengming586@sina.com
jadeding@whu.edu.cn
Fei Zhao received a Ph.D. from Wuhan University, Wuhan,
China, in 2012. He is currently an associate professor in the
School of Earth Sciences, Yunnan University, Kunming, China.
His main research interests include cartography and spatial
analysis. Email: vwobai@163.com
9