ArtificialIntelligenceintheLifeSciences2(2022)100037
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ailsci
Viewpoint
Deep learning of protein–ligand interactions—Remembering the actors
Jürgen Bajorath
Department of Life Science Informatics and Data Science, B-IT, LIMES Program Unit Chemical Biology and Medicinal Chemistry, Rheinische
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität, Friedrich-Hirzebruch-Allee 5/6, Bonn D-53115, Germany
One of the intensely investigated applications of deep learning in findings indicate that CNN and GNN affinity prediction models might
drug design is the prediction of compound potency (affinity) based upon primarily memorize training data information from complex structures,
three-dimensional structures of protein–ligand complexes. Consistently rather than learn specific protein–ligand interactions. Similar memo-
accurate ligand binding affinity predictions would represent a milestone rization effects have been observed for deep compound classification
event for the field and put structure-based ligand design on a new level. models displaying limited generalization ability [10] .
For this purpose, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [1] with voxel The most recent scientifically rigorous investigation of protein–
representations of ligand binding sites as well as graph neural networks ligand interaction models has employed an MPNN architecture to learn
(GNNs) [2] including message passing neural networks (MPNNs) [3] are from different graph representations of protein–ligand complexes from
applied. GNNs/MPNNs learn directly from molecular graphs. In general, PDBbind [ 4 ]. For a given complex structure, Rognan and colleagues gen-
MPNNs are becoming increasingly popular for representation learning in erated graph representations of the ligand (L), protein (P), and protein–
chemistry. For affinity predictions using GNNs/MPNNs, protein–ligand ligand interactions (I) using differently defined nodes and edges, as illus-
complex structures are translated into interaction graphs. trated in Fig. 1 [ 4 ]. For example, protein binding site residues were rep-
Employing these neural network architectures, a variety of affin- resented as nodes annotated with interaction-relevant chemical prop-
ity prediction models based on protein–ligand complex structures have erty information. Furthermore, in interaction graphs, different nodes
been reported in recent years (for an up-to-date summary see, for ex- representing interaction sites formed by ligand atoms and binding site
ample, [ 4 ]). Graph-based models often achieve high correlation (at the residues, respectively, were combined and edges accounted for non-
80% level) between predicted and experimentally observed ligand bind- covalent short-range interactions (annotated with their distances).
ing affinities and prediction accuracy within or close to an order of From the three graph representations, seven training constellations
magnitude (10-fold). These observations have triggered recurrent as- were generated including the individual graphs (L, P, I), three pair-
sumptions or claims that deep neural networks are capable of learn- wise combinations (PL, PI, LI), and the triplet (PLI) combining all three
ing specific protein–ligand interactions. However, this would also im- graphs. This framework was used to derive different MPNN models,
ply that the resulting models would capture, in one way or another, which were then applied to predict the ligand affinities of complex struc-
the physico-chemical foundations of these interactions. Might this be tures from different test sets. Predictive performance was quantified by
conceivable by learning from molecular interaction graphs? Regardless calculating Pearson’s correlation coefficient (RP) for predicted and ex-
of such principal considerations, several observations suggest that the perimental affinities as well as the root mean square error (RMSE).
promising results reported for various protein–ligand affinity prediction The models were generally found to be predictive, with RP values of
models should be considered with caution. above 0.6 and maximally ∼0.8. Importantly, models based only on the
An essential resource for protein–ligand complex structures with L or P graphs were more accurate than the model trained on the inter-
available experimental affinity measurements is the PDBbind database action graph (I model), with the ligand-based model performing best.
[5] that provides the basis for many investigations. However, the num- The accuracy was further increased by the PL model, the performance
ber of high-resolution structures with high-quality affinity measure- of which was very similar to the PLI model trained on all three graphs.
ments is limited and the composition of PDBbind is biased towards pre- These findings conclusively demonstrated that affinity predictions using
ferred crystallographic targets [ 6 , 7 ], which naturally limits the gener- MPNNs did not depend on learning specific protein–ligand interactions,
alization ability of predictive models derived from these data. This is let alone the underlying physics.
consistent with the finding that different training and test data parti- The authors further extended their analysis. For example, the MPNN
tions can significantly influence model performance [6] . On the other models were found to display limited generalization potential, but were
hand, training sets of varying size often yield similarly accurate protein– insensitive to reduction of training set size. In addition, simple “memo-
ligand interaction models [ 4 ], which is counterintuitive for deep learn- rization baseline ”models were generated predicting the affinity of com-
ing. It has also been observed that CNN models trained only on protein plexes based on averages for the most similar ligands or proteins from
or ligand representations can approach or meet the accuracy of models the training set. Interestingly, the ligand baseline model nearly reached
trained on protein–ligand interaction data [6–9] . Taken together, these the accuracy of the I model. Taken together, these results showed that
E-mail address: bajorath@bit.uni-bonn.de
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ailsci.2022.100037
Received 25 May 2022; Accepted 25 May 2022
Available online 26 May 2022
2667-3185/©2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ )J. Bajorath Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100037
Fig. 1. Graph representations of proteins, ligands, and their interactions . Based on the structure of a protein–ligand complex, graph representations encode the
( A ) ligand (red nodes, edges), ( B ) protein’s ligand binding site (blue nodes, edges), and ( C ) protein–ligand interactions (blue/red nodes, edges). For further details,
see Volkov et al. [ 4 ]. The figure was reprinted with permission from Volkov, M.; Turk, J.A.; Drizard, N.; Martin, N.; Hoffmann, B.; Gaston-Mathé; Rognan, D. On the
frustration to predict binding affinities from protein-ligand structures with deep neural networks. J Med Chem 2022. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.2c00487. in press.
Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society.
2J. Bajorath Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100037
the affinity predictions were mostly driven by memorizing patterns from References
training data, with ligand similarity relationships playing a major role.
The authors also showed that increasing the complexity of interaction [1] He K, Zhang X, Ren S, Sun J. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition; 2016.
graphs by including more interactions over longer distances further in-
p. 770–8 .
creased the prediction accuracy of the I model. This observation led [2] Xiong J, Xiong Z, Chen K, Jiang H, Zheng M. Graph neural networks for automated
to the conclusion that an interaction model deprived of additional pro- de novo drug design. Drug Discov Today 2021;26:1382–93 .
tein or ligand context information should provide a reasonable basis for
[3] Gilmer J, Schoenholz SS, Riley PF, Vinyals O, Dahl GE. Neural message passing for
quantum chemistry. In: Proceedings of the 34th international conference on machine
further exploring the ability of deep neural networks to learn protein– learning, 70; 2017. p. 1263–72 .
ligand interactions. Like others before, the authors also emphasized that [4] Volkov M., Turk J.A., Drizard N., Martin N., Hoffmann B., Gaston M., Rognan D.,
the current sparsity of high-quality and diverse protein–ligand com- On the frustration to predict binding affinities from protein-ligand structures with
deep neural networks. J Med Chem 2022. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.2c00487, in
plex data represents a major limitation for the further development of press.
protein–ligand affinity models. [5] Wang R, Fang X, Lu Y, Wang S. The PDBbind database: collection of binding affinities
For compound potency predictions and structure-based drug design, for protein-ligand complexes with known three-dimensional structures. J Med Chem
2004;47:2977–80 .
insights provided by careful studies like the one by Rognan and col-
[6] Yang J, Shen C, Huang N. Predicting or pretending: artificial intelligence for pro-
leagues are of fundamental relevance, putting putative methodological tein-ligand interactions lack of sufficiently large and unbiased datasets. Front Phar-
advances into scientific perspective, raising awareness of potential over- macol 2020;11:69 .
[7] Wang J, Dokholyan NVYuel. Improving the generalizability of structure-free com-
interpretation, and balancing expectations. Moreover, for deep learning
pound-protein interaction prediction. J Chem Inf Model 2022;62:463–71 .
across the life sciences, investigations demonstrating limitations of cur- [8] Chen L, Cruz A, Ramsey S, Dickson CJ, Duca JS, Hornak V, Koes DR, Kurtzman T.
rent approaches and potential caveats or misinterpretation of results are Hidden bias in the DUD-E dataset leads to misleading performance of deep learning
in structure-based virtual screening. PLoS One 2019;14:e0220113 .
as important for the further development of the field as methodological
[9] Nguyen T, Le H, Quinn TP, Nguyen T, Le TD, Venkatesh S. GraphDTA: pre-
breakthroughs. dicting drug-target binding affinity with graph neural networks. Bioinformatics
2021;37:1140–7 .
Declaration of Competing Interest
[10] Wallach I, Heifets A. Most ligand-based classification benchmarks reward memo-
rization rather than generalization. J Chem Inf Model 2018;58:916–32 .
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
3