Array15(2022)100223
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/array
Novel group handover mechanism for Cooperative and Coordinated Mobile
Femtocells technology in railway environment
Rand Raheem*, Aboubaker Lasebae, Ali Raheem
Faculty of Science & Technology, Middlesex University, London, United Kingdom
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: Recently, the Mobile Femto (MF) Technology has been debated in many research papers to be a promising so-
High-speed trains lution that will dominate future networks. This small cell technology plays a major role in supporting and
Mobile femto maintaining network connectivity, enhancing the communication service as well as user experience for pas-
Donor eNB
sengers in High-Speed Trains (HSTs) environments. Within the railway environment, there are many MF
Group handover
Technologies placed on HSTs to enhance the train passengers’ internet experience. Those users are more affected
Signalling
by the high penetration loss, path loss, dropped signals, and the unnecessary number of Handovers (HOs).
Mobility management
Performance analysis Therefore, it is more appropriate to serve those mobile users by the in-train femtocell technology than being
Railways environment connected to the outside Access Points (APs) or Base Stations (BSs). Hence, having a series of MFs (called
Cooperative and Coordinated MFs -CCMF) installed inside the train carriages has been seen to be a promising
solution for train environments and future networks. The CCMF Technologies establish Backhaul (BH) links with
the serving mother BS (DeNB). However, one of the main drawbacks in such an environment is the frequent and
unnecessary number of HO procedures for the MFs and train passengers. Thus, this paper proposes an efficient
Group HO mechanism that will improve signal connection and mitigate the impact of a signal outage when train
carriages move from one serving cell to another. Unlike most work that uses Fixed Femtocell (FF) architecture,
this work uses MF architecture. The achieved results via Matlab simulator show that the proposed HO scheme has
achieved less outage probability of 0.055 when the distance between the MF and mobile users is less than 10 m
compared to the signal outage probability of the conventional HO scheme. More results have shown that the
dropping calls probability has been reduced when mobile users are connected to the MF compared to the direct
transmission from the eNB. That is in turn has have improved the call duration of mobile UEs and reduced the
dropping calls probability for mobile users who are connected to the MF compared to eNB direct connection UEs.
1. Introduction main reasons is the well-shielded structure with coated windows that
leads to high penetration loss for in and out signals. Thus, all User
Being connected to wireless broadband services has risen signifi- Equipments (UEs) who are inside public transportation and connected to
cantly with the high deployment of smartphones, tablets, and other the serving eNB via the wireless links are suffering from high Vehicular
mobile devices. Passengers on public transportation such as buses, Penetration Loss (VPL) and signal degradation.
trams, and trains make intensive use of these devices and they require to Hence, HSTs are considered to be one of the vital transportation
be connected to the internet from anywhere and at any time with any- services in which they save time and effort. That is without neglecting
thing. Studies have shown that mobile broadband users are growing the fact that HSTs are used all over the world such as Europe, China, and
10% annually and it was 120 million in 2019. On the other hand, Japan with speeds exceeds 350 km/h [2]. As mentioned earlier, those
forecasts have shown that smartphone users will reach 7.4 billion in well-shield carriages are more exposed to Doppler frequency shift, high
2025 which is 83% of all mobile subscriptions [1]. VPL up to 40 dB, and low HO success rate. Therefore, many projects and
However, passengers on public transportation especially HST pas- studies have proven that there is a persistent need for seamless wireless
sengers are the most who are suffering from the inadequacy of Quality of connectivity and better QoS to be provided to train passengers in
Service (QoS). There are so many reasons behind that and one of the high-speed environments and future networks [3]. Hence,
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: R.H.Raheem@mdx.ac.uk (R. Raheem), A.Lasebae@mdx.ac.uk (A. Lasebae), aliraheem@outlook.com (A. Raheem).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2022.100223
Received 22 December 2021; Accepted 3 July 2022
Availableonline9July2022
2590-0056/Crown Copyright © 2022 Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).R. Raheem et al. A r r a y15(2022)100223
Fig. 1. CCMFs scenario in HST environments.
Communication Enablers for Twenty-twenty (2020) Information Society outage probability by proposing a mechanism that reduces the number
(METIS) is considered to be one of the few projects in which it has of unnecessary HOs, HO failure, and link outage probability. The pre-
considered the deployment of small cells technology inside HST envi- vious solutions have considered the mobile relay which is limited in
ronments to improve vehicular UEs wireless connectivity. terms of the served number of UEs as well as the issue of the severe
Therefore, this paper discusses the deployment of the CCMF Tech- interference between the different mobile relays and Macrocells.
nologies inside the HSTs environment to improve train passengers’ Whereas, a HO authentication mechanism has been proposed by Ref. [8]
signal quality and network connectivity. The CCMFs technology is seen in which it has reduced the HO time delay while providing strong
to be a promising solution to overcome the issue of coverage in the high- authentication for served mobile users. The previous study provided
speed railway environment. The CCMF technology is installed on trams, complex solution that relies on authentication keys to control the
trains, and other large-spatial-dimensions vehicles. Hence Fig. 1 shows number of HOs in HSTs environment. In contrast, the author in Ref. [9]
that the CCMFs themselves are connected with each other via the CrX2 has introduced a new HO scheme by proposing two antennas in order to
coordination interface. Having such a connection allows the high opti- minimise communication interruption during the HO procedure. In this
misation of group HO procedure and BH link connections in which both study, the design and performance analysis of the proposed handover
will be investigated further in this work. That is essential to maintain the process was relatively based on an ideal model with perfect channel
data and voice services of mobile users inside the high-speed railway estimation. However, it is well known that accurate channel information
environment. is difficult to obtain in broadband wireless systems for HST. Therefore,
While the main contribution of this paper is proposing an efficient this study was limited as it did not show how the channel estimation
mobility management scheme in which it improves and supports errors affect the performance of handover schemes. Another study has
seamless mobility between the DeNB and other small cells technologies. improved the HO scheme based on choosing the appropriate power
In this framework, new rules are presented to support the HO procedure allocation [10]. The author has shown that the proposed scheme was
and link adaptation that maintain signal strength and quality during able to reduce the HO delay at the cost of capacity where the capacity
UEs’ mobility together with the presented small cells mobility. One of showed slight degradation.
these rules is the group HO procedure for all train passengers when As mentioned earlier, most of the previous work that is concerned
handing over the small cell technology from one Macrocell to another. with improving the QoS of UEs inside HSTs was based on using mobile
Several challenges will be considered here; the HO process, resource relays in such an environment [11,12], and [13]. Other studies have
allocation, dropping calls probability, outage probability, and other UEs discussed the challenges the mobile relay face in HSTs environment such
performance requirements. as interference and HO-related problems [14,15].
However, in our previous work, the installation of the MF inside
2. Literature review public transportation specifically buses has been discussed [16]. It was
shown that the deployment of the MF inside buses has greatly improved
There are many studies that tackled the mobile relay HO procedure the vehicular UE experience compared to other solutions. That is
but very few studies tackled the MF HO procedure. In Ref. [5] the author because MF works on licensed spectrum, increases network capacity,
has discussed the mobile relay HO issue in HSTs environment. The and shows better load sharing, voice quality and data/multimedia
proposed HO scheme relies on the fact that the train travels in fixed experience. More work has been done to discuss mobility and interfer-
paths. The author has shown that the proposed measurement procedure ence management for those vehicular cells [17,18]. In terms of mobility
was able to shorten the HO time. However, the proposed solution is management, a group handover procedure has been introduced for all
limited to the fact that is not capable to survive in crowded train stations bus passengers when the bus moves from the coverage area of one eNB
where UEs need to quickly be attached and de-attached from the mobile to another. The proposed solution has discussed the main concept of this
relays after the users get on or get off the train. Other studies have HO scheme which is resource allocation. That is because handing over
focused on enhancing the HO performance of mobile relay by reducing the MF itself from one eNB to another does not only dependent on the
the HO outage probability in HSTs environment [6]. In addition, the MF’s direction, speed, and channels availability but also on the Band-
author in Ref. [7] has focused on minimising the HO failure and link width (BW) and Physical Resource Blocks (PRBs) availability in the next
2R. Raheem et al. A r r a y15(2022)100223
Fig. 2. Train movement between different coverage areas.
Fig. 3. Handing over MF from the S DeNB to the T DeNB.
cell. The proposed solution has shown a significant reduction in the one another through the CrX2 coordination interface. This allows high
signal outage probability, dropping and blocking calls probability, and optimisation for the group HO procedure and BH link connection. In our
improved the throughput of future networks in general. However, the previous work, the interference issue has been investigated between the
previous studies were limited to the fact that the Doppler shift and speed Macrocells and the deployed small cells technologies. The proposed
on bus environment are completely different from the ones on the HSTs interference scheme was based on controlling the eNB and the MF
environment. The latter is more exposed to signal degradation because transmission power, controlling the MF location distribution, and using
of the high speed of trains, which requires sufficient maintenance for the frequency reuse scheme for the worst-case scenarios. However, the
UE’s signal especially when the coverage area changes rapidly in such an mobility aspect which is the HO process for the CCMF has not been
environment. Therefore, installing the MF in HSTs environment will be tackled yet. That is why it will be discussed in this research paper.
further discussed in this research paper. Hence, this work will investigate the Group HO strategy and its impact
In contrast, in Ref. [4] we have introduced the CCMF technology in in maintaining the UEs connectivity when the installed MF moves out of
which has improved the signal quality and UEs internet experience in- the coverage area of the serving eNB to the target eNB.
side high-speed railways environment. The achieved results have shown
great improvement after deploying the CCMF technology in comparison 3. Handover scenario and system model
to other technologies. The CCMFs is implemented on trains and other
large-spatial-dimensions vehicles where those CCMFs are connected to It has already been mentioned that maintaining connectivity inside
3R. Raheem et al. A r r a y15(2022)100223
Fig. 4. UEs group handover.
Fig. 5. Proposed HO mechanism for MF with its attached UEs.
4R. Raheem et al. A r r a y15(2022)100223
the HST environment is the most challenging issue especially with the will be dropped, thus, the MF UEs connections will be dropped too. That
increased demand on using such a transportation system. Thus, pas- is clearly due to the lack of a sufficient number of the PRB to accom-
sengers can be connected to those small cells technologies to enhance modate the coming MF and its UEs. It is to be mentioned that there is
their signal quality and mitigate the number of dropped and blocked always a possibility for the train passengers to be connected individually
connections. However, there is another challenge with this environment to the T DeNB via the direct links. Those UEs will be considered as new
which is when this small cell moves out of the coverage area of the UEs, thus, they can establish a connection with any close by BS (MF or T
serving eNB to another. The issue can be summarised by Fig. 2: DeNB). The CAC in this case checks whether the MF coverage in the
However, to solve the above issue there are a couple of possible so- same carriage is still available or not. If the MF coverage is available,
lutions that can be discussed here. The first solution is by adjusting the then the MF is the first choice to connect the UE to; otherwise, T DeNB is
transmission power [19]. The approach states that when the train enters the second option to be connected to. However, this connection quality
the overlapped area between the serving eNB and the target eNB, the depends on three important factors; the VPL, path loss, and the speed of
serving eNB increases its transmission power to delay the HO process. the train. That means the connection might not last long due to the
Using such an approach helps to avoid premature HOs until the train previous three factors that can be could cause issues.
becomes closer to the target eNB. Hence, the target eNB starts increasing On the other hand, Fig. 5 illustrates in detail the HO procedure when
its transmission power while in turn, the serving eNB starts decreasing the MF is handed over from the S DeNB to the T DeNB. That is only when
its transmission power in order to let the HO process take its place the number of the available PRB at the T DeNB is adequate to accom-
smoothly. modate the coming MF with all its attached UEs. In this case, the HO
On the other hand, the efficient coverage planning of the base sta- procedure is going through three main phases as shown below; the
tions along the railway track is an important aspect in order to improve preparation phase, the execution phase, and finally the completion
the HO operation [20]. That can be facilitated by placing the MF on train phase. Those three main phases themselves include sub-procedures
carriages in their correct locations. Since the available transmission within them in order to ensure the success of the HO procedure in
power of the mother BS is assumed to be 46dBm for the inter-BS spacing HST environments. Thus, before moving into the first phase, it is to be
of 3.8 km [18], studies have proven that the required power to achieve a pointed that the S DeNB configures and triggers the MF Measurements
sufficient QoS by train passengers can exceed the 46dBm especially Control where in turn the MF replays with the required Measurements
when the train is near the cell boundary. That is almost halfway between Report to complete the HO procedure successfully.
consecutive BSs. Thus, when the coverage planning process takes into
account the presence of the MF together with the QoS requirements, this 3.1. HO preparation phase
can significantly enhance the signal strength and internet connection for
train passengers. That can only be done when the presented MFs are In this phase the S DeNB makes the decision based on the previous
positioned in their right locations which can reduce the power con- measurement reports and whether it is required to perform the HO
sumption at the BS end. procedures of the leaving MF towards the T DeNB. The S DeNB sends a
Hence, the CCMF is seen to be a promising solution for the high- HO Request message to the T DeNB. Once the request is received, the T
speed railway environments and future networks. As a result, it is DeNB performs an admission control check to decide whether to accept
required to understand the HO mechanism and call maintenance of train the coming MF or not. If yes, the T DeNB acknowledges the receipt of the
passengers when the train moves away from the serving eNB to the HO Request message after reserving the required resources for the
target eNB as shown in Fig. 3. Thus, main challenge of offering seamless coming MF. This phase does not end up here as the S DeND needs to
HO in HST and future networks is data forwarding from the Serving inform the corresponding MF to hand over by the Radio Resource
DeNB (S DeNB) to the Target DeNB (T DeNB). As mentioned earlier, Control (RRC) connection reconfiguration command.
Fig. 3 illustrates the fact that when the MF leaves the coverage area of
the S DeNB towards the T DeNB the HO process will take a place here to 3.2. HO execution phase
maintain the vehicular UEs’ connection who are connected to the
serving the MF. Once the RRC connection reconfiguration command is received, all
However, the HO process, in this case, will not be per UE but it will required information for the BH link reconfiguration between the MF
be per a group of UEs connected to the serving MF as shown in Fig. 4. and the T DeNB can be applied. At this phase, the MF is detached from
The group HO procedure is established when the signal strength –Signal the S DeNB and synchronise to the T DeNB. Thus, all packets will be
to Interference and Noise Ratio (SINR) between the MF and the S DeNB forwarded from the S DeNB to the T DeNB. The RRC connection
drops. The chosen T DeNB depends on the train path which is usually reconfiguration command between the MF and the T DeNB is completed
fixed in a known direction. Added to that, the success of the HO pro- where the MF notifies the T DeNB about that via a message. This phase
cedure depends on a very important factor that cannot be neglected cannot be completed unless the required PRBs at the T DeNB are suffi-
which is the availability of the PRB in the T DeNB. That means, in order cient to meet the MF with its UEs needs.
to ensure the success of the HO procedure, the required PRB in the T
DeNB must satisfy the handed-over MF with all its UEs. If that cannot be 3.3. HO completion phase
met, then the Call Admission Control (CAC) in this case allows the
release of some of the BW from the existing direct links of the Macro UEs To end up the HO procedure, the T DeNB sends a path switch request
by degrading their QoS to serve the coming MF. That is because the CAC message to the Mobility Management Entity (MME). That is essential
policy permits the release of the required BW for the coming MF request because the MME communicates with the Serving Gateway (SGW) of the
where in turn the system allows a maximum (BWT DeNB – BWrequired) MF to switch the routing path. Once that is confirmed, the MME of the
reduction of the BW to complete the HO procedure and meet the coming MF acknowledges the path switch request via a message to the T-DeNB.
MF resource demands. This HO procedure is accompanied by a group After receiving the path switch request Ack by the T DeNB, the latest
HO for all UEs inside the train carriage who are attached to the serving sends a UE context release message to the S DeNB to release all S DeNB
MF. resources and make them available for other MFs and UEs. However, it is
In contrast, it is worth mentioning if the minimum required BW at to be mentioned that the path switch of the MF is accompanied by a path
the T DeNB is inadequate even after releasing some BW from the direct switch of all UEs attached to the corresponding MF. In turn, the SGW
links of the existing Macro UEs, then the connection of the coming MF forwards all UEs’ packets to the T DeNB which is necessary to maintain
5R. Raheem et al. A r r a y15(2022)100223
their internet connection and signal quality. previously mentioned factors that could severely affect the received
Hence, the MF HO algorithm in HSTs environment has been repre- SINR, a signal outage in the system could happen which is known as
sented below: outage probability. Nowadays, systems’ main concern is to reduce the
Algorithm. 1. MF HO with UEs Group HO outage probability and its impact by maintaining the train passengers’
signal connections. Therefore, studying the impact of the proposed HO
1: Detect the MF SINR
2: Request Measurement Report procedure with the use of the CCMF in HSTs environment is the main
3: S DeNB Initiates MF HO Request target of this section. Fig. 6 illustrates the possible HO scenario of our
4: T DeNB Receives MF HO Request proposed approach in which it is required to maintain train passengers’
5: If BW available at T DeNB≥MF BW required then connection inside train carriages. As it can be shown below, the common
6: Accept MF HO at the T DeNB
7: T DeNB BW total=T DeNB BW total+MF BW required case is to have the train passengers connected to the installed MF inside
8: Forward MF packets to the T DeNB the train carriages. However, when the MF leaves the coverage area of
9: Path switch of The MF to the T DeNB the S DeNB towards the T DeNB, some worst-case scenarios are to reject
10: Group UE HO of MF served UE to the T DeNB the HO if the PRBs at the T DeNB are not adequate to accommodate the
11: S DeNB Releases the occupied MF Resources
coming MF with its attached mobile users. Thus, the attached mobile
12: Else if BW available at T DeNB < MF BW required then
13: Reject MF HO users to the serving MF as highlighted in Fig. 6 will have the option to be
14: MF UEs detect the T DeNB signal connected individually to the T DeNB to maintain their signal connec-
15: Initiate a HO to the T DeNB tion and resist the outage probability that could take a place in this case.
16: T DeNB Receives UE HO Request
Hence, it is essential to calculate the outage probability of the pro-
17: If BW available at T DeNB≥UE BW Required then
posed HO mechanism and understand its impact in maintaining the
18: Accept UE HO at the T DeNB
19: T DeNB BW total=T DeNB BW total+UE BW required signal connection of served UEs. There are two main cases here; when a
20: Path switch of The UE to the T DeNB successful Group HO procedure takes a place and when a rejection from
21: Else if BW available at T DeNB < UE BW required then the T DeNB takes a place. The outage probability of a single-hop system
22: Reject UE HO
when there is a direct link between the T DeNB and the train passenger
24: If UE signal degrades again then
25: Drop call UE can be given by the following equation:
2 26 7: : EnE dn d P outage DIrect= P received(SINR Rx≤ SINR threshold DIrect) (1)
28: End
The above case is when there is a HO rejection for the MF with all its
attached UEs due to the inadequacy of the PRBs at the T DeNB. Thus, the
UE will try to establish a HO connection with the T DeNB as its required
After the detailed illustration of the MF HO with all its attached UEs
(group HO), now it is vital to study and evaluate the impact of the
BW is less than the MF required BW. The SINRRx, in this case, is the SINR
proposed HO scheme on served train passengers. The proposed HO
at the receiver Rx, where the received power at Rx is represented by
procedure will be evaluated based on the occurrence of the signal outage
Preceived. The SINR threshold at the receiver Rx is represented by SINR-
and dropping calls probabilities in the HSTs environment. threshold_Direct which is required to support a given target rate over the
direct link between the T DeNB and the vehicular UE. It is important to
set an SINR threshold because it will give a clear indication of when the
4. System level
system will be outage. Hence, the SINR threshold of the direct trans-
mission between the T DeNB and the train passenger (UE) can be
To create a clear evaluation and comparison between the achieved
calculated by the following equation as shown in our previous work
results, a mathematical model will be presented taking into account the
[16]:
transmission power of both, eNBs and MFs. Thus, there are two main
transmission links here; the direct link between the eNB and the train SINR threshold Direct= SINR threshold MF= 2R(cid:0) 1 (2)
passenger, and the access link between the MF and the train passenger.
R is the required transmission Rate at the UE’s end and it is in bits/
As mentioned earlier, the HST environment is more exposed to the high
sec. Likewise, the MF in the CCMF system supports the full-duplex
path-loss, VPL, fading, and weak SINR at the receiver end that is unable
transmission mode of the DeNB. As a result, at the Femtocell end,
to support the required transmission rate of R bits per sec. Due to the
both the BH and the access links are supporting a given end-to-end R
Fig. 6. Worst case scenario HO procedure.
6R. Raheem et al. A r r a y15(2022)100223
b Di et Ns/ Bse
.
c
H
a et
n
t ch ee
,
r te hc ee siv ae mr
e
R Sx Ie Nn Rd ts him rei sla hr
o
t ldo t wh ie
l
ld bir ee c ut
s
etr da n fosm
r
bis os ti ho n
c
afr so em
s.
the DroppingCallProbability(P min, L)=P(P r(L)< P min) (8)
The transmitter Tx has an average transmission power of Px, likewise, Hence, it can be concluded that that HST UEs are more likely exposed
when the receiver Rx is at distance y from the transmitter Tx itself has a to HO failure and dropping calls probabilities due to their high-speed
received power given by Precieved which can be calculated by [16]. and continuous movement from one coverage area to another.
P recieved(y)=P xL(y)ψ|G|2 (3)
5. Results and discussion
The equation terms can be summarised by the following; L(y) is the
path-loss when Rx is at distance y from Tx, whereas the power loss The following section represents the achieved results of the signal
caused by the shadowing is given by ψ and G is the channel gain. outage and dropping calls probabilities of mobile users inside HSTs’
Nevertheless, it is worth mentioning that both SINR thresholds of direct environment. The results will create a clear comparison between the
and access links vary according to the various QoS requirements such as signal quality of UEs who are served by either the direct link or the
the available rate R bits/sec which can be calculated via the Shannon access link transmissions. That is without neglecting the impact of the
capacity theorem as follows [16]: proposed HO procedure in the simulated environment. A Matlab simu-
lation tool has been used while Table 1 summarises the main parameters
R= BW efflog 2(1+SINR) (4)
that have been assumed in this work:
Here the BWeff represents the BW efficiency that is offered to the Fig. 7 represents the SINR value of mobile users inside and outside
served UEs while the SINR was more appropriate to be used rather than transceivers over distance. However, the SINR value in both situations is
the SNR because of the consideration of the interference aspect in this quite small because of the inter-cell interference (ICI) effect. When the
case. That is actually because of the multiple access methods in which mobile user is inside the train carriage, the SINR value is 0.69 due to the
several transmitters can send information simultaneously over a signal short distance which is up to 1 m between the mobile user and the
communication channel especially when each UE is surrounded by serving MF. On the other hand, the SINR value is 0.89 when the distance
many options to be connected to. This gives UEs the opportunity to share between the DeNB and the mobile user inside the train carriage is more
a band of frequencies that can easily cause interferences. However, an than 1 m (outside transceivers).
interferences mitigation scheme has already been discussed in our pre- In contrast, Fig. 8 compares the outage probability of our proposed
vious work [4]. HO scheme and the conventional HO scheme, taking into account the
Hence, since the SINR threshold of the direct and access links are distance gap between the transmitter and the receiver. In this work, the
equal, they both can be calculated via the following equation: outage probability of train passengers has been taken into account
( ) where the outage threshold value has been set to 6 dB. The achieved
R
SINR threshold Direct= SINR threshold MF= 2BWeff(cid:0) 1 (5) results show that the outage probability of our proposed HO scheme is
very small when the distance is 10 m or less. That indicates the effec-
tiveness of the proposed HO scheme in reducing the outage probability
especially when the distance between the mobile user and the serving
Thus, the signal is outage when either the BH link or the access link is
base station is no larger than 10 m.
outage. The BH link can be outage when the T DeNB is unable to
Whereas, Fig. 9 illustrates the decrease in the outage probabilities of
accommodate the coming MF due to the inadequacy of the required
the proposed HO in comparison to the conventional HO schemes ac-
BW and PRBs. On the other hand, the access link can be outage when
cording to the outage threshold variance. The increase in the outage
the MF itself is not attached to any eNB. Both cases can be sum-
threshold led to a decrease in the outage probability. Hence, the results
marised by the following:
show that the proposed HO scheme improved the signal connection and
reduced the outage probability compared to the conventional HO
scheme.
P out=P recieved(min(SINR backhual, SINR access)< SINR threshold MF) (6) On the other hand, Fig. 10 represents the impact of distance between
Hence, if the outage probability value is high, then the number of the served UEs and the serving base stations on dropping calls proba-
dropped calls/packets is high too because of the positive correlation bility. This comparison has been created to evaluate the advantage of
between the two. Dropping calls probability is a key performance indi- being served by the installed MF inside train carriages and the impact of
cator that is used by many service providers to measure the system QoS that on reducing the issue of dropping calls probability. There are many
and the efficiency of the HO procedure. There are many other factors factors influencing the number of dropping calls probability in HSTs
that play important role in increasing the number of dropped calls and environment such as the VPL and the path-loss which has a negative
these factors can be summarised by the VPL inside train carriages, path- impact on the signal power over distance d. That makes the received
loss, and shadowing. In fact, the shadowing issue is caused by the signal power at Rx less than the minimum power threshold Pmin as in
obstacle between the transmitter and the receiver where this obstacle
absorbs the power. That is also known as penetration loss which is
common in vehicular and indoor environments. On the other hand, the Table 1
path-loss issue is caused by the dissipation of power that is radiated by Simulated parameters.
the transmitter together with the effects of the propagation channel. Used parameters Values
However, the used path-loss model in our HSTs environment scenario is
MF Carrier Frequency 1900 MHz
the Microcell non-line-of-sight (NLOS) path-loss model that is given by: MF Transmission Power 24 dBm
PL(L)=34.53+38log 10(L) (7) D Me FN HB
e
T igr han
t
smission Power 4 26
m
d Bm
SINR Threshold of Outside Transceivers 8 dB
where L is the distance between the transmitter and the receiver. SINR Threshold of MF 11 dB
However, in wireless systems, there is a target minimum received level No. of DeNBs 2
of Pmin, and whatever power below this set power threshold, the per- System BW 10 MHz
Train Speed 300 km/h
formance will be unacceptable. Thus, dropping calls probability can be
VPL 40
given by: Path-loss Model in dB PL(L)=34.53+38log 10(L)
Minimum Required rate at the UE end 2 bits per sec
7R. Raheem et al. A r r a y15(2022)100223
Fig. 7. (a) SINR of mobile users inside train vs. distance (b) SINR of outside transceviers vs. distance.
Fig. 8. Outage probability vs. distance.
Fig. 9. Outage probability vs. outage threshold.
8R. Raheem et al. A r r a y15(2022)100223
Fig. 10. Dropping calls probability vs. distance.
Fig. 11. Dropping calls probability vs. call duration.
(Pr(d) < Pmin). The results show that the MF achieves less dropping fact, calls last longer when the quality of the connection is good because
probability when the distance d between the mobile user and the serving of the strong signal between the mobile user and the serving BS. Hence
base station is less than 500 m. That is because of the reasonable short installing MF inside train carriages has a positive impact in boosting
distance between the transmitter and the receiver which makes the vehicular UEs signal connection, overcoming the path-loss issue, VPL
(Pr(d) >Pmin). However. The dropping calls probability value increases problem, and mitigating the generated interference because of the weak
after the 500 m until it reaches its maximum at 1000 m. That occurs signals.
because of the BH link variation when the installed MF inside the HSTs
environment moves closer to the edge of the serving macrocell. As a 6. Conclusion
result, the proposed HO scheme takes a place to hand over the MF from
the S DeNB to the T DeNB which is accompanied by a UEs group HO in Public transportation has dominated people’s life as people always
order to main the MF and its UEs connection. look for fast and cheap means of transportation. HSTs are considered to
In contrast, Fig. 11 demonstrates the correlation of call duration and be one of the main means of transportation in which they can serve
dropping calls probability. This correlation shows clearly that call many users and save their money and time. Providing internet connec-
duration has a positive impact on mobile users’ performance and the tion inside train carriages is the future of public transportation and
QoS. Call duration or mean call holding time represents the time in future networks. Therefore, the vehicular network is seen to be a new
which the mobile station consumes to complete a call connection h= A λ type of wireless network that made an appearance along with the
where A is a traffic intensity and λ is the call arrival rate. As a result, the development of both wireless technologies and the automotive industry.
call arrival rate varies with call duration the same way it varies with the However, the vehicular network itself comes with implications and de-
call dropping probability. That makes a conclusion that calls dropping pendencies like any other technology. Therefore, providing internet
probability decreases with the positive increase in the call duration. In connection inside train carriages via the CCMF has been seen to be a
promising solution despite the challenges accompany this solution due
9R. Raheem et al. A r r a y15(2022)100223
to the high-speed railway environment. Consequently, HO is one of the [6] Qian X, Wu H, Meng J. A dual-antenna and mobile relay station based handover in
main aspects in HSTs to guarantee the seamless connectivity and distributed antenna system for high-speed railway. In: Seventh international
conference on innovative mobile and internet services in ubiquitous computing;
communication of served UEs inside train carriages. In fact, in a high- 2013. p. 585–90. https://doi.org/10.1109/IMIS.2013.103. 2013.
speed moving CCMF environment, HO can occur more frequently, [7] Liu Z, Fan P. An effective handover scheme based on antenna selection in
therefore, providing an effective HO procedure to mitigate the outage ground–train distributed antenna systems. IEEE Trans Veh Technol 2014;63(7):
3342–50.
and dropping calls probabilities were the main target of this work. The
[8] Cao J, Ma M, Li H, Fu Y, Niu B, Li F. Trajectory prediction-based handover
proposed HO procedure considered the process of handing over the MF authentication mechanism for mobile relays in lte-a high-speed rail networks. In:
itself from one DeNB to another accompanied by a group UEs HO for all 2017 IEEE international conference on communications (ICC); 2017. p. 1–6.
[9] Tian L, Li J, Huang Y, Shi J, Zhou J. Seamless dual-link handover scheme in
attached UEs to the serving MF. The achieved results showed the
broadband wireless communication systems for high-speed rail. IEEE J Sel Area
reduction in the outage and dropping calls probabilities of the proposed Commun 2012;30(4):708–18.
HO scheme compared to the conventional HO scheme. [10] Liu Z, Zhou E, Fan P, Hao L. Tradeoff of capacity and handover performance in
high speed railway wireless communications. In: 2016 IEEE 83rd vehicular
technology conference. VTC Spring); 2016. p. 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/
Declaration of competing interests VTCSpring.2016.7504508.
[11] Van Phan V, Horneman K, Yu L, Vihriala J. Providing enhanced cellular coverage
in public transportation with smart relay systems. In: Proc. Vehicular networking
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
conference; 2010. p. 301–8.
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence [12] Li W, Zhang C, Duan X, Jia S, Liu Y, Zhang L. Performance evaluation and analysis
the work reported in this paper. on group mobility of mobile relay for LTE advanced system. Proc. Vehicular
Technol. Conf. 2012:1–5.
[13] Sui Y, Papadogiannis A, Yang W, Svensson T. Performance comparison of fixed and
Acknowledgment moving relays under co-channel interference. In: Proc. Globecom workshops. GC
Wkshps); 2012. p. 574–9.
The authors would like to thank all those who contributed to [14] Sui Y, Vihriala J, Papadogiannis A, Sternad M, Yang W, Svensson T. Moving cells: a
promising solution to boost performance for vehicular users. IEEE Commun Mag
accomplish this work. The Faculty of Science and Technology at Mid- 2013;51:62–8.
dlesex University played an important role in backing up this work until [15] Sui Y, Papadogiannis A, Svensson T. The potential of moving relays-A performance
it is completed. analysis. In: Proc. IEEE 75th vehicular technology conference. VTC Spring); 2012.
p. 1–5.
[16] Raheem R, Lasebae A, Aiash M, Loo J, H Colson R. Mobile femtocells utilisation in
References LTE vehicular environments: vehicular penetration loss elimination and
performance enhancement”. ELSEVIER Journal on Vehicular Communications;
[1] Ericsson. Ericsson mobility report. https://www.ericsson.com/mobility-report; 2017.
2019. [17] Raheem R, Lasebae A, Aiash M, Loo J, H Colson R. Interference management and
[2] Ai B, He R, Zhong Z, Guan K, Chen B, Liu P, et al. Radio wave propagation scene system optimisation for femtocells technology in LTE and future 4G/5G networks.
partitioning for high-speed rails. Hindawi, Int. J. Antennas Propag. 2012;2012:1–7. In: Advances in communications: reviews’ book series. vol. 1. Barcelona, Spain):
https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/815232. IFSA Publishing; 2017.
[3] Shift2Rail. Rails proejcts. accessed on 03/01/2021, avaliable at: http://www.shift [18] Raheem R, Lasebae A, Aiash M, Loo J. Mobility management for vehicular user
2rail.org. Equipments in LTE/mobile femtocell networks. Int J Inf Syst Serv Sect (IJISSS)
[4] Raheem R, Lasebae A, Petridis M, Raheem A. Cooperative and coordinated mobile 2017;9:60–87. https://doi.org/10.4018/ijisss.2017100105.
femtocells technology in LTE vehicular environment: mobility and interference [19] Lu Y, Xiong K, Fan P, Zhong Z, Ai B. The effect of power adjustment on handover in
management, IEEE 35th international conference on advanced information high-speed railway communication networks. IEEE Access 2017;5:26237–50.
networking and applications (AINA). Toronto, Canada: Ryerson University; 2021. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2775044.
[5] Pan M, Lin T, Chen W. An enhanced handover scheme for mobile relays in lte- [20] Yaacoub E, Alsharoa A, Ghazzai H, Alouini MS. Seven challenges for
highspeed rail networks. IEEE Trans Veh Technol 2015;64(2):743–56. https://doi. communication in modern railway systems. Front. Commun. Netw. 2021. https://
org/10.1109/TVT.2014.2322374. doi.org/10.3389/frcmn.2020.619527.
10