Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
AASRI Procedia 3 ( 2012 ) 313 – 318
2012 AASRI Conference on Modelling, Identification and Control
Numerical Simulation on the Flow State of Dross Layer in
Tundish(cid:3)
LI Chaoxiang*, LIU Biao, ZHU Shengyu(cid:3)
School of Metallurgy and Resources, Anhui University of Technology, Ma'anshan 243002, China
Abstract
In tundish, the flow state of top dross layer not only influences the oxidation of the molten steel, but also is directly
related to the floating and adsorption of inclusions, and is concerned with the entrainment of steel to micro-inclusions. In
this study, with the VOF method, the charging and normal casting processes are numerical simulated, two structural
models of tundish being created. The results demonstrate that the flow control has significant effect on the stability of
dross layer and the probability of dross entrainment. The improved structural model can effectively stabilize the dross
layer and reduce the risk of entrainment. It plays an important role on the removal of inclusions, and enhances the
cleanliness of molten steel.
©© 22001122 T Phueb Aliusthheodrs b. Pyu Ebllissehveide rb yB E.Vls.eSveieler cBti.Von. Oapnedn/ oacrc epsese urn rdeevr iCeCw B uYn-dNeCr- NreDs pliocennssieb.ility of American Applied
SSeclieecnticoen Raneds/eoarr pcehe Ir nrestviiteuwte u nder responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
Keywords: tundish, protecting dross, flow state, inclusion, numerical simulation
In recent years, on many steel sheets surface, some inclusions are detected, whose composition is the same
as the protecting dross in tundish [1]. Some researches [2] have also shown that 60% surface defects in the
ultra-low carbon steel are caused by the protecting dross entrainment. It is visible that the slab defects are
greatly due to the entrainment. Therefore, in order to improve the purity of steel and optimize the floating
process of inclusion, it is necessary to clear about the flow states of molten steel and protecting dross in
* * Corresponding author: Prof. Dr. Chaoxiang LI. Tel.: 13955583866; fax: 0555-2311571 .
E-mail address: (cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:82)(cid:91)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:35)(cid:68)(cid:75)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:81).
2212-6716 © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
doi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2012.11.050314 LI Chaoxiang et al. / AASRI Procedia 3 ( 2012 ) 313 – 318
tundish. When casting normally or replacement of a larger tundish, as a result of the strong inertia and
impulse of the steel injected from the teeming nozzle, the molten steel reverses violently. The reversal and
impact of the molten steel cannot be completely eliminated in vertical direction, despite various kinds of
slowing flow and inhibiting flow control devices. For cooling and solidifying on the top, the dross layer seems
relatively stable. However, at the interface of steel and dross, there is undercurrent simmering. In fact, the
surface flow in tundish is typical non-steady flow with moving interface. The tundish construction and high-
temperature surroundings are adverse to observing dynamic characteristics, so the numerical simulation is
particularly appropriate.
By numerical simulation, Guo Junyu, Zhang Jieyu et al [3] have researched systematically the influences
of the height of dam, the depth of weir and the distance between dam and weir on fluctuation of molten steel
in tundish. Yue Lifang et al [4] have studied the changes of the free surface and the velocity field during the
emptying and filling of the tundish. In this paper, using the VOF method, the state of top dross layer and the
flow of molten steel in tundish are simulated during the charging and continuous casting processes, two
structural models of tundish being created. The purpose is to research the distribution and flow state in the
interface. This paper provides reference on construction of tundish for the production of high purity steel.
1. Governing Equations
The volume of fluid (VOF) method is presented by American scholars Hirt & Nichols et al [5], on the basis
of the MAC method. It is a fixed grid technique designed for two or more immiscible fluids. In the VOF
model, the volume fraction of each of the fluids in each computational cell is tracked throughout the domain.
To facilitate study, the following assumptions are applied: the cooling and solidifying of the dross layer are
ignored, and the dross is considered always in the flow state.
The governing equations used in the VOF calculation are as follows:
Volume fraction equation:
a S 1 n
q a a q m m (1)
t q pq qp
q q p 1
Momentum equation:
div u div grad S (2)
t
Realizable k-
k
k ku t G G Y S (3)
t x j x x k b M k
i i k j
u t
t x j x x
j j j (4)
2
C S C C G C S
1 1 k 3 b 2 k
Where, m is mass transfer from phase p to phase q, and m is mass transfer in reverse (i.e. from phase
pq qp
q to phase p). is common variable, and can denote an unknown variable u, v, w, etc. is the generalized
diffusion coefficient. S is the generalized source term. G represents the generation of turbulent kinetic energy
k
due to the mean velocity gradients. G is the generation of kinetic energy due to buoyancy.
bLI Chaoxiang et al. / AASRI Procedia 3 ( 2012 ) 313 – 318 315
k
C 1 max 0.43, 5 in which S . C 1 and C 2 are constants. k and are the turbulent Prandtl
numbers for k represents the contribution of the fluctuating dilatation in compressible
M
turbulence to the overall dissipation. S and S are user-defined source terms. In Fluent, these values used by
k
default are constant, C 1.44, C 1.9, 1.0, 1.2.
1 2 k
2. Model Structure
In order to adjust to Fluent software, the Gambit software is used for modeling and meshing. To obtain
precise numerical results, Model scale is 1:1. The dimensions of tundish are as follows. At upper side, length
is 9036mm, width is 1668mm, and at lower side, length is 8648mm, width is 854mm. The tundish is shown a
trough, with 1100mm high. The teeming nozzle diameter is 118mm, and the one of submerged nozzle is
82mm. Due to symmetry of construction and for saving computing resources, half of tundish is as simulation
object.
Model-1 is shown in Fig. 1. Cartesian coordinate system is set up. Take the intersection of teeming nozzle
centerline and bottom of tundish as coordinate origin. Y-axis positive direction is upward, x-axis positive
direction is pointing to the right side of the tundish, and z-axis is along the width, pointing to the observer (see
Fig.1).
Fig. 1 Schematic view of tundish in Model 1
Model-2 is an improved model. On the basis of the model-1, the dam is removed. Only the retaining wall is
left and moved to the side for 300mm distance, and the retaining wall is thickened by 10mm. From the bottom
of tundish, a rectangular opening is tapped for diversion in side edge of the wall. The opening size is
80×600mm. It is shown in Fig. 2. Both walls have openings, along diagonal direction.
Fig. 2 Schematic view of tundish in Model 2316 LI Chaoxiang et al. / AASRI Procedia 3 ( 2012 ) 313 – 318
Solid wall is seen to be no-slip. The near-wall boundary layer uses the standard wall function. The entrance
is defined molten steel inlet. Assumed that the velocity is uniform distribution in cross section, the inlet
velocity is 1.406m/s at the teeming nozzle, calculated from the casting speed and slab dimensions. At the top
of model is set to pressure outlet, and reflux is set as air phase.
The calculation parameters are determined as follows:
(1) The number of multiphase is set to 3, i.e., molten steel, dross, and air.
(2) Molten steel and dross are both incompressible fluid, and air is compressible fluid.
(3) Molten steel: density is 7004.07kg/m3, and viscosity is 0.004553kg/(ms). Dross: density is 3500kg/m3,
and viscosity is 0.035kg/(ms).
(4) The dross thickness is 60mm.
3. Simulation and Analysis on Charging Process
For Model-1 and Model-2, during charging process, the location and distribution of dross are recorded,
from empty tundish to normal casting level (1100mm), as shown in Fig.3 and 4.
It can be seen from Fig. 3, with the process of charging, molten steel level increases, and the dross layer
fluctuates often. During the whole process, the concentration distribution varies erratically, particularly near
the stopper. It is mainly caused by the lower molten steel impact. Seen from Model-2 in Fig. 4, at initial
charging stage, the dross is uniformly distributed on the steel surface, and concentration is also very uniform.
Only when close to normal casting level, the dross layer near the retaining wall slightly ripples by strong
impact. Near the stopper and other regions, the dross layer is very steady and smooth.
(cid:3)
A
a
b
B
c
CLI Chaoxiang et al. / AASRI Procedia 3 ( 2012 ) 313 – 318 317
d D
Fig. 3 Flow state and concentration distribution of dross layer in Fig. 4 Flow state and concentration distribution of dross layer in
Model 1 Model 2
a,b- Time=35s, c- Time=360.9s, d- Time=572.6s a,b- Time=35s, c- Time=354.7s, d- Time=574.7s
In the case of dross flow state and concentration distribution, in Model-2 they are superior to those in
Model-1, and the dross layer is more stable. The dross stability determines the adsorption of floating
inclusions. The more stable the dross layer is, the steadier the flow is at the interface, and the better the
floating inclusions can be adsorbed. It can also be seen from Model-2, with the height of molten bath
increases, the dross near the retaining wall is shocked more seriously, and there may be an ideal bath height.
4. Simulation and Analysis on Normal Casting Process
In order to further illustrate the stability of the dross layer in the two models, the flow state of protecting
dross is simulated in normal casting process. The simulation results are demonstrated in Figs.5 and 6. The
location of screenshot is at y=1130mm, selecting the middle of the dross layer in thickness direction.
E
e
f F
Fig. 5 Volume fraction of dross layer in Model 1 Fig. 6 Volume fraction of dross layer in Model 2
e- Cloud picture, f- Contours e- Cloud picture, f- Contours
Fig. 5 presents that in Model-1, the volume fraction of dross layer is changing from time to time, especially
at the end of the tundish. This shows that even in normal continuous casting, the concentration of dross layer
changes frequently. It is certain, at the interface the steel flow produces a strong impact to dross, resulting in
dramatic variation in the concentration of the dross layer. In Fig. 5, the intensive distribution contours
illustrate that under dross layer, there is strong turbulence in molten steel, damaging the adsorption. Because
the flow at interface is unstable, floating inclusions are difficult to be adsorbed by dross. Even worse, partial
dross is entrained by molten steel and flows to the filling opening.318 LI Chaoxiang et al. / AASRI Procedia 3 ( 2012 ) 313 – 318
In contrast, Model-2 adopts flow control technology with side openings. In molten bath, molten steel form
a rotational movement in horizontal direction. It can alleviate the impulse in the vertical direction. This
follows the rotating separation principle of mechanics, and facilitates the separation of inclusions. As can be
seen from Fig. 6, in Model-2 the distribution and concentration of dross layer are very uniform and stable.
n the dross layer is very small. A potential flow core can even be
formed, with zero relative velocity between molten steel and dross layer, and becomes gathering center for
floating inclusions. The dross layer is very steady, and conducive to the adsorption of inclusions.
5. Conclusions
(1) With VOF method, the multiphase flow model can simulate the flow state of dross in tundish well.
(2) The simulation results indicate in model-1 (commonly used in two-strand slab continuous casting
tundish), due to the control flow of retaining wall and dam, in vertical direction a turbulence and its pulse are
generated. This brings about a strong impact to the dross. It is unfavorable to the adsorption of the floating
inclusions, or even dross is partly entrained along with the filling opening.
(3) In Model 2, the conventional diversion is altered, and the flow forms a rotational motion in horizontal
direction. This follows the rotating separation principle of mechanics, and facilitates the separation of
inclusions. Meanwhile, the rotational motion will not impact the top dross, maintaining the stability of the
dross layer. With zero relative velocity between molten steel and dross layer, it is very conducive for dross to
adsorb the floating inclusions. This model is very significant for the production of high purity steel.
References:
[1] ZHU Guosen, YU Huixiang, WANG Wanjun, WANG Xinhua. Study of surface defects of cold-rolled IF
steel sheet [J]. Iron and Steel, 2004, 39(4): 54-56.
[2] Originally Published by International Iron and Steel Institute, Translated by Chinese Society for Metals.
IISI Study on Clean Steel State of the Art and Process Technology in Clean Steelmaking [M]. Beijing:
Metallurgical Industry Press, 2006: 11-14.
[3] Guo Junyu, Zhang Jieyu, Ren Yanqiu. Study on free surface in tundish [J]. Steelmaking, 2000, 16(4): 34-
36, 46.
[4] YUE Lifang, REN Yanqiu. Numerical simulation of the free surface in the process of filling and emptying
of the tundish [J]. J. of Inner Mongolia University of Science and Technology, 2007, 26(1): 6-9, 13.
[5] C.W. Hirt, B.D. Nichols. Volume of fluid (VOF) method for the dynamics of free boundaries [J]. J. of
Computational Physics, 1981, 39: 201-225.