Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ailsci
Trends and challenges in chemoinformatics research in Latin America
Jazmín Miranda-Salas a, Carlos Peña-Varas b ,c , Ignacio Valenzuela Martínez b,
Dionisio A. Olmedo d, William J. Zamora e, f , i , Miguel Angel Chávez-Fumagalli g,
Daniela Q. Azevedo h, Rachel Oliveira Castilho h, Vinicius G. Maltarollo h, David Ramírez b,
José L. Medina-Franco a, ∗
a DIFACQUIM Research Group, Department of Pharmacy, School of Chemistry, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Avenida Universidad 3000, México 04510,
Mexico
b Departamento de Farmacología, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad de Concepción, Concepción 4030000, Chile
c Departamento de Ciencias de la Computación, Facultad de Ingeniería, Universidad de Concepción, Concepción 4030000, Chile
d Centro de Investigaciones Farmacognósticas de la Flora Panameña (CIFLORPAN), Apartado 0824-00178, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad de Panamá, Ciudad de
Panamá, Panamá
e CBio3 Laboratory, School of Chemistry, University of Costa Rica, San Pedro, San José, Costa Rica
f Laboratory of Computational Toxicology and Biological Testing Laboratory (LEBi), University of Costa Rica, San Pedro, San José, Costa Rica
g Computational Biology and Chemistry Research Group, Vicerrectorado de Investigación, Universidad Católica de Santa María, Arequipa 04000, Perú
h Department of Pharmaceutical Products, Faculty of Pharmacy, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio Carlos, 6627, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais
31270-901, Brazil
i Advanced Computing Lab (CNCA), National High Technology Center (CeNAT), Pavas, San José, Costa Rica
a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t
Keywords: Chemoinformatics is an independent inter-discipline with a broad impact in drug design and discovery, medicinal
Artificial intelligence chemistry, biochemistry, analytical and organic chemistry, natural products, and several other areas in chemistry.
Chemoinformatics Through collaborations, scientific exchanges, and participation in international research networks, Latin Amer-
Drug discovery
ican scientists have contributed to the development of this subject. The aim of this perspective is to discuss
Education
the status and progress of the chemoinformatic discipline in Latin America. We team up to provide an author´s
Open science
perspective on the topics that have been investigated and published over the past twelve years, collaborations be-
tween Latin America researchers and others worldwide, contributions to open-access chemoinformatic tools such
as web servers, and educational-related resources and events, such as scientific conferences. We conclude that
linking and fostering collaboration within each nation as well as among other Latin American nations and glob-
ally is made possible by open science and the democratization of science. We also outline strategic actions that
can boost the development and practice of chemoinformatic in the region and enhance the interaction between
Latin American countries and the rest of the world.
1. Introduction use sometimes depends on the geographical region. To illustrate this
fact, Fig. 1 shows a parallel coordinate plot with the number of pa-
Chemoinformatics is an independent discipline that has a broad pers in PubMed in the period 2010–2022 with the keywords “Chemi-
range of applications in chemistry [ 1 , 2 ]. It has several formal def- cal informatics ”, “Cheminformatics ”, “Chemoinformatics ”, and “Chem
initions, for example, “All concepts and methods that are designed to informatics. ” The figure shows an overall increase in the number of
interface theoretical and experimental efforts involving small molecules ” publications since 2010 with a slight decrease in 2022. Among the two
[3] or “Chemoinformatics is a generic term that encompasses the design, frequently used terms in conferences and scientific journals, “chemoin-
creation, organization, management, retrieval, analysis, dissemination, vi- formatics ” shows a slightly larger number of publications than those
sualization, and use of chemical information ” [4] . Other definitions are containing the term “cheminformatics ”. It should be emphasized that
collectively discussed elsewhere [1] . It should be noted that several the community has not yet agreed on a single title, unlike the closely
terms published in the literature refer to the same discipline and its related discipline "bioinformatics," whose term has mostly been ap-
Abbreviations: AI, artificial intelligence; LaNAPDB, Latin American Natural Product Database; QSAR, quantitative structure-activity relationships; SAMPL, statis-
tical assessment of the modeling of proteins and ligands; VOS, visualization of similarity.
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: medinajl@unam.mx (J.L. Medina-Franco) .
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ailsci.2023.100077
Received 6 May 2023; Received in revised form 10 May 2023; Accepted 10 May 2023
Available online 11 May 2023
2667-3185/©2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ )J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077
Fig. 1. Number of papers in PubMed in the period 2010–2022 with the keywords “Chemical informatics ”, “Cheminformatics ”, “Chemoinformatics ”, and “Chem
informatics. ”The figure shows the trend in usage of the most common terms that refers to the same discipline.
Fig. 2. The number of papers in PubMed with the keywords “Chemical informatics ”, “Cheminformatics ”, “Chemoinformatics ”, and “Chem informatics ”plus another
relevant keyword by year.
proved [2] . For the remainder of this manuscript, we will use the term sign (3764), and machine learning (2402) (see also Fig. S1 in the Sup-
“chemoinformatics. ” plementary material).
Regardless of the specific term, since the first applications of The principle of open science has been used to build many of the cur-
chemoinformatics in the ’50s, the discipline has been evolving and ex- rent chemoinformatics applications and developments, including teach-
panding rapidly with the most recent and large advances in artificial in- ing aids and research tools. Undoubtedly, the democratization of science
telligence (AI) [5] . Chemoinformatics has a broad range of applications would increase global connections between research teams and students
across different research areas, including drug design, chemogenomics, of all academic levels. It would be easier to make connections between
and systems pharmacology, as well as medicinal, analytical, organic, various geographical zones when you are aware of the study that has
cosmetic, food, and inorganic chemistry [6–8] , and natural product re- been done in various worldwide places. To this goal, in 2018 we pre-
search [ 6 , 9 ], among others. To illustrate the applications of chemoin- sented a viewpoint on chemical informatics from a Latin American group
formatics in other areas, Fig. 2 shows the number of publications in [10] .
PubMed with the keywords “Chemical informatics ”, “Cheminformatics ”, The goal of this manuscript is to discuss the status of Chemoinformat-
“Chemoinformatics ”, and “Chem informatics ”plus another relevant key- ics in Latin America with input from expert research groups working on
word by year. The analysis reveals that whereas molecular modeling the region. We also present an author’s perspective on the future direc-
was the primary topic connected to chemoinformatics at the beginning tions of chemoinformatics, emphasizing the need to strengthen research
of the examined period (2010–2022), other fields have been involved networks between Latin American scientists as well as with other in dif-
with time, with education being one of them. This has allowed us to ferent countries, making it possible to increase funding and the multidis-
glimpse the tremendous growth of this discipline and its significant ap- ciplinary formation of advanced human capital. The paper is organized
plication in related areas as the years pass by. In the same period (2010– into six main sections. After this Introduction, Section 2 discusses the
2022), the most frequent areas published along with chemoinformatics status of the research in Latin America. Section 3 presents exemplary
(as measured by the number of publications with concurrent keywords) research outcomes through representative chemoinformatics-related ap-
were mainly molecular modeling and drug discovery with 6935 and plications and tools recently developed in Latin America, emphasizing
5459 papers, respectively. Other frequent areas published along with open-access resources. The next Section discusses exemplary contribu-
chemoinformatics were bioinformatics (6689), computer-aided drug de- tions to education, training, and scientific dissemination. Section 5 elab-
2J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077
Fig. 3. Number of papers in PubMed in the period 2010–2022 with the keywords “Chemical informatics ”, “Cheminformatics ”, “Chemoinformatics ”, and “Chem
informatics ”A. Analyzed by continent. America is separated as North and Latin America. B. Analyzed by each Latin American country.
orates on future directions, challenges, and perspectives to strengthen American countries per year, it is remarkable the growth that chemoin-
chemoinformatics in Latin America. Section 6 presents summary con- formatics had during the last coronavirus pandemic (2020–2022). In-
clusions. deed, almost all the countries that belong to this region have at least one
published paper related to this discipline, as it is explicit in Fig. 3 B. It can
2. Research: publications, applications, and collaborations be highlighting that Brazil, Mexico, Argentina, Colombia, and Ecuador
are within the top-5 Latin American countries with the largest num-
2.1. Publications and main applications ber of papers, as found in PubMed during 2010–2022. This leads to the
conclusion that, thus far, these countries are leading the development
In this section, we discuss contributions by research groups in Latin of chemoinformatics in Latin America. Given its geographical location
America towards the development and application of chemoinformat- throughout the Latin American territory, they may be motivating the
ics as analyzed through peer-reviewed publications between 2010 and rest of the countries, especially those belonging to Central America and
2022. Fig. 3 depicts the tremendous expansion of chemoinformatics in the Caribbean, to develop this discipline since it is also relevant to the
Latin America during the previous 12 years. Fig. 3 A underlines that, growing frequency that the rest of the Latin American countries have
during the previous five years, Latin America’s publication rate has sig- been generating.
nificantly increased, even though Europe, Asia, and North America have To elucidate which are the main applications that Latin American
published many more papers than Latin America overall. Fig. 3 B indi- countries are giving to cheminformatics and to contrast the informa-
cates that, as the years pass by, more Latin American countries have been tion obtained until now in PubMed, we made the same research in the
joining the development of this discipline, contributing to more pub- same period but in Web of Science. The data was obtained using the
lished peer-reviewed papers. By putting together the studies of all Latin keywords “Chemoinformatics OR Cheminformatics OR Chem informat-
3J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077
Fig. 4. Bibliometric map based on Web of Science data based on keyword co-occurrence during the period 2010–2022. The data were obtained using the keywords
“Chemical informatics ”, “Cheminformatics ”, “Chemoinformatics ”, and “Chem informatics ”and each of the Latin American countries with published papers in 2010–
2022. A total of 474 publications were identified. The relative size of the nodes is related to the number of publications containing the keyword.
ics OR Chemical informatics ”for each of the Latin American countries. Microbiology and Neurosciences is evident, where the latter has shown
Surprisingly, there was a significant difference between the data ob- greater growth in Chile, while “Microbiology ” has greater growth in
tained, finding more total publications obtained in Web of Science (536) Saint Lucia, combining percentage points with “Medicinal Chemistry. ”
in contrast with PubMed (451), which also were reflected in fewer peer-
reviewed publications found per country as it is depicted in Fig. S5. 2.2. Journals: where research has been published
Fig. 4 shows a network with the key concepts related to chemoinfor-
matics in each Latin American country as found in the Web of Science. According to the Web of Science Core Collection, the 536 peer-
The network was created with Visualization of Similarity (VOS) viewer reviewed articles published by the Latin American countries between
desktop version 1.6.19 (0) ( https://www.vosviewer.com/ ) [11] based 2010 and 2022 appeared in 252 journals. Fig. 5 shows the ten peer-
on keyword concurrent during the period 2010–2022. This figure de- reviewed journals with major usage by Latin American countries, evi-
picts the main concepts involved in chemoinformatics. Each keyword dencing that the journal with the highest occurrence is the Journal of
and its entanglement are given by the usage of publications, and it is Cheminformatics, which at least eight Latin American countries have
also notable the thickness of the edges in the graph, where chemoinfor- published there. Molecular Informatics is the journal with the largest
matics is strongly associated with drug discovery and chemical space. number of publications, although only seven countries published in it.
The network shows that drug discovery, quantitative structure-activity Furthermore, it is possible to distinguish in which of the journals the
relationships (QSAR), and chemical space are amongst the most frequent highest number of publications by country is found; Brazil, Mexico, and
con-current words and applications published so far by Latin American Cuba, have the largest number of its articles published in Molecular In-
scientists. formatics. Colombia, the fourth one according to the Web of Science,
Fig. S2 (Supplementary data) highlights the principal areas of ap- has published the most in the Journal of Cheminformatics, which is in
plication in which the publications of each Latin American country turn the second most popular journal.
are focused according to the Web of Science categories. The analy-
sis indicates that the main categories are “Pharmacology Pharmacy ”, 2.3. Regional and global collaboration networks between Latin American
“Chemistry Medicinal ”, “Chemistry Multidisciplinary ”, “Computer Sci- groups
ence Information Systems ”, “Computer Science Interdisciplinary Appli-
cations ”, Biochemistry Molecular Biology ”, “Computer Science Infor- As discussed in Section 2.1 . undoubtedly, Latin America has had sig-
mation Systems ”, “Neurosciences ”, “Biochemistry Molecular Biology ”, nificant growth in the discipline (i.e., Fig. 3 A), although there is still a
and Microbiology ”. The category “Chemistry Multidisciplinary ” pre- comparable difference with other regions of the world. This growth is
dominates in Brazil, Mexico, Colombia, Ecuador, and Cuba. For Chile largely implicit thanks to the collaborations that have been generated
and Saint Lucia “Pharmacology Pharmacy ” is the major category. In within Latin America and other geographical regions. These collabora-
Argentina, “Chemistry Medicinal ”and “Computer Science Information tions are represented in Fig. S3, where a research collaboration network
Systems ”are, equally, the most frequent categories. Greater variability is presented. Fig. S3A, C and D identifies the top-10 countries that have
of focus areas is evident with respect to the previously mentioned coun- the greatest number of collaborations with Latin American countries,
tries, and they experience differentiation by the percentages assigned highlighting those with a larger number of joint publications through
to each focus area. Likewise, the recent growth of focus areas such as the edge thickness and total number of publications with the node size.
4J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077
Fig. 5. Top ten peer-reviewed journals publishing chemoinformatics papers by Latin American countries during 2010–2022 according to the Web of Science Core
Collection.
We can find a greater collaboration with respect to the number of ar- dos, El Salvador, and Trinidad and Tobago turn out to be the countries
ticles with North America, but Europe also generates a relevant collab- with the least collaborations found.
oration with Latin America by involving a larger number of countries Although we have reduced our analysis to a specific number of top-
implicated in said collaborations (six out of ten countries). Finally, Asia 10 non-Latin American countries with which we collaborate, there is
and Oceania, although they are only shown with one country within the a greater number of collaborations with the rest of the world that is
top ten collaborators for each of these two continents, they illustrate a illustrated in Fig. S4A (Supplementary material) which shows the col-
relevant connection with Latin American countries. laborations between Latin America and the rest of the world, visualizing
Regional collaborations are shown in Fig. S3B, where we visualize a great interaction with these countries. Fig. S4B illustrates the collab-
the important support network that involves the entire region, and that oration between non-Latin American countries, and although a greater
has allowed Latin America to grow in the development of chemoinfor- number of collaborations are visualized, this Fig. S4B allows to infer the
matics. relevance of the Latin American collaborations.
Figs. S3C and S3D show the interactions using an alternative graphic Based on the collaborations and analysis, it is necessary to under-
method, to further highlight each collaboration between Latin American line the vast effort that is being made at the regional and global level to
countries and other regions of the world. Fig. S3C distinguishes Brazil as contribute to the development of this discipline, finding diverse collab-
the Latin American scientific superpower that has the highest normal- orations between different geographical areas that must undoubtedly be
ized collaboration with the different countries described, foregrounding maintained or continue to increase.
among them USA, Germany, Sweden, and Japan. Mexico is the second
country with the highest number of collaborations between the same 3. Resources and applications for research
countries and only compares Brazil with Spain regarding the number of
collaborations. Over the past few years academic groups in Latin America have
Since data normalization with respect to the number of collabora- been developing open-source and freely available resources for research
tions from the two Latin American countries with the highest number focused on chemoinformatic and related disciplines. These tools form
of publications makes it difficult to visualize this last graph for the rest part of the increasingly open chemoinformatic resources developed and
of the Latin American countries, Fig. S3D was generated. Fig. S3D al- used worldwide [12–14] . Part of such contributions are the compound
lows us to observe in greater detail the differentiation by each Latin databases. This section summarizes examples of chemoinformatics-
American country with respect to its collaboration with the rest of the related tools developed by Latin American groups in the past twelve
ten countries with the greatest collaboration, visualizing that Argentina, years, with emphasis on open-access resources.
Chile, Colombia, and Peru in general have very similar trends, differ- Table 1 summarizes web servers, standalone tools, and other re-
ing in that Peru has a very marked and greater collaboration with Italy sources recently developed by Latin American countries in the public
while Argentina, Chile and Colombia have it with Spain in different domain. All the tools listed in the table are characterized by having in-
proportions. tuitive use with a user-friendly interface accompanied by their respec-
Similar trends are perceived with the rest of the Latin American tive tutorials. The tools also provide at least one means of communi-
countries, where Ecuador, like Brazil, has a greater collaboration with cation with the users for questions, feedback, or comments in general,
the USA. Jamaica, Uruguay, Panama, Cuba, Venezuela, and Costa Rica which further facilitates interactions between Latin American scientists.
remain in a limited interval of collaborations. Finally, Nicaragua, Barba- Several of the platforms listed in the table offer various types of com-
5J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077
Table 1
Exemplary web servers, standalone tools, and other resources developed in Latin America.
Country Resource Application - use Ref., URL
Argentina LIDeB Tools Publicly available open-source customizable [34] , https://lideb.biol.unlp.edu.ar/?p=1237
cheminformatics tools to be used in computer-assisted drug
discovery.
Brazil UniCamp Molecular Dynamics Simulations and custom software http://leandro.iqm.unicamp.br/m3g/main/home.shtml
tools for analyzing the structure and thermodynamics of
solutions using simulation data.
Chile Pharmacoinformatics and drug Computational polypharmacology with wet lab analyses to https://ramirezlab.github.io/5.1 _ resources
design strengthen the drug design and development processes.
Chile CBSM Center of Bioinformatics More than resources done and under development for https://cbsm.utalca.cl/?page _ id=2073
and Molecular Modeling modeling and analyzing protein sequences and structures.
Colombia MPTG-CBP Computer simulations at different levels of resolution and https://mptg-cbp.github.io/
complexity to decipher how biological macromolecules
interact with each other to accomplish their function.
Costa Rica Cbio3 Laboratory Codes in GitHub repositories for the calculation of useful https://cbio3group.netlify.app/
descriptors in chemoinformatics: i) pH-dependent
lipophilic descriptors for amino acids ii) descriptors based
on the count of n conjugated systems with n = 2 ( n = 𝜋
electrons/2) relevant for the prediction of partition
coefficients in an aromatic solvent such as toluene.
Mexico DIFACQUIM, d -Tools Five free web services to analyze chemical diversity and https://www.difacquim.com/d-tools/
chemical space, generate in silico libraries of peptides, and
predict bioactivity profiles.
Uruguay Institut Pasteur de Montevideo Dedicated to the development of methods that allow https:
advanced simulations to be carried out but with low //pasteur.uy/laboratorios/simulaciones-biomoleculares/
computational cost, to improve the comparability of
theoretical studies with biochemical, biophysical, or
molecular biology experiments.
putational studies beyond chemoinformatics e.g., tools associated with from the opening of the SAMPL-6 blind challenge (2017–2018) the in-
pharmacoinformatics in general, molecular dynamics, and biophysics. cursion of Latin American groups from Argentina, Chile, and Costa Rica
Within chemoinformatics, the web servers and tools are mostly tuned took place.
for drug discovery and development of lead candidates but also can be Despite the reduced representation in the SAMPL challenges, it is
used for other research areas, as discussed in Section 2.1 . worth noting that valuable performance was obtained in the submis-
sions where the participation of groups from Latin America was in-
3.1. Compound databases cluded. Fig. 6 shows that two of four submissions for predicting the
n -octanol/water log P for eleven fragment-like small molecules endowed
Concerning the development of compound databases, perhaps one of with kinase inhibitory bioactivity were in the top 50 submissions, how-
the most notable contributions in the region is the generation, curation, ever, considering the submissions by categories based on the computa-
and update of natural products databases freely accessible. For more tional methods used, the results of the groups belonging to our region
than ten years, Brazil has been developing an extensive database of nat- were in the top 10.
ural products, and several other Latin American countries have followed In the case of the SAMPL-7 blind challenge, it was planned in three
the initiative. Table 2 summarizes exemplary natural product databases parts. First, the scientific community was proposed to predict the acid-
in the public domain. The status of the development of natural product ity constant of 22 N-sulfonamides compounds, then the n -octanol/water
databases in Latin America has been reviewed recently. Notably, there is partition coefficient for the same compounds, and finally for the submis-
a multi-country effort to put together a unified Latin American Natural sions with the first two parts completed, the distribution coefficient at
Product Database –LANaPDB [ 15 , 16 ]. pH 7.4 was predicted.
Fig. 7 represents the scarce participation for the p K
a
prediction call,
3.2. Blind challenges for validating chemoinformatics methods
which was not surprising considering that the organizers did not re-
quest the macroscopic p K
a
of compounds, but rather the p K
a
of vari-
As mentioned in the previous section, the Latin American region,
ous microstates to predict the experimental observable and hence the
through its research groups, has generated knowledge regarding the de-
predictive techniques based on in machine learning approaches did not
velopment of databases, web servers, and chemoinformatics tools. In a
participate due to the impossibility of having experimental values of
complementary way, the blind challenges known as Statistical Assess-
microstates. In fact, the submissions received were all from the physical
ment of the Modeling of Proteins and Ligands (SAMPL Challenges [17] )
category based on first-principles methods, even though some of these
funded by the USA National Institutes of Health has provided an excel-
submissions did the conformational analysis using the open chemoinfor-
lent opportunity for Latin Americans to validate the impact of their tools
matics tool such as Open Babel [23] . Interestingly, the participation of
and methodologies through the participation of researchers in these
Latin American groups obtained excellent performances, among which
challenges. The section on the prediction of physicochemical proper-
was obtained the second best-ranked submission.
ties in SAMPL Challenges has included predictions of solvation energies
On the other hand, Fig. 8 depicts 17 submissions to the SAMPL7 n-
[ 18 , 19 ], acidity constant [ 20 , 21 ] and partition coefficients [ 21 , 22 ] in
octanol/water log P prediction challenge. This second part of the chal-
various biphasic systems (cyclohexane/water and n -octanol/water) rel-
lenge was encouraging for the Latin American region. One of the partici-
evant for rational drug design.
pating groups (University of Costa Rica) using a classical machine learn-
Table 3 shows the participation of Latin American research groups in
ing model such as multiple linear regression and by calculating molec-
predicting physicochemical properties of drug-like molecules in the pe-
ular descriptors using chemoinformatics tools accomplished the highest
riod analyzed (2010–2022). It can be noted that our participation in the
accuracy, among empirical methods and also in all submissions based on
SAMPL-3, SAMPL-4, and SAMPL-5 blind challenges was null, however,
the ranked ones. In addition, the collaboration between the University
6J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077
Fig. 6. Representation of the root-mean square error (RMSE) of A. the 91 submissions to the SAMPL6 n -octanol/water log P prediction challenge (the participation
of groups from Latin America are marked with stars where the red star represent to the submission of the University of Costa Rica in collaboration with the University
of Barcelona and yellow stars the submissions of the Austral Universidad of Chile in collaboration with the University of Concepción), B. Twenty five submissions
provided by physical methods using quantum mechanical approaches, and C. Thirty one submissions provided by physical methods using molecular mechanics
approaches. The rank obtained by each Latin American submission both globally and by category is represented at the top of each mark. Details of the methods and
participants can be found in Table S1 (Supplementary material) and https://github.com/samplchallenges/SAMPL6/tree/master/physical _p roperties .
Fig. 7. Representation of the root-mean square error (RMSE) of seven submissions to the SAMPL7 to the p K
a
challenge. The participation of groups from Latin
America are marked with stars where the red star represents the submission of the University of Costa Rica in collaboration with the University of Barcelona and
the orange star the submissions of the National University of Santiago del Estero, Argentina in collaboration with the Miami University. The rank obtained by
each Latin American submission is represented next to each mark. Details of the methods and participants can be found in Table S2 (Supplementary material) and
https://github.com/samplchallenges/SAMPL7/tree/master/physical _p roperty/pKa .
7J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077
Table 2
Exemplary compound databases of natural products generated in Latin America.
Database Country General description (link) a Refs.
NaturAr Argentina Natura products from Argentina. https://naturar.quimica.unlp.edu.ar/es/ [35]
NuBBE
DB
Brazil Natural products of Brazilian biodiversity. Developed by the São Paulo State University and the University of São [ 36 , 37 ]
Paulo. Includes natural products from plants, microorganisms, terrestrial animals, and marine animals.
http://nubbe.iq.unesp.br/portal/nubbe-search.html
SistematX Brazil Database composed of secondary metabolites from plants, developed at the Federal University of Paraiba. [ 38 , 39 ]
https://sistematx.ufpb.br/
UEFS Brazil Natural products from plants that have been published separately. Developed at the State University of Feira de [40]
Santana. http://zinc12.docking.org/catalogs/uefsnp
BRACOLI Brazil Brazilian Compound Library is a new manually curated virtual substance library developed by Brazilian research
groups to support computer-aided drug design work. The first version of BraCoLi has 1176 substances. Contains
biological and chemical information on synthetic, semi-synthetic and natural substances.
avMpNp Brazil Antiviral Medicinal Plants and Natural Products is a DB developed in Brazil and contains bioactive substances
from biodiversity with antiviral activity.
NAPRORE-CR Costa Rica Natural products isolated from plants and microorganisms. The database is being developed by the Cbio3 [41]
Laboratory, School of Chemistry at the University of Costa Rica.
LAIPNUDELSAV El Salvador Developed by the Research Laboratory in Natural Products of the University of El Salvador.
UNIIQUIM Mexico Natural products from plants mainly isolated and characterized at the Institute of Chemistry of the National [42]
Autonomous University of Mexico. https://uniiquim.iquimica.unam.mx/
BIOFACQUIM Mexico Natural products isolated and characterized in Mexico at the School of Chemistry of the National Autonomous [ 43 , 44 ]
University of Mexico and other Mexican institutions. Includes compounds from plants, fungi, propolis, and marine
animals. version 2 https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/BIOFAQUIM _ V2 _ sdf/11312702
CIFPMA Panama Natural products from plants that have been tested in over 25 in vitro and in vivo bioassays for different [45]
therapeutic targets. Developed at the University of Panama.
PeruNPDB Peru Database created at the Catholic University of Santa Maria with natural products from animals and plants. [46]
https://perunpdb.com.pe/
PSC-db Chile Free accessible database containing the 3D structures of several plant secondary compounds along with their [47]
physicochemical and pharmaceutical properties. http://pscdb.appsbio.utalca.cl/viewSearch/index.php
a When available.
Table 3
Participation of Latin American research groups in global challenges for the Statistical Assessment of the Modeling of Proteins and Ligands (SAMPL Challenges [17] ).
Latin American participants
Challenge Physicochemical blind challenge Participants in special issue publications Information Refs.
SAMPL3 Prediction of 36 solvation free energies 21 submissions 0 https://github.com/samplchallenges/ [18]
(2011–2012) for three series of chlorinated compounds 8 different SAMPL3/tree/main/solvation _ energy
groups/participants
SAMPL4 Prediction of hydration free energies for a 49 submissions 0 https://github.com/samplchallenges/ [19]
(2013–2014) series of 47 small molecules. 19 different SAMPL4/tree/main/
groups/participants hydration _ free _ energy
SAMPL5 Prediction of distribution coefficient 76 submissions 0 https://github.com/samplchallenges/ [50]
(2015–2016) predictions were introduced for the first 18 different SAMPL5/tree/main/
time for a set of 53 small molecules groups/participants distribution _c oefficients
SAMPL6 Prediction of microscopic and 37 submissions 0 https://github.com/samplchallenges/ [20]
(2017–2018) macroscopic pKas of 24 small organic 11 different SAMPL6/tree/master/
molecules protein kinase inhibitors groups/participants physical _ properties/pKa
SAMPL6 Prediction of the octanol/water partition 91 submissions 4 submissions https://github.com/samplchallenges/ [ 22 , 51 , 52 ]
(2017–2018) coefficients (log P) of 11 small molecules 27 different 2 groups (Chile and Costa SAMPL6/tree/master/
protein kinase inhibitors groups/participants Rica/Spain) physical _ properties/logP
SAMPL7 Prediction of the pKa for 9 submissions 2 ranked submissions https://github.com/samplchallenges/ [ 21 , 53 , 54 , 55 ]
(2019–2020) 22 N-sulfonamides 7 different 2 groups (Argentina and SAMPL7/tree/master/
groups/participants Costa Rica/Spain) physical _ property/pKa
SAMPL7 Prediction of the octanol-water partition 33 submissions 3 groups (Argentina/USA, https://github.com/samplchallenges/
(2019–2020) coefficients for 22 N-sulfonamides 17 different Costa Rica/Spain, and Costa SAMPL7/tree/master/
groups/participants Rica) physical _ property/logP
SAMPL7 Prediction of the octanol-water 6 submissions 2 ranked submissions https://github.com/samplchallenges/
(2019–2020) distribution coefficients for 6 different 2 groups (Argentina/USA SAMPL7/tree/master/
22 N-sulfonamides combining the pKa groups/participants and Costa Rica/Spain) physical _ property/logD
and logP predictions
of Costa Rica and the University of Barcelona using the IEFPCM-MST and log P prediction results of the collaboration between the University
model presented very good results with both globally (rank 8th) and of Costa Rica and the University of Barcelona using the IEFPCM-MST
physical (rank 2nd) methods. Considering the difficulty of these chal- model, the best ranked method was obtained to replicate the experi-
lenges, the collaboration between the National University of Santiago mental results of pH-dependent distribution coefficients for the 22 sul-
del Estero, Argentina with the Miami University had also good results fonamides that the challenge proposed.
(rank 15th). In summary, Latin American groups have achieved important results
Fig. 9 shows the performance based on the root-mean square error of in the blind challenges mentioned in this work, positioning the region as
six submissions to the SAMPL7 n -octanol/water log D prediction chal- a benchmark for the reliable prediction of physicochemical properties
lenge. Only quantum chemistry-based methods considered the effect of of drug-like compounds. The experimental determination of these prop-
solvent. The conformational space of the 22 molecules was explored erties requires a high investment of time and resources, so having expert
using cheminformatics tools. As expected, due to the outstanding p K
a
groups in the region on these issues may be attractive for future collab-
8J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077
Fig. 8. Representation of the root-mean square error (RMSE) of A. the 17 submissions to the SAMPL7 n -octanol/water log P prediction challenge (the participation of
groups from Latin America are marked with stars where the red star represent to the submission of the University of Costa Rica (rank 1st), University of Costa Rica in
collaboration with the University of Barcelona (rank 8th) and orange stars the submissions of the National University of Santiago del Estero, Argentina in collaboration
with the Miami University (rank 15th)), B. Eight submissions provided by empirical methods using chemoinformatics and machine learning approaches, and C. Six
submissions provided by physical methods using quantum mechanics approaches. Details of the methods and participants can be found in Table S3 (Supplementary
material) and https://github.com/samplchallenges/SAMPL7/tree/master/physical _p roperty/logP .
orations between academic groups, not only with the pharmaceutical ing computational chemical education and cheminformatics education
industry, but also from the food and chemistry industry, and in environ- in their undergraduate and graduate programs. Indeed, much of the
mental policies where these properties are used to determine risk factors chemoinformatics discipline, as we perceive it today, initiated at the
for exposure to chemicals. pharmaceutical industry instead of academic settings, which also ex-
plains the strong orientations of chemoinformatics toward drug design
4. Education, training, and dissemination of science and discovery. In any case, it is highly relevant to contribute to the ed-
ucation and training of highly qualified researchers to enter into the
In contrast to bioinformatics where it is common to find special- increasingly demanding job market requesting professionals trained in
ized courses, textbooks, and educational resources, it is still rare to find chemoinformatics.
courses, and even more, graduate programs focused on chemoinformat- Historically, Brazil has researchers and professors who have actively
ics. This is not only a particular case of Latin America but worldwide. worked in the field of chemoinformatics and, therefore, have consider-
Indeed, as commented elsewhere [2] , chemistry departments and the able scientific dissemination in the area. This fact is observed by the
schools of pharmacies in universities are conservative in implement- prominence of this country related to the number of publications asso-
9J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077
Fig. 9. Representation of the root-mean square error (RMSE) of six submissions to the SAMPL7 n -octanol/water log D prediction challenge. The participation of
groups from Latin America are marked with stars where the red star represents the submission of the University of Costa Rica in collaboration with the University
of Barcelona and the orange star the submissions of the National University of Santiago del Estero, Argentina in collaboration with the Miami University. The rank
obtained by each Latin American submission is represented next to each mark. Details of the methods and participants can be found in Table S4 (Supplementary
material) and https://github.com/samplchallenges/SAMPL7/tree/master/physical _p roperty/logD .
ciated with the theme ( Fig. 3 B and 3 C). In an evaluation of the last 20 tions in this process, and an example of relevance was the development
years, these publications emphasized the Brazilian panorama regarding of captopril. By applying the "structure-based drug discovery" strategy,
medicinal chemistry, natural products chemistry and molecular biology, captopril was the first antihypertensive drug elucidated, whose mech-
addressing their advances and challenges, especially in the sphere of ed- anism of action is through the inhibition of the angiotensin-converting
ucation and research. Several relevant topics and historical landmarks enzyme (ACE). Its discovery benefited from pharmacological studies on
were contextualized and discussed throughout this period, such as the the effects of the venom of the Brazilian snake Bothrops jararaca , carried
role of pharmaceutical and chemistry educational institutions in the de- out by Rocha e Silva’s group, and later by Sérgio H. Ferreira from the
velopment of the area, the integration of multidisciplinary knowledge University of São Paulo Medical School, demonstrating its vasodilator
required for its expansion, and the evolution in the area for application action, dependent on its ability to potentiate the activity of bradykinin
of systems and computational tools designed to extract knowledge from [56].
a huge set of information [ 24 , 25 ]. In parallel, the understanding of the molecular aspects directly in-
In the 1980s, the sector was driven by the Human Genome Project, volved in the emergence of diseases, led to the expansion of technologi-
with great progress in the areas of genomics and molecular biology, cal resources available for pharmaceutical research in the search for new
whose essential technology was bioinformatics for increasing analysis drugs of natural and synthetic origin, as well as the insertion of new dis-
of data generated in DNA, RNA and protein sequences [26] . Therefore, ciplines in undergraduate and graduate courses related to the molecular
by the late 1990s there were a significant number of biomolecules in bases and interactions between the metabolism and drugs. In addition,
GenBank. Also, in the 90 ′ s the use of QSAR spread worldwide. In Brazil there was an impact on the automation of processes and data analysis,
due to international collaborations, especially with Professor Hugo Ku- with automated screening on a large scale, Automated high-throughput
binyi, from the University of Heidelberg, Germany, and, consecutively, screening, coupled with the development of new methods of organic
courses and workshops given in the country. One of the political conse- synthesis, such as combinatorial chemistry and the analysis of medicinal
quences of this event was the creation of the Chemical Structure and Bi- plants and natural products by dereplication and studies of its action by
ological Activity Division in the Brazilian Chemical Society, forerunner metabolomics studies. In general, education and research in the various
of the Medicinal Chemistry Division, the latter formed in 1998 [ 27 , 28 ]. areas of science that use chemoinformatics tools has increased exponen-
Already in the 2000s, the discussions that permeated chemoinfor- tially in the last two decades, the research groups are better distributed
matics in the scientific and educational context were based on the stan- throughout Latin America and their scientific contributions have signif-
dardization of terms and methods, such as the elaboration of a glossary icant impact in the science, with consequent publications in the main
of terms used in drug planning and the improvement of tools, partic- journals of the area as shown in Fig. 5 .
ularly docking and molecular dynamics [ 29–31 ]. The classical versus Toward this end, this section summarizes representative educa-
industrial paradigm in the process of drug discovery was also a debated tional resources developed in Latin America e.g., web-based applica-
issue, as well as the availability of a large virtual database of small tions and tools developed for educational and research purposes. We
molecules and proteins (PDB) of natural and synthetic origin, drove the also talk about frequent regional and worldwide conferences, seminars,
development of software for in silico screening, applied to the approach and schools that are entirely or mostly organized by scientists from Latin
known as virtual screening [32] . America and where chemoinformatics (or a directed discipline) is the
On this occasion, the published books authored by distinguished main topic or a significant portion of the scientific agenda.
Brazilian professors and researchers, such as "Medicinal Chemistry: the Table 4 summarizes the event, main purpose, and target audience. In
molecular basis of drug action" by Barreiro & Fraga, "Methods of Theo- several cases, the conferences, webinars, and educational/tutorial ma-
retical and Molecular Chemistry" by Morgon, and "Bioinformatics: from terial have been made available on demand (when applicable, the URL
biology to molecular flexibility" by Verli, became indispensable biblio- is included in the table). Throughout the table, different types of mate-
graphic references in disciplines focused on medicinal chemistry in un- rials are displayed in the area, where many of them have educational
dergraduate and graduate courses throughout Brazil. Furthermore, the approaches with which this discipline can increase in use. For example,
development of new, safer and more effective drugs for many diseases some websites are included that contain tutorials on the use of chemoin-
has been demonstrated, as well as the influence of educational institu- formatics tools and that allow the introduction or specification of greater
10J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077
Table 4
Examples of recent conferences, workshops, and educational resources generated in Latin America with a focus on chemoinformatics or directly associated disciplines.
Type Event or resource Description (target audience) Access/Refs.
Meeting Colloquium: Chemoinformatics and Online meeting for the general public with an emphasis on https://www.difacquim.com/english/events/
online Artificial Intelligence undergraduate and graduate students. 2022-colloquium/ [48]
Meeting LatinXChem A virtual forum through which the community of Latin https://www.latinxchem.org/lxchemcomp
American chemists located anywhere in the world can share
and discuss their research results. It includes a section
dedicated to computational chemistry.
Workshop CABANA Workshop: The aim was to introduce researchers to Chemoinformatics, https://www.ebi.ac.uk/training/events/
Chemoinformatics in Drug Discovery especially in structure-based and ligand-based drug design. cabana- workshop- chemoinformatics- drug- discovery/
Topics covered: the use of protein, ligand and drug databases,
protein modeling, molecular docking and virtual screening for
drug discovery applications; managing and analyzing virtual
chemical libraries; machine learning algorithms in drug
discovery.
Workshop Computational Chemistry in Drug The objective was to introduce the concepts of Information in the office of Sponsor SENACYT.
Discovery and Development. From Chemoinformatics and its applications in the academic
Academia to Industry. environment. In addition, show national researchers topics
Computer-Aided Drug Design related to cheminformatics, data mining, database
representations in 2D and 3D.
Conference Integrated Chemoinformatics This conference provided information on chemotherapy against https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
approaches to virtual screening in the Leishmania where the development of CYP51 inhibitor drugs is 235412450 _I ntegrated _ chemoinformatics _
search of new lead compounds sought as a new purpose, so in general terms the conference approaches _ to _ virtual _ screening _ in _t he _ search _ of _
against Leishmania focused on the use of chemoinformatics as a complement to new _ lead _ compounds _ against _ Leishmania
virtual detection approaches (VS) based on ligands and
structures.
Conference Informatics method to bridge gap It included applications of computational chemistry to https://repositorioslatinoamericanos.uchile.cl/
between experimental results and simulation for carbon nanotube reinforced composites. handle/2250/926817
simulation for carbon nanotube
reinforced composites
Conference Latin American Chemistry and It included applications of computational chemistry to https:
Catalysis. catalysis. //www.youtube.com/watch?v=wlRbuIf2Hbw
Conference Women in Bioinformatics & Data Recurrent meeting bringing together Latin American https://wbds.la/ [49]
Science-Latin America. researchers who work in the areas of systems biology, omics
technologies, artificial intelligence, machine learning, data
science, data mining, and high-performance computing with
applications in biology.
Conference School of chemoinformatics Online event discussing developments and applications and https:
chemoinformatics, including chemical space, data analysis, //www.youtube.com/@SchoolChemInfLA/videos
natural products, virtual screening, toxicity prediction, and
drug discovery for neglected diseases. It included a hands-on
session to use the ChEMBL. Editors of chemoinformatics
journals discussed points related to scientific publishing.
Conference Digital Technologies, Innovation and Online event to publicize the uses and practical applications of https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
Health in the Covid-19 Pandemic | information and communications technologies during the T49FvEk6aCg™t=2196s
PROSIC - UCR pandemic caused by the Covid-19 virus, which included a talk
on the role of Chemoinformatics and Computational Biology
during the pandemic.
Educational / RamirezLab Github Website with tutorials, script library and FAQ for https://github.com/ramirezlab/WIKI
tutorial pharmacoinformatics and drug design.
Educational / Practical Aspects of Drug Discovery: Course open to applicants from institutes based in Latin https://coursesandconferences.
Course At the Interface of Biology, Chemistry America and the Caribbean. The program was aimed at wellcomeconnectingscience.org/event/
and Pharmacology - Latin America researchers with a background knowledge of any discipline practical- aspects- of- drug- discovery- at- the-
and the Caribbean related to drug discovery, including biology, chemistry, interface- of- biology- chemistry- and-
pharmacology, computational chemistry and informatics. pharmacology- latin- america- and- the- caribbean-
20221113/
Educational Online Manual of Chemoinformatics This manual contributes to the academic formation of the https://difacquim.gitbook.io/
(in Spanish). students, strengthening in students the understanding of basic quimioinformatica/
concepts of Chemoinformatics and seeks to allow them to be
able to handle and interpret computational techniques
associated with this scientific discipline, frequently used in the
discovery, design and development of bioactive compounds.
Educational NAPROC13 The 13C NMR Database of Natural Products is a web https://c13.materia-medica.net/
and Research application that provides different search tools to know the
structure of a compound. In addition, it allows the use of
chemoinformatics applications based in JSME-X-2020 by Peter
Ertl and Bruno Beinfait, (Novartis), in the design and
development of undergraduate student theses in Pharmacy.
Meeting 10th School of molecular modeling in Meeting of researchers and students interested in acquiring http://www.emmsb.lncc.br/
online biological systems knowledge in the following topics: protein structure prediction,
machine learning methods, molecular modeling applied to
drug development, receptor-ligand docking methodologies,
molecular dynamics, monte carlo, quantum electronic structure
calculations, hybrid quantum/classical calculations, and
bioinformatics.
11J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077
Table 5
Representative strategic actions to strengthen chemoinformatics in Latin America.
Action Time frame a Expected contribution or impact
Research: enhance research collaborations within Latin Medium/long Advance significantly in research projects (basic and applied research), joining
America and between Latin America and other countries. efforts with multi-sites; increase the diversity of points of view.
Research: continue working on topics relevant to geographical Short/medium Working on top of regional and global issues and challenges will contribute to
regions and global issues. Foresee upcoming challenges, maintaining Latin American countries on top.
emerging needs, areas of opportunity, and trends.
Research: Partner with industry-driven foundations and Medium/long Get involved in basic research projects that can be translated into practical
research institutes (e.g., tres cantos Open Lab foundation) . applications.
Research: Partner with software companies Short/medium Collaborating in the development of chemoinformatics tools such as molecular
(e.g.,Pharmacelera). docking programs
Education: Promote the university research seedbeds in Short/medium This will enhance the interest in research in undergraduate students, allowing
undergraduate programs at Latin American universities. them to generate skills in the use of computational tools in the faculties of
computer science, biology, chemistry, and pharmacy. This would foster their
interest in furthering studies in basic chemoinformatics and its applications in
academia, industry, and emerging companies in AI.
Education: Establish and sustain postgraduate programs (e.g., Long It will help to train highly educated specialists in chemoinformatics that will
Masters’s) in Latin American universities. join the industry, academia, and start-up companies.
Education: continue and increase the number of quality Short/medium Scientific conferences help increase the interactions among students and
conferences, seminars, and schools. These could be in-person, research scientists in the area and the world; will contribute to being up to date
hybrid, or virtual events. with recent developments and identifying future needs.
Funding: attract attention, collaboration, and partnerships with Medium/long Expand funding sources beyond traditional government support will help to
industries (pharmaceutical, food, materials, etc.) to fund increase the research funding itself and will promote work on applied projects.
research programs with translational applications. Students participating in research projects will gain experience working on
industry-driven projects and help them to work on industry positions.
Funding: continue and increase the connections with Medium Idem (previous entry)
foundations, not-for-profit institutions, publishers, and
industries in the region and worldwide that help support
educational and research programs.
General : Create a Latin American chemoinformatics society Long Help to sustain the collective efforts in terms of research, education, and
that guides and oversees the development. funding.
Dissemination and collaborations: continue to enhance the Short/medium Active participation of Latin American students and scientists will favor the
presence and participation of Latin American Scientists in generation and/or consolidation of collaborative networks; will also help the
international conferences organized in other parts of the world. awareness of the scientific community worldwide of the research done in Latin
America.
Dissemination and collaborations: Continue and enhance the Medium Strengthen the connection and networks between Latin America with other
participation of Latin American scientists in specialized countries, be “ambassadors ”that share the needs and progress in the Latin
international committees and editorial boards of peer-reviewed American region.
journals.
Chemoinformatics community-wide blind challenges. Long With the progress in the generation of databases of natural products, biological
activities and physicochemical properties of compounds in the region, it is
intended to democratize reliable data so that the scientific community around
the world can validate computational tools, propose new predictive models that
can be critically evaluated through blind challenges.
a Approximate timeframe to start the implementation and development of the task. In all cases, it is expected that the action sustains for several years.
Short-term: 1 year; medium-term: 1–5 years; long-term: 5–10 years.
interrelationships. A manual of the discipline is even presented, with tions and the authors’ perspective, we outline a concise action plan to
which an integration of a greater number of scientists who approach strengthen the development of chemoinformatics in this geographical
this discipline is generated. Conferences and webinars are very illustra- region and worldwide. Table 5 summarizes the action, the expected pe-
tive of the applicability that is being given to chemoinformatics, allow- riod required to implement it, and its anticipated contribution or impact.
ing interactions with experts, who can guide towards the areas of focus The list of tasks is not exhaustive but aims to stimulate the analysis of
and interest of the viewer. Since many webinars were recorded and are these and other strategic actions that can take place. It is expected that
freely available, they are also useful resources for teaching and train- the action tasks can be sustained for several years.
ing. At the same time, they are excellent references to witness and keep From the action tasks summarized in Table 5 , we would like to point
track of the evolution of chemoinformatics during the next few years. out the need to strengthen the education of undergrad and graduate stu-
Although a few examples are listed, the conferences, workshops and re- dents so that highly trained professionals in Latin America join start-ups,
sources in Table 4 point to the efforts of several countries to develop pharmaceutical and other companies, academic groups in universities or
chemoinformatics in Latin America. start and develop their own companies. Start-up (AI) companies based in
Due to the recent COVID-19 pandemic, the online and hybrid for- Latin America could stablish solid collaborations with medium-to-large
mats could represent an advantage to increase the number of national, industries following the example of successful partnerships happening in
regional, and/or international conferences. Of course, such online or hy- other countries, for example, Exscientia ( https://www.exscientia.ai/ )-
brid conferences would be added to the full in-person meetings that also Sanofi; Recursion ( https://www.recursion.com/ )-Roche and Genentech;
provide key advantages through the direct interaction between scientists Benevolent AI ( https://www.benevolent.com/ )-AstraZeneca [33] . No-
and students. tably, there are scientists who graduated from Latin American universi-
ties currently employed by Recursion and Benevolent AI.
5. Future directions Scientific meetings and conferences favor the exchange of knowl-
edge and technology transfer based on computational tools that can be
In this section, we summarize the author’s perspective on the ex- incorporated into universities and institutes, allowing for the following
pected progress and evolution of chemoinformatics in Latin America in the academic environment: the participation of undergraduate stu-
during the next few years. Based on the discussion of the preceding Sec- dents in scientific initiation sessions and their incorporation into uni-
12J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077
versity research hotbeds with groups are already well established. In Also, there are extensive collaboration networks between Latin Amer-
any case, face-to-face (or hybrid) meetings that are also beneficial can ican countries and other geographical regions. Of note, collaborations
be conducted and financed through collaborations within Latin Amer- between Brazil and USA and Brazil and Germany. Other Latin American
ica. These interactions lead us to the generation of conglomerates that countries have frequent interactions with the USA, Germany, Spain, and
can develop multi-center projects in the Latin American region. Italy. While Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Uruguay
This will favor the interests of financing agencies (public or private) are among the countries that have been developing important open-
in financing collaborative projects. The above, together with the advan- access resources for research, education, and training on chemoinfor-
tages of online and live conferences and webinars, make it increasingly matics and closely related disciplines. It is also noticeable that more
easier to hold meetings or conferences that have the advantage of saving than ten compound databases have been developed with an emphasis
time and reducing the cost of organization and attendance. It is also ben- on natural product collections. Development of compound databases,
eficial to have the continued convenience of being involved in editorial including natural products, is also a common trend in other countries
boards of peer-reviewed publications. Currently, several Latin Ameri- outside Latin America.
cans are taking an active part in the editorial boards of journals such as Continuing doing research, consolidating current collaborations, and
the Journal of Chemoinformatics, Journal of Chemical Information and expanding interaction networks within research groups within Latin
Modeling, eLife, to name a few examples. Also, a current trend of some America and other countries is an important challenge and will have
scientific publishers is to include early career researchers in the review a strong impact on developing chemoinformatics in the region. A strong
board, e.g., Protein Science, which opens opportunities for scientists in challenge in Latin America to make academic-industry partnerships is
Latin America to take part in editorial boards where our representation the paramount of paperwork and lengthy time required to sign and
is underrepresented. implement legal cooperation agreements. We think that speeding up
In several of the action points proposed in Table 5 , it is crucial to the process will benefit both parties. The vast territory and richness
expedite the paperwork needed to formalize confidential agreements of natural resources in Latin America offer an attractive opportunity
with industry. The overabundance of bureaucracy frequently saps in- to spread start-up and AI-focused companies that can foster the fur-
dustry and other institutions’ motivation to collaborate with academic ther development of chemoinformatics and related computational dis-
organizations on scientific achievements. Of course, these points re- ciplines in the area. Democratization and open science would foster
quire a greater effort that includes the participation of high manage- the connection of research groups and students at various levels within
ment and governments. In all, research, education, and funding are Latin America and across the world. Although open science favors sci-
among the main pillars that will help to sustain and improve Chemoin- ence development worldwide, this is quite relevant in Latin America,
formatics and related disciplines in Latin America. The research in- where the funding level to acquire and maintain commercial software
cludes dissemination through peer-reviewed publications, participation and computational resources is limited. Dissemination through peer-
in international scientific conferences, and creation and strengthen- reviewed papers, active participation at scientific conferences (orga-
ing of collaboration networks within Latin America and with other nized within Latin America and elsewhere), and training and educa-
countries. tion will play an important role to continue expanding chemoinformat-
ics and related disciplines in Latin America. Indeed, formal and com-
6. Summary conclusions prehensive courses on chemoinformatics and related disciplines have
been introduced in Latin American universities in the past 3–5 years.
This is a collective effort to discuss the status, progress, and chal- This short time sharply contrasts with other geographical regions, such
lenges of chemoinformatics in Latin America by experts working on this as Europe or the United States, where chemoinformatics courses and
geographical region. Although there are several other Latin American formal programs have been ongoing for several decades. It is antici-
research groups working on chemoinformatics that are not included in pated that the continued and sustained growth of research will attract
this manuscript, we consider that this is the first effort to team up and funding and additional partnership between Latin American universi-
discuss the subject that is loosely based on the “four W´s ”: wh en the ties with industry and other public or private organizations. Overall,
publications and applications have been disclosed (for this work we fo- we anticipate that chemoinformatics will continue growing in Latin
cused on the period 2010–2022); wh o (e.g., Latin American countries America.
working on chemoinformatics along with network collaborations within
the continent and the rest of the world); wh at applications of chemoin-
Declaration of Competing Interest
formatics are being published; and wh ere (we analyzed the journals,
online databases, scientific conferences, and forums where the research
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
is being disseminated). We concluded that like “bioinformatics, ”there
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
is a need to establish a unique term for a well-defined and indepen-
the work reported in this paper.
dent discipline. It is also concluded that, overall, Latin America is the
fourth geographical region that contributes to chemoinformatics world-
Data availability
wide after Europe, Asia, and North America. By far, Brazil is the Latin
American country with the strongest contributions, followed by Mex-
The data collected in the paper is a bibliometric analysis, and it is
ico. In the last twelve years, the most common cheminformatics ap-
described in the manuscript in detail.
plications with other disciplines have been molecular modeling and
drug discovery that, in general are common applications of chemoinfor-
matic in other geographical regions. Also, QSAR and chemical space are Acknowledgments
common topics published along with chemoinformatics. Collectively,
Molecular Informatics and Journal of Chemoinformatics, followed by Rich discussions with Diana L. Prado-Romero, Fernada I. Saldívar-
the Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, are the most fre- González, Alejandro Gómez-García, and all members of the DIFACQUIM
quent journals where Latin American groups publish their papers. The research group are deeply acknowledged. Brazilian authors would like
same conclusion can be drawn from the scientific journals where re- to thank the funding agencies CAPES (Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento
searchers from other countries publish their chemoinformatic research de Pessoal de Nível Superior), CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvi-
papers. mento Científico e Tecnológico), FAPEMIG (Fundação de Amparo à
We also conclude that there is a strong collaboration network within Pesquisa do Estado de Minas Gerais), and UFMG (Universidade Federal
Latin America, the strongest being between Brazil and Mexico this far. de Minas Geais).
13J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077
Funding [19] Mobley DL, Wymer KL, Lim NM, Guthrie JP. Blind prediction of solvation free en-
ergies from the SAMPL4 challenge. J Comput-Aided Mol Des 2014;28(3):135–50.
doi: 10.1007/s10822- 014- 9718- 2 .
We thank the Dirección General de Cómputo y de Tecnologías de
[20] I şı k M, Rustenburg AS, Rizzi A, Gunner MR, Mobley DL, Chodera JD. Overview
Información y Comunicación (DGTIC), UNAM, for the computational of the SAMPL6 pK challenge: evaluating small molecule microscopic and macro-
resources to use Miztli supercomputer at UNAM under project LANCAD- scopic pK predictions. J Comput-Aided Mol Des 2021;35(2):131–66. doi: 10.1007/
UNAM-DGTIC-335; and the innovation space UNAM-HUAWEI the com-
s10822- 020- 00362- 6 .
[21] Bergazin TD, Tielker N, Zhang Y, Mao J, Gunner MR, Francisco K, Ballatore C,
putational resources to use their supercomputer under project No. 7 “De- Kast SM, Mobley DL. Evaluation of log P, pK, and log D predictions from the
sarrollo y aplicación de algoritmos de inteligencia artificial para el dis- SAMPL7 blind challenge. J Comput-Aided Mol Des 2021;35(7):771–802. doi: 10.
eño de fármacos aplicables al tratamiento de diabetes mellitus y cáncer ”. 1007/s10822- 021- 00397- 3 .
[22] I şı k M, Bergazin TD, Fox T, Rizzi A, Chodera JD, Mobley DL. Assessing the
We also thank the funding of DGAPA, UNAM, Programa de Apoyo a accuracy of octanol-water partition coefficient predictions in the SAMPL6 part
Proyectos de Investigación e Innovación Tecnológica (PAPIIT) , grant II log P Challenge. J Comput-Aided Mol Des 2020;34(4):335–70. doi: 10.1007/
No. IN201321 . This research was also funded by: FONDECYT (Fondo s10822- 020- 00295- 0 .
[23] O’Boyle NM, Banck M, James CA, Morley C, Vandermeersch T, Hutchison GR.
Nacional de Desarrollo Científico y Tecnológico —Chile) , grant num-
Open babel: an open chemical toolbox. J Cheminf 2011;3:33. doi: 10.1186/
ber 1220656 and ANID (Agencia Nacional de Investigación y Desar- 1758- 2946- 3- 33 .
rollo —Chile) grant number ATE220043 and FOVI210027 ; ANID –MILE- [24] Barreiro EJ, Rodrigues CR, Albuquerque MG, Sant’Anna CMR, Alencastro RB.
modelagem molecular: uma ferramenta para o planejamento racional de fár-
NIO –NCN19_038; Vice-rectory of Research and Postgraduate Studies
macos em química medicinal. Quím Nova 1997;20(3):300–10. doi: 10.1590/
of the University of Panama for University Research Funds CUFI-VIP- S0100-40421997000300011 .
01–14–2019–05 and SNI sponsor. WZ thanks the Vice Chancellor for [25] Montanari CA. A química medicinal na próxima década. Quím. Nova
2000;23(1):134–7. doi: 10.1590/S0100-40422000000100024 .
Research of the University of Costa Rica for its support work via the
[26] Góes ACS, Oliveira BVX. Projeto genoma humano: um retrato da construção do con-
research projects 115-C2–126 and 908-C3–610 . Brazilian researchers hecimento científico sob a ótica da revista ciência hoje. Ciênc educ 2014;20(3):561–
was funded by Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tec- 77 (Bauru). doi: 10.1590/1516-73132014000300004 .
nológico ( CNPq - 303757/2019–1 and 311875/2022–0 ), CAPES founda-
[27] Ferreira LG, Dos Santos RN, Oliva G, Andricopulo AD. Molecular docking and
structure-based drug design strategies. Molecules 2015;20(7):13384–421. doi: 10.
tion , grant numbers 88887.684031/2022–00 ; UFMG intramural funds 3390/molecules200713384 .
and its Pró-Reitoria de Pós - Graduação (PRPG) intramural funds . [28] Tavare, A.; Horta, C.; Kümmerlec, A.E.; Guido, R. A evolução da química medicinal
no Brasil: avanços nos 40 anos da sociedade brasileira de química. 2017; 40:694–700
doi: 10.21577/0100-4042.20170075 .
Supplementary materials [29] Amaral AT, Montanari CA. Química medicinal: 25 anos de planejamento racional de
fármacos. Quím Nova 2002;25:39–44. doi: 10.1590/S0100-40422002000800008 .
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in [30] Sant’Anna CMR. Glossário de termos usados no planejamento de fármacos (re-
comendações da IUPAC para 1997). Quím Nova 2002;25(3):505–12. doi: 10.1590/
the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.ailsci.2023.100077 .
S0100-40422002000300027 .
[31] Verli H, Barreiro EJ. Um paradigma da química medicinal: a flexibili-
References dade dos ligantes e receptores. Quím Nova 2005;28(1):95–102. doi: 10.1590/
S0100-40422005000100018 .
[1] Varnek A, Baskin II. Chemoinformatics as a theoretical chemistry discipline. Mol Inf [32] Lima LM. Química medicinal moderna: desafios e contribuição brasileira. Quím
2011;30:20–32. doi: 10.1002/minf.201000100 . Nova 2007;30(6):1456–68. doi: 10.1590/S0100-40422007000600015 .
[2] López-López E, Bajorath J, Medina-Franco JL. Informatics for chemistry, biology, [33] King, A. Encoding creativity in drug discovery. Chemistry World. 2023 https://www.
and biomedical sciences. J Chem Inf Model 2021;61:26–35. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim. chemistryworld.com/news/encoding- creativity- in- drug- discovery/4016866.article
0c01301 . (accessed 2023-04-13).
[3] Bajorath J. Understanding chemoinformatics: a unifying approach. Drug Discov To- [34] Gori DNP, Alberca LN, Rodriguez S, Alice JI, Llanos MA, Bellera CL, Talevi A. LIDeB
day 2004;9:13–14. doi: 10.1016/s1359- 6446(04)02916- 2 . tools: a Latin American resource of freely available, open-source cheminformatics
[4] Gasteiger J, Funatsu K. Chemoinformatics –An important scientific discipline. J apps. Artif Intell Life Sci 2022;2:100049. doi: 10.1016/j.ailsci.2022.100049 .
Comput Chem 2006;5(2):53–8. doi: 10.2477/jccj.5.53 . [35] Website. 2023 https://naturar.quimica.unlp.edu.ar/es/ .
[5] Gasteiger J. Chemistry in times of artificial intelligence. Chemphyschem [36] Valli M, dos Santos RN, Figueira LD, Nakajima CH, Castro-Gamboa I, Andricop-
2020;21(20):2233–42. doi: 10.1002/cphc.202000518 . ulo AD, Bolzani VS. Development of a natural products database from the biodiver-
[6] Medina-Franco JL, Saldívar-González FI. Cheminformatics to characterize phar- sity of Brazil. J Nat Prod 2013;76(3):439–44. doi: 10.1021/np3006875 .
macologically active natural products. Biomolecules 2020:1566. doi: 10.3390/ [37] Pilon AC, Valli M, Dametto AC, Pinto MEF, Freire RT, Castro-Gamboa I, Andricop-
biom10111566 . ulo AD, Bolzani VS. NuBBE: an updated database to uncover chemical and biolog-
[7] Gasteiger J. Chemoinformatics: achievements and challenges, a personal view. ical information from Brazilian biodiversity. Sci Rep 2017;7(1):7215. doi: 10.1038/
Molecules 2016;21(2):151. doi: 10.3390/molecules21020151 . s41598- 017- 07451- x .
[8] Medina-Franco JL, et al. Bridging informatics and medicinal inorganic chemistry: [38] Scotti MT, Herrera-Acevedo C, Oliveira TB, Costa RPO, Santos SYKO, Rodrigues RP,
toward a database of metallodrugs and metallodrug candidates. Drug Discov Today Scotti L, Da-Costa FB. SistematX, an online web-based cheminformatics tool for
2022;27(5):1420–30. doi: 10.1016/j.drudis.2022.02.021 . data management of secondary metabolites. Molecules 2018;23(1). doi: 10.3390/
[9] Kirchmair J. Molecular informatics in natural products research. Mol Inf molecules23010103 .
2020;39(11):e2000206. doi: 10.1002/minf.202000206 . [39] Costa RPO, Lucena LF, Silva LMA, Zocolo GJ, Herrera-Acevedo C, Scotti L, Da-
[10] Naveja JJ, Oviedo-Osornio CI, Trujillo-Minero NN, Medina-Franco JL. Chemoin- Costa FB, Ionov N, Poroikov V, Muratov EN, Scotti MT. The SistematX web portal of
formatics: a perspective from an academic setting in Latin America. Mol Diversity natural products: an update. J Chem Inf Model 2021;61(6):2516–22. doi: 10.1021/
2017;22(1):247–58. doi: 10.1007/s11030- 017- 9802- 3 . acs.jcim.1c00083 .
[11] Perianes-Rodriguez A, et al. Constructing bibliometric networks: a comparison be- [40] ZINC catalog UEFS natural products. 2023 http://zinc12.docking.org/catalogs/
tween full and fractional counting. J Informetr 2016;10(4):1178–95. doi: 10.1016/ uefsnp (accessed 2023-03-15.
j.joi.2016.10.006 . [41] Zamora, W.J.; Pinheiro, S.; Acuña, D. NAPRORE-CR (NAtural PROducts REpository
[12] González-Medina M, Jesús Naveja J, Sánchez-Cruz N, Medina-Franco JL. Open - Costa Rica), 2023. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.7858102 .
chemoinformatic resources to explore the structure, properties and chemical space [42] Unidad de informática del Instituto de Química. 2023 https://uniiquim.iquimica.
of molecules. RSC Adv 2017;7(85):54153–63. doi: 10.1039/C7RA11831G . unam.mx/ (accessed 2023-03-15).
[13] Cox PB, Gupta R. Contemporary computational applications and tools in drug dis- [43] Pilón-Jiménez BA, Saldívar-González FI, Díaz-Eufracio BI, Medina-Franco JL. BIO-
covery. ACS Med Chem Lett 2022;13(7):1016–29. doi: 10.1021/acsmedchemlett. FACQUIM: a Mexican compound database of natural products. Biomolecules
1c00662 . 2019;9(1). doi: 10.3390/biom9010031 .
[14] Villoutreix BO, et al. One hundred thousand mouse clicks down the road: selected [44] Sánchez-Cruz N, Pilón-Jiménez BA, Medina-Franco JL. Functional group and di-
online resources supporting drug discovery collected over a decade. Drug Discov versity analysis of BIOFACQUIM: a Mexican natural product database. F1000Res
Today 2013;18(21–22):1081–9. doi: 10.1016/j.drudis.2013.06.013 . 2019;8. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.21540.2 .
[15] Gómez-García A, Medina-Franco JL. Progress and impact of Latin American natural [45] Olmedo DA, González-Medina M, Gupta MP, Medina-Franco JL. Cheminformatic
product databases. Biomolecules 2022;12(9):1202. doi: 10.3390/biom12091202 . characterization of natural products from Panama. Mol Diversity 2017;21(4):779–
[16] L Medina-Franco J. Towards a unified Latin American natural products database: 89. doi: 10.1007/s11030- 017- 9781- 4 .
lANaPD. Future Sci OA 2020;6(8):FSO468. doi: 10.2144/fsoa- 2020- 0068 . [46] Barazorda-Ccahuana, H.L., Ranilla, L.G., Candia-Puma, M.A., Cárcamo-Rodriguez,
[17] Mobley, D.L. The SAMPL challenges. SAMPL. 2023 https://samplchallenges.github. E.G., Centeno-Lopez, A.E., Del-Carpio, G.D., Medina-Franco, J.L., Chávez-Fumagalli,
io/ (accessed 2023-04-30). M.A. Peru NPDB: the Peruvian natural products database for in silico drug screening.
[18] Geballe MT, Guthrie JP. The SAMPL3 blind prediction challenge: transfer Sci Rep 2023 13, 7577. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598- 023- 34729- 0
energy overview. J Comput-Aided Mol Des 2012;26(5):489–96. doi: 10.1007/ [47] Swamy MK, Kumar A. Phytochemical genomics: plant metabolomics and medicinal
s10822- 012- 9568- 8 . plant genomics. Springer Nature; 2023 .
14J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077
[48] Bajorath J, Chávez-Hernández AL, Duran-Frigola M, Fernández-de Gortari E, [52] Zamora WJ, Pinheiro S, German K, Ràfols C, Curutchet C, Luque FJ. Prediction
Gasteiger J, López-López E, Maggiora GM, Medina-Franco JL, Méndez-Lucio O, of the n-octanol/water partition coefficients in the SAMPL6 blind challenge from
Mestres J, Miranda-Quintana RA, Oprea TI, Plisson F, Prieto-Martínez FD, MST continuum solvation calculations. J Comput-Aided Mol Des 2020;34(4):443–
Rodríguez-Pérez R, Rondón-Villarreal P, Saldívar-Gonzalez FI, Sánchez-Cruz N, 51. doi: 10.1007/s10822- 019- 00262- 4 .
Valli M. Chemoinformatics and artificial intelligence colloquium: progress and chal- [53] Viayna A, Pinheiro S, Curutchet C, Luque FJ, Zamora WJ. Prediction of n-
lenges in developing bioactive compounds. J Cheminf 2022;14(1):1–12. doi: 10. octanol/water partition coefficients and acidity constants (pK) in the SAMPL7 blind
1186/s13321- 022- 00661- 0 . challenge with the IEFPCM-MST model. J Comput-Aided Mol Des 2021;35(7):803–
[49] Velez Rueda AJ, et al. Women in bioinformatics & data science - Latin America. 11. doi: 10.1007/s10822- 021- 00394- 6 .
MethodsX 2022;9:101907. doi: 10.1016/j.mex.2022.101907 . [54] Rodriguez SA, Tran JV, Sabatino SJ, Paluch AS. Predicting octanol/water parti-
[50] Bannan CC, Burley KH, Chiu M, Shirts MR, Gilson MK, Mobley DL. Blind prediction of tion coefficients and pKa for the SAMPL7 challenge using the SM12, SM8 and
cyclohexane-water distribution coefficients from the SAMPL5 Challenge. J Comput- SMD solvation models. J Comput-Aided Mol Des 2022;36(9):687–705. doi: 10.1007/
Aided Mol Des 2016;30(11):927–44. doi: 10.1007/s10822- 016- 9954- 8 . s10822- 022- 00474- 1 .
[51] Riquelme M, Vöhringer-Martinez E. SAMPL6 octanol-water partition coefficients [55] Lopez K, Pinheiro S, Zamora WJ. Multiple linear regression models for predicting
from alchemical free energy calculations with MBIS Atomic Charges. J Comput- the n ‑octanol/water partition coefficients in the SAMPL7 blind challenge. J Comput-
Aided Mol Des 2020;34(4):327–34. doi: 10.1007/s10822- 020- 00281- 6 . Aided Mol Des 2021;35(8):923–31. doi: 10.1007/s10822- 021- 00409- 2 .
15