Array14(2022)100135
ContentslistsavailableatScienceDirect
Array
journalhomepage:www.elsevier.com/locate/array
Whowatchesthenewwatchmen?Thechallengesfordronedigitalforensics
investigations
EvangelosMantasa,ConstantinosPatsakisb,c,∗
aUniversityofOxford,OX12JDOxford,UnitedKingdom
bUniversityofPiraeus,80Karaoli&Dimitrioustr,18534Piraeus,Greece
cAthenaResearchCenter,Artemidos6,Marousi15125,Greece
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: The technological advance of drone technology has augmented the existing capabilities of flying vehicles
UAV renderingthemavaluableassetofthemodernsociety.Asmoredronesareexpectedtooccupytheairspace
UAS in the near future, security-related incidents, either malicious acts or accidents, will increase as well. The
Drones forensicsanalysisofasecurityincidentisessential,asdronesareflyingabovepopulatedareasandhavealso
Digitalforensics
been weaponised from radical forces and perpetrators. Thus, it is an imperative need to establish a Drone
Investigation
Digital Forensics Investigation Framework and standardise the processes of collecting and processing such
Standardisation
evidence.
Althoughtherearenumerousdroneplatformsinthemarket,thesameprinciplesapplytoallofthem;just
likemobilephones.Nevertheless,duetothenatureofdrones,standardisedforensicsprocedurestodatedonot
manage to address the required processes and challenges that such investigations pose. Acknowledging this
need, we detail the unique characteristics of drones and the gaps in existing methodologies and standards,
showcasing that there are fundamental issues in terms of their forensics analysis from various perspectives,
ranging from operational and procedural ones, and escalate to manufacturers, as well as legal restrictions.
The above creates a very complex environment where coordinated actions must be made among the key
stakeholders.Therefore,thisworkpavesthewaytoaddressthesechallengesbyidentifyingthemainissues,
theirorigins,andtheneedsinthefieldbyperformingathoroughreviewoftheliteratureandagapanalysis.
1. Introduction high-valuepersonsassassinations,2andusedinattacksagainstindustry
complexes3 to name a few. The number of malicious acts is expected
Afewyearsago,droneswereexclusivelyusedbygovernmentand torisesinceperpetratorsarebecomingmoreacquaintedwiththisnew
military organisations, but the ever-evolving technology made them
technology.
accessibletothepublic.Whatwaslabelledasa‘‘technologyofthefu-
The need to address this emerging technology has pushed Digital
ture’’,quicklybecomeatechnologyoftoday,asdronesintegratedtothe
ForensicsSciencetofurtherspecialiseinhandlingincidentsinvolving
needsofthemarketrapidly.Dronesevolvedfromtoymachinesusedby
numerousflightenthusiaststomachinesthatcanundertakeoperations drones and their supporting equipment or devices. Since this need is
oneverydaytasks.Fromseeminglysimpleapplicationslikehigh-level relativelynew,thereisalimitedamountofinformationandspecialisa-
qualityinfrastructureinspections,andeverydaygoodsdeliveriestolife- tiononthematter,andasthereisnostandardisedpracticetoconducta
savingSearchandRescue(SAR)missions,droneshaveestablishedtheir forensicinvestigationarounddrones,theinvestigatorreliesonalready
valuetothesociety.Therevolutionaryuseofdronescomeswithside
establishedprocedures,relevanttootherdigitaldevices,thatmaynot
effects as malicious actors have also evolved to incorporate drones in
beapplicabletoadrone.Furthermore,thepresenceofalargenumber
their modus operandi as they are cheap, reliable and easy to modify
ofdifferentdevices,thatsupporttheoperationofadroneexpandsthe
to carry payloads (e.g. drugs, explosive devices). Over the last five
years,droneshavebeenusedtodisruptairportoperations,1attempted complexity of the investigation, as the forensics expert will have to
∗ Correspondingauthorat:UniversityofPiraeus,80Karaoli&Dimitrioustr,18534Piraeus,Greece.
E-mailaddresses: emantas000@gmail.com(E.Mantas),kpatsak@unipi.gr(C.Patsakis).
1 https://www.forbes.com/sites/grantmartin/2019/01/08/londons-heathrow-airport-briefly-closed-following-possible-drone-sighting/.
2 https://www.bbc.com/news/world-latin-america-45073385.
3 https://www.nytimes.com/2019/09/14/world/middleeast/saudi-arabia-refineries-drone-attack.html.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2022.100135
Received29June2021;Receivedinrevisedform3October2021;Accepted22February2022
Availableonline11March2022
2590-0056/©2022TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierInc.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NC-NDlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).E.MantasandC.Patsakis Array14(2022)100135
handlethesupportingdevicesaswellastofindandcorrelateevidence • Electronic and Hardware Components: Electronic speed con-
regardingthedroneoperation. trollers (ESC), power distribution board, battery, propellers and
This work focuses on explaining the reason behind the need for a motors, are the essential components to provide power, lift and
standardisedprocedurebyidentifyingtherelateddevicesneededtobe propulsion.
examined and the evidence stored in them. Therefore, we review the • GPS Receiver: Used to provide the location of the drone and
related literature, highlighting key differences with traditional digital enables features such as Return To Home/Land (RTH/RTL) and
forensicsoperationsandthechallengesthattheseintroduce.Weargue autonomousmission’sflightpath.
that since both drone accidents and malicious acts will become in- • RadioFrequencyReceiver:Usedtoreceivecontrolsignalsfrom
creasinglyfrequentinthenearfuture,aforensicsframeworktohandle theground-basedtransmitter,eitherthepilotoragroundcontrol
such incidents should be set in a timely manner. In this regard, our station(GCS).
workperformsathoroughliteraturereviewwhichcoverstheworkin • Body: The main fuselage of the UAV used to protect and house
both academic and ‘gray’ literature as it spans to, e.g. international allthecomponents.
standards. Based on this, our gap analysis illustrates the needs in the • Payload-Sensors:Astheindustrybecomesmorereliedondrones,
fieldandservesasaguidelineforbothacademicandpractitionersin cameras and sensors (e.g. lidar, range-find sensor) are deployed
thefield.
on drones becoming an essential part of the system since these
Therestofthismanuscriptisorganisedasfollows.First,wepresent
aretheonesofferingthemainfunctionality.
the related work by first providing an overview of the drone and
the most relevant forensics tools for drones. Then, in Section 3, we
2.2. Droneforensicstools
discuss which are the primary sources for evidence in a drone and
their types, to proceed with a generic overview of the cases that a
Theneedtoforensicallyinvestigatedroneshassparkedgreatinter-
forensics investigator would have to face. To facilitate her task, we
estamongcybersecurityresearchers.Earlyworkfocusedonidentifying
accompany the latter with a comprehensive and prioritised list of
thecrucialsegmentsrelatedtoadroneinvestigation[1].Intheirwork
evidence for each case. In Section 4.1, we first present the relevant
Kaoetal.[2]andYousefetal.[3,4]haveusedspecificmodelsofdrone
forensicmodelsandstandardstodiscusstheprimarychallengesinthe
makerDJIascasestudiestoanalyseevidencerecordedindroneflights.
forensics investigation in the form of a gap analysis afterwards. The
The same approach, to use a particular drone model from another
keydifferencesofdronesandtheirparticularitiesindicatethatweare
popularmanufacturer,ParrotBebop,wasusedintheworkofKamoun
currently missing not only the needed tools but also the procedures
et al. [5]. In their research, Clark et al. [6] used the DJI Phantom III
to address the upcoming forensics cases. The article then concludes
as their case study to create an open-source tool (DROP) to extract
and streamlines some key findings and open issues for the further
data from the drone, that is stored in an encrypted, encoded, and
developmentofthefield.
proprietaryfile.Sincethereleaseoftheresearch,DROPhasbeenused
2. Relatedwork asthedefaulttoolfortheanalysisofDJIlogfiles,asthereiscurrently
no other tool available in the market. In our previous work [7], we
Thegoalofthissectionistoacquaintthereaderwiththedroneand focused on describing techniques to extract data from drones with
theexistingtoolstocollectforensicevidencefromadrone.Therefore, Ardupilotflightopen-sourcefirmware,developinganopen-sourcetool
webrieflyprovideanoverviewofadroneandproceedtopresentsome that is agnostic to the type of the vehicle model or type, extracting
relevanttoolsandtheirscope. data from the MAVLink messages transmitted on the drone. It must
be highlighted that most of the drone forensics researches focus on
2.1. Overviewofadrone flyingvehiclesthatarepopularonthemarket,runningonproprietary
software,andalthoughtheyprovideasolutiontoconductaforensics
UnmannedAerialVehiclesarecommonlyacknowledgedasdrones investigation,theirmethodology,orpartsofthemethodology,cannot
ineverydaylife.Itisimportanttomakeadistinctionbetweenthesys- be standardised. The techniques described in the research may soon
tems with autonomous capabilities and the hobbyist flying machines; becomeobsoleteorirrelevantduetothechangesdronemanufactures
the capabilities of which rely only on the pilot’s skills. Since these willmostlikelymakeintheirfutureproducts.
radio-controlled(RC)machinesrequireminimalandbasichardwareto
fly, usually a ‘flight board‘ to receive and process the signal to spin 3. Thedroneandevidencesources
themotors,theydonotofferanytangibledigitalforensics.Therefore,
thisworkfocusesondroneswithautonomouscapabilities.Theprimary Inthissection,wehighlighttheprimarycomponentsofadronethat
componentsofadronearethefollowing: can be used as sources for extracting evidence. Then, we proceed to
• FlightController:Themostcriticalcomponentofadronesince pinpoint the cases in which a forensics investigation will be required
andprioritise,whicharethemostrelevantevidencethataninvestigator
it contains a variety of sensors (e.g. accelerometer, gyroscope)
wouldhavetolookforpercase.
and software, or as widely know as the autopilot, to allow the
execution of autonomous commands and more complex flight
scenarios.Theflightcontrollercanalsoreceiveinputfromsensors 3.1. Dronefromtheforensicexpert’sperspective
(e.g.lidar,infrared)andadjusttheflightpathtoavoidcollision
withnearbyobjectswithoutanyhumaninteraction. ThegrowthofdronetechnologyhasintroducedtheuseofUAVstoa
• CompanionComputer:Theflightcontrollercanbedirectlycon- numberofapplicationsintheprivateandmilitarysector.Dronesthat
nectedtoasmallon-boardcompanioncomputer(e.g.Raspberry deliver payloads (e.g. medical supplies or everyday goods) or drones
Pi,AsusTinker-board)thataugmentsthedrones’capabilitieseven conducting surveillance over combat areas, use a variety of sensors
further, running a real-time Operating System (OS). A task like and systems to communicate and receive commands from the ground
anobjectavoidancecanbeexecutedbycombiningtheon-board operators.Fromlaptopsandmobiledevicestodirectionalantennasand
range-findingsensorsconnectedonthecompanioncomputerand 5Gtowerstonameafew,theoperationofadronereliesonasystem,the
providethatfeedbacktotheflightcontroller.Companioncomput- UnmannedAerialSystem(UAS).Therefore,thedigitalforensicsexpert
ersareexpectedtobefoundonmakeshift/DIYflyingmachinesor mustfocusonthewholeUASandnotonlytheflyingvehicle.Thekey
verysophisticatedcommercialdronestohandledemandingtasks, componentsoftheUAS(seeFig.1),whichmayalsocomeintheform
suchasobjectavoidanceand3Dobjectreconstruction. ofaswarm,arethefollowing:
2E.MantasandC.Patsakis Array14(2022)100135
Fig.1. ComponentsofanUnmannedAerialSystem(UAS).
• Unmanned Aircraft (UmA): The flying vehicle as described in whichalongwithothererrormessagesmaypointtoamalfunc-
the previous section, is probably the most critical component tion.Thepilotofthedronealsocancreateafightmissionthatcan
sincethewholesystemexiststoassistthedrone’soperationand be loaded on the flight controller directly. This file can provide
itsautonomouscapabilities.Itshouldalsobenotedthatanother informationaboutpreviousflightsthatwerenotstoredordeleted,
ormultipleflyingvehiclesmaybepartofthesameUAS,which orevenscheduledflights.
isdescribedasaswarm. • Media: Drones equipped with cameras offer a vast source of
• Ground Control Station (GCS): Ground Control Station is the images and video footage captured during the flight. The ac-
ground-based software and hardware that provides communica- quisition of such media can indicate the target of the drone’s
tion and enables the remote control of the drone. GCS software mission(e.g.spyingontheindustrialormilitarycomplex)andthe
can be installed on systems on fixed locations (e.g. military air- areas affected by the drone’s flight. These multimedia may con-
bases)orinportablesystemssuchaslaptopsandmobilephones. tain frames of the drone operator, footages before the collision,
The acquisition of the GCS device is of great significance since resultinginaquickeridentificationbytheforensicsinvestigator.
it contains most of the flight data and can be linked with an • Sensororotherpayloadlogs:Thepayloadofadroneisnotlim-
individual. There are commercially available drones that come itedtocamerasonly.Dronesarebecomingpartofoureveryday
equippedwithcontrollerswithproprietarysoftwaretocontrolthe lifeandundertakeoperationsthatrequireadvancedhardwareon
drone,ahybriddevicecombiningtheanalogueRFcontrolandthe board(e.g.3Dreconstructionoftheground,infrastructureinspec-
digitalinterfaceofamobileplatform,theacquisitionofwhichcan tion). Although this kind of equipment captures large quantities
alsocontainconsiderableevidence. of data, they may not have any significant forensic value to the
• CommunicationData-Link(CDL):Datalinksaremainlyusedfor investigation, as data collected are to be utilised for a specific
UAV control, video transmission from the on-board camera and businessoperation.
telemetry providing information on the location of the vehicle
The presence of a large variety of devices also provides a large
or other sensor values. Each data link broadcasts on a different
sourceofevidencecollection.EachdeviceintheUASwillmostlikely
radio-frequency(RF)wavelengthwith4GHzand900Mhzmainly
haveastorageunitwherethedroneforensicsinvestigatorcanuncover
beingusedforUAVcontrol,3-4–5GHzforvideotransmissionand
details about the activity of the drone and its operator. The presence
400–900 Mhz for telemetry.4 Small UAVs (sUAV) may also use
of multiple evidence on different devices means that if the drone or
Bluetooth and WiFi communications to execute all the previous
a device of the UAS is rendered unrecoverable due to, e.g. a damage
operations,buttheirflightradiusissignificantlyreduced.
or anti-forensics techniques5 (e.g. encrypted internal drone memory),
Alltheseinterconnectedcomponentsstoredatarelatedtothedrone there is a high possibility that other evidence can be retrieved. The
operationorservethemtootherdevices.Thesedatacanbeclassified mostcommondevicesthatcancontainevidenceofadroneflightare
inthefollowingtypes: describedbelow:
• Flight logs and predefined flight missions: As mentioned be- • Drone Internal Storage: The drone’s internal on-board storage
fore, the flight controller, is responsible for the autonomous ca- contains, although in a limited amount due to hardware limi-
pabilities, has another function during the flight. It generates a tations, as it rarely exceeds tens of GBs, flight logs and media
logthatcontainsinformationaboutcriticalsensorsliketheGPS captured during the flight. Usually, the internal memory serves
position and altitude, resulting in a reconstruction of the flight asanalternativeor‘‘backup’’locationtostoredataifremovable
path,providingvaluableinformationaboutthedroneactivityto storageisnotpresent.
theforensicsinvestigator.Moreover,theycontainkeyequipment • On-boardRemovableStorage:Thewidespreadneedtocapture
data and error logs. For instance, battery and signal statistics alargeamountofdatacanbesatisfiedbyusingremovablemedia
4 https://www.911security.com/learn/airspace-security/drone- 5 https://blog.eccouncil.org/6-anti-forensic-techniques-that-every-cyber-
fundamentals/drone-communication-data-link. investigator-dreads/.
3E.MantasandC.Patsakis Array14(2022)100135
Fig.2. EvidenceDistributiononUASdevices.
liketheSDcard.Providedwiththefactthatstoragecapacitiesof Table1
microSDcardshaveexceededtheTBmark,thelowpriceperbyte Highleveldescriptionofdroneforensicinvestigationcases.
ratiohasestablishedthemasthedominantdatastoragesolution Evidencesource Colour
inUAVs.MostofthedroneshaveanSDcardslottosaveimages Fuselage*
and video footage recorded during the flight or even the ‘‘hard GCSDevice*
drive’’ofthecompanioncomputer. FlightLogs
• Companion Computer Storage: As mentioned before, compan- Media
Sensors
ion computers are running a real-time OS. This may contain
On-boardComputer
digitalevidenceas‘‘raw’’informationofdronesactivity,likethe
Payload
execution of flight-mission scripts and transmission of data to
NetworkPacketLogs
otherdevices.
(a)Colourcodingofevidencesources.Note(*):Relatedphysicalevidence
• Mobile Devices: Mobile GCS applications provide the ability
Case Sourcespriority
to control a drone or receive a payload (e.g. video stream of
thedrone’son-boardcamera)viawirelessconnection(e.g.WiFi, Collision/Crashland
Bluetooth) and should also be considered as a prospective data IllegalAreaSurveillance
Ordnance/PayloadDelivery
sourcethatcanbedirectlylinkedtothepilot.
Cyber-attack(Victim)
• NetworkPackets:Themonitoringandcapturingofpacketsfrom
Cyber-attack(Actor)
theUASnetwork,canleadtothediscoveryofnumerouspayloads
Weatherrelatedaccident
ordevicesandserversthatthefightdataarestored,asanaddi-
(b)Prioritisationofevidencesourcesaccordingtothecase.
tionalsourceofevidencethatcouldnotbeotherwiseobviousto
(eur
theforensicinvestigator.
• Cloud Storage: There is a currently increasing trend in UAV
technology,wheremanufacturersallowtheirclientstostoretheir
they would be available on the pilot’s GCS device (e.g. accident in a
logs and images on their servers. Data storage outsourcing to
deliveryflight).
third parties’ servers, internal UAS cloud, and backup servers,
Goingastepfurther,wehavetoconsidercasesofmaliciousphysical
duetothedemandtoreducelocalstoragemedia,shouldalsobe
actseitherfromthedroneortowardsit.Ontheonehand,weconsider
consideredduringaUASforensicsinvestigation.
physicalattackstowardsthedronethatincludebutarenotlimitedto,
An indicative list of the devices and the evidence found on a typical physical damage or theft of the drone or its payload. On the other
UASisillustratedinFig.2. hand, we consider acts where the drone is used to perform malicious
physical acts which include, among others interception, surveillance,
3.2. Casesforforensicsinvestigation theft,deliveryofillegalproducts,anduseofarmoury.
Finally,weconsiderdigitalattackstoandfromthedrone[8].Dig-
It is deemed necessary to outline the cases that a digital forensic ital attacks towards the drone can be considered jamming, command
investigationwouldberequired,tohighlightwhichevidencemightbe injection,electromagneticpulse(EMP),denialofservice(e.g.flooding
availableandwhichonescouldbemoremorerelevantforeachcase. a network interface), and data leakage through the interception of a
The most ‘‘benign’’ cases involve accidents where the forensic in- vulnerableprotocol.Ofspecificinterestcanbeconsideredthemalware
vestigator should determine its causes. It is clear that even a small infectionofthedroneduetotheexistenceof,e.g.avulnerableinterface
malfunction, due to the altitude that a drone may have and the dif- orservice.Moreover,wehavetoalsoconsiderfirmwarebackdoorsas
ficulty to balance once something starts falling from the sky, severe moreandmoresupplychainattacksarebecomingmorerelevant[9].
damageswouldbesufferedbythedrone.Moreover,whileonemaynot On the other side, the drone can be used to launch a digital attack,
careaboutthedamagetothedroneanditspayloadperse,insurance e.g. infiltrate a wireless network, perform a denial of service of an
issuesduetothecauseddamagesmayrequiretheinvestigationofthe unprotectedserviceorpartiallydisruptit.
accident.Itshouldbenotedthatweatherissuesduetosuddenandlocal Usingthecollectedevidence,theinvestigatorhasfirstlytoassessthe
phenomenaorevencollisionswithabirdoranotherdronefallintothe natureoftheincidentandwhetheritisanoffence,e.g.whetheritisan
accidentcategoryandhavetobeinvestigated.Insuchcases,themost accidentoramaliciousact.Basedonthesceneunderinvestigation,the
relevant evidence would be the flight logs and media captured, since collected evidence and the visible incurred damages, the investigator
4E.MantasandC.Patsakis Array14(2022)100135
has to assess the actual impact as further damages may have been
caused. The evidence will allow her to estimate when and where the
incident occurred but also to extract some key locations of interest,
e.g. from where the drone was launched and where it was heading
to.Thescheduledflightandthepayloadmayalsodenotethedrone’s
purpose. For the attribution, the investigator also has to consider the
stored data (images, videos), metadata (emails, registered accounts,
stored WiFi), hardware tags, as well as wet evidence (fingerprints,
DNA)toassessthepossibleownerandcontrollerofthedrone.Clearly,
theabovehighlightthestrongconnectionofthedigitalevidencewith
thephysicaloneswhichactrathercomplementary.
Tosummarisetheevidencecollectionsources,inTable1,wehigh-
light and prioritise the most relevant evidence sources per case. The
tableclearlyshowshowthegenericcaseswediscussedearlierdifferas
theinvestigatorhastolookfordifferentevidence.
4. Challengesandgapsfordronedigitalforensics
There is a constant challenge to stay up to date with the rapid
changes in the latest technologies. Drones are beginning to shape
tomorrow’s society, used by many individuals for both personal and
professional purposes. The challenge of carrying out digital forensics
ondronesandassociateddevicesaspartoftheUAS,istoidentifyflight
routes,possiblemalfunctions,collisions,andassociatedmedia(pictures
andvideos)containedwithinthesystem’sdevices.Thesemayfacilitate
the investigator to understand the mission of the drone, whether the
operation was successfully performed, the people or assets that were
affected by it, and the reasons behind possible damage or collision.
Thefindingsderivedfromelectronicevidencemustfollowastandard
set of guidelines to ensure that the investigation is not challenged in
a court of law [10]. Moreover, the border-less nature should also be
consideredduetocloudstorage(e.g.evidenceonaserverhostedina
third country). In fact, as indicated by NIST, cloud forensics are also
facing many challenges [11] and a draft mapping of, e.g. ISO 27037
isnotthatsimple.6 Additionally,theprovisionoftheevidencefroma
cloudproviderorathirdparty,ingeneral,isnotnecessarilygranted,
asshowninthecaseofAppleandtheSanBernardinoshootingcase.7
Note that even if the cloud service provider is willing to cooperate
the data may be stored across different servers and countries. The
Fig. 3. Applicability of standards and guidelines to the investigation process classes
presence of multiple devices and various formats on a UAS requires
andactivities.
a high level of expertise from the forensic’s experts that take part in
the investigation since each device requires different acquisition and
examinationtechniques. ProcedureModel(ACSPM)[14],theintegrateddigitalforensicprocess
model of Kohn et al. [15], the Systematic digital forensic investiga-
4.1. Relevantstandards,practicesandchallenges tionmodel(SRDFIM).[16],andtheadvanceddataacquisitionmodel
(ADAM)[17].Ingeneral,lawenforcementagenciesfollowvariantsof
Standards are a vital necessity to ensure conformance and mutual theACPO(AssociationofChiefPoliceOfficers)guidelines[18].
complianceacrossthegeographicalandjurisdictionalborder.Thereare The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) has re-
currently numerous standards and established practices provided by leased a series of standards to assist in this effort by providing the
organisationsworldwideusingacceptedmethods.Thetechnicaldetails familyofISO27000,thatfocusoninformationsecuritystandardisation
onhowtoforensicallyapproachtheinvestigationdiffers,dependingon procedures. In what follows, we present the most relevant standards
thedevice.Theanalysisofelectronicevidenceistypicallycategorised about digital forensics investigation of drones as described in Fig. 3
into the following phases: identification, collection, acquisition, preser- derivedfromISO/IEC27041:2015[19].
vation and disposal, although the exact phases naming may vary due
to the usage of different forensic model that each organisation finds • ISO/IEC 27035: This is a three-part standard that provides or-
appropriatefortheirneeds. ganisationswithastructuredandplannedapproachtotheman-
Currently, there are several models and methodologies regarding agement of security incident management covering a range of
incidentresponsephases
thehandlingofevidenceanddigitalforensicproceduresduringanin-
vestigation.TheseincludetheDFRWSmodel[12],theEnhancedDigital • ISO/IEC27037:2012:Thisstandardprovidesgeneralguidelines
about the handling of the evidence of the most common digital
Investigation Process Model (EDIP) [13], the Analytical Crime Scene
devicesandthecircumstancesincludingdevicesthatexistinvarious
forms,givingtheexampleofanautomotivesystem[20]thatuses
6 https://downloads.cloudsecurityalliance.org/initiatives/imf/Mapping- many sensors that a drone does. This means that although the
the-Forensic-Standard-ISO-IEC-27037-to-Cloud-Computing.pdf. framework for the supporting devices of a drone exists in the
7 https://edition.cnn.com/2016/02/16/us/san-bernardino-shooter-phone- ISOstandard,thehandlingoftheactualflyingvehicleisnotyet
apple/index.html. established.
5E.MantasandC.Patsakis Array14(2022)100135
• ISO/IEC27038:2014:Describesthedigitalredactionofinforma- of the standards mentioned above. Therefore, while the equipment
tionthatmustnotbedisclosed,takingextremecaretoensurethat and the preparation of a forensic lab that would investigate a drone
removedinformationispermanentlyunrecoverable. are foreseen, the particularities of drones are not covered by existing
• ISO/IEC 27040:2015: Provides detailed technical guidance on standards.
how organisations can define an appropriate level of risk miti- Finally, INTERPOL recently released an overview of drones and
gation by employing a well-proven and consistent approach to associated devices and guidance for digital forensic investigators re-
theplanning,design,documentation,andimplementationofdata sponsible for the acquisition, examination, analysis, and presentation
storagesecurity. of the digital evidence from the drone [24]. This work tried to gap
• ISO/IEC27041:2015:Describesotherstandardsanddocuments the knowledge of law enforcement officers on this state of the art
toprovideguidance,settingthefundamentalprinciplesensuring forensics topic and is the first official organisation attempt towards a
thattools,techniquesandmethods,appropriatelyselectedforthe standardisedprocedure.
investigation.
• ISO/IEC27042:2015:Thisstandarddescribeshowmethodsand 4.2. Challenges and gaps in established procedures and current standard
processestobeusedduringaninvestigationcanbedesignedand limitation
implementedtoallowcorrectevaluationofpotentialdigitalevi-
dence,interpretationofdigitalevidence,andeffectivereporting Duetothenatureofadrone,itisapparentthatitisasystemthat
offindings. significantlydifferentiatesfromtraditionaldevicesthataninvestigator
• ISO/IEC27043:2015:Itdefinesthekeycommonprinciplesand wouldhavetoperformdigitalforensics.Firstly,itisacyber–physical
processes underlying the investigation of incidents and provides system; therefore, the physical part introduces many issues in the
aframeworkmodelforallstagesofinvestigations. investigation.Thiscanbemanifestedbyvariousmeans,e.g.thesensors
• ISO/IEC 27050: This recently revised standard guides non- may have significant differences due to calibration or accuracy as in
technicalandtechnicalpersonneltohandleevidenceonelectron- the case of the GPS sensor. To highlight this significant issue, the
icallystoredinformation(ESI). following should be considered. The accuracy of the GPS depends on
• ISO/IEC 17025:2017: This standard describes the general re- the sensor’s technology.9 A Standard GPS or has an accuracy of 1.5
quirements for the competence of testing and calibration lab- meters, a Differential GPS 40 centimeters where in the case of RTK 1
oratories, applying to all organisations performing laboratory centimeter.ThisdeviationmeansthattheGCSdoesnotreporttheexact
activities,regardlessofthenumberofpersonnel. location of the UAV. In a case of a catastrophic event (e.g. collision
• ISO/IEC30121:2015:Providesaframeworkfororganisationsto withanearbyobjectorextremeweatherconditions)thedroneoperator
strategicallyprepareforadigitalinvestigationbeforeanincident canonlyassumethepositionofthedrone,asreportedbytheGCS,and
occurs,tomaximisetheeffectivenessoftheinvestigation. the data for the forensic investigation cannot be precisely evaluated.
Theaccuracyofthesensorisnottheonlyproblemregardingsatellite
ETSIisaEuropeanStandardsOrganizationthatproducesstandards navigation systems. Drones are susceptible to GPS spoofing [25–28],
for ICT systems and services that are used all around the world, meaning that the validity and integrity of the GPS signal can be in
collaboratingwithnumerousorganisations.In2020ETSIpublishedTS questionduringaninvestigation.
103 643 V1.1.1 (2020-01) [21], a set of techniques for assurance of Aspreviouslymentioned,theUASconsistsofmultipledevices,and
digitalmaterialinalegalproceeding,toprovideasetoftoolstoassist itis notalwaysclear whichonewould beavailableduring aforensic
thelegitimatepresentationofdigitalevidence.8 investigation. For instance, the UAV may have been collected by the
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has incident responder but may not have access to the GCS device either
releasedguidelinesfororganisationstodevelopforensiccapability,based because it was destroyed or not found during the investigation. The
ontheprinciplesofforensicscienceintheaspectoftheapplicationof inversemayalsoapply,thatistheUAVcannotberecovered,andthe
science to the law but should not be used on digital forensic investi- investigator has access only to the GCS device. Therefore, there is no
gations due to subjection to different laws and regulations, as clearly full access to possible evidence sources. Despite the lack of a source
stated on their manual. The scope on NIST guidelines is incorporating of evidence, a big challenge is to determine which source should be
forensics into the information system life cycle of an organisation. The trustedinthecasethatthetwosourceshavecontradictoryormissing
mostrelevantguidelinesare800-86[22]forIntegratingForensicTech- logs. Note that the differences may stem from various reasons as the
niques into Incident Response and 800-101 [23] for Mobile Device problemisamplifiedbythelackofproperauthenticationmechanisms.
Forensics. Since in most UAVs the commands are not authenticated via crypto-
The Scientific Working Group on Digital Evidence (SWGDE) is an graphicprimitivesonemaycraftthelogfilesinanyofthetwodevices.
organisation engaged in the field of digital and multimedia evidence Even if this is not the case, the differences from the sensors (see the
tofostercommunicationandcooperationaswellastoensurequalityand discussion above for the differences in GPS) introduce further issues
consistencywithintheforensiccommunity.SWGDEhasreleasedanumber fortheinvestigator.
ofdocumentstoprovidethecurrentbestpracticesonalargevarietyof Currently,therearealsonumerousdronemodelsthatlackessential
stateoftheartforensicssubjects.Nonetheless,noneofthemistargeting security features that may hinder the forensic investigation, into for-
noraddressingtheparticularitiesofdroneforensics. mally presenting the case. The lack of encryption and authentication
Nevertheless,innoneoftheaforementionedstandardsisthereany on commercially available products is a profound example. Due to
reference to drones. While someone could oversee this omission as theirabsence,thereceivedcommandsarenotauthenticated,andtheir
the procedures could cover the procedures needed for UAV forensic source can be questioned. Therefore, it is not evident who issued a
investigations. However, for the collection of forensic evidence from commandtothedrone,thatinthecaseofanautonomousmissioncould
a UAV one cannot always access the data and may need to exploit significantly deviate from the expected flight path or pattern. On the
the device to gain access to them. As will be discussed in the next contrary, when there is encryption used on the device, the key may
paragraphs,suchprocessesarenotforeseenbyanystandard.Moreover, not always be available, so the acquisition from forensics tools might
the contradicting records in the log files of the UAV and the GCS; notbepossible.
alsodiscussedinthefollowingparagraphs,arenotconsideredbyany
9 https://marxact.com/support/what-is-the-difference-between-
8 https://www.swgde.org/documents/published. standalone-differential-gps-and-real-time-kinematic/.
6E.MantasandC.Patsakis Array14(2022)100135
The latter issue with encryption leads to another challenge. To take place. Therefore, the investigator should take into consideration
collect the evidence from a drone that lacks accessible removable whichisthedevicefromwhichshehastocollectevidenceandunder
storagedevices,ortheyareencrypted,similartomobiledevices,one whichmodeitallowstheirextractiontopreventtamperingwiththem.
may need to exploit a vulnerability to gain access to the data. This This example raises another concern about the technical knowl-
implies tampering of the digital evidence introducing issues for the edge of the investigators tasked with acquiring data from the drone.
chainofcustodyoftheevidence.Thenatureoftheexploitandtheneed Although the investigators are acquainted with procedures to handle
to,e.g.‘‘root’’thedevicemaysignificantlyalterthestoredinformation differentkindofdevices,thecognitiveandhumanfactors[31]coupled
andcarefulexaminationofthetoolsandmethodsisnecessarytoallow withthelackofexpertiseonthedrones’technicaldetails,thatcomeson
thepresentationofthefindingsinacourtoflaw.Clearly,suchpractices thestandardisationoftheprocess,isofgreatimportance.Whendeemed
violatethefirstprincipleofACPO,whichclearlystatesthat: necessarytoswitchonthedevice,itisadvisedthatthecorresponding
environmenthasFaradayshieldingtopreventnetworksignalsfromor
‘‘No action taken by law enforcement agencies or their agents should tothedrone.Ifthisisnotpossible,thenjammingdevicesoraluminium
change data held on a computer or storage media which may subse- foils must be used to prevent incoming and outgoing network traffic
quentlyberelieduponincourt.’’ fromthedrone.
Moreover,thereareseverallegalandethicalaspectsthatunderpin
One has also to consider the diversity of the platforms. Unlike
such a forensic investigation and may introduce several restrictions
mobilephoneswheretherearetwomainplatforms,AndroidandiOS,
for the investigator. For instance, depending on the jurisdiction, the
and can be considered a well-established market the drone market
investigator may not be allowed to use the stored credentials in the
mighthaveabigplayer(DJI)whichenjoysthebiggestmarketshare;
dronetocollectfurtherevidence.
more than 70%, nevertheless, the rest is significantly fragmented.
Therefore,thereareplentyofdifferentplatformswhichimplytheneed
5. Conclusions
for various forensics tools. Furthermore, the different scope of many
of the drones as well as their big numbers suggest that despite the
Due to the continuous adoption of UAVs in various domains from
fragmentationthisheterogeneityisexpectedtocontinue,sothereisno
shipping and delivery to agriculture, and from disaster management
foreseeninteroperabilityoftheforensicstools.Itisworthnoticingthat
and smart city monitoring to search and rescue operations, the skies
therecentbanonChinesemanufactureddronesmayleadtosignificant
arebeingpopulatedcontinuouslywithmoreandmoreflyingvehicles.
marketchanges.10
ThefactthatUAVscansavebothtimeandcostswhileofferingnovel
Oneverychallengingparameterfordroneforensicshastodowith
services implies that this trend will continue. Moreover, we have al-
liveforensics.WhileAdelstein[29]stressedtheneedforliveforensics,
ready witnessed their malicious usage in various acts, both physical
we have to acknowledge the additional difficulties and limitations of
and digital. Based on the above one can easily understand that the
performinglivedigitalforensicsinadrone.Contraryto‘‘traditionally’’
increaseinthenumbersofdronescoupledwiththeirexploitationfrom
compromiseddeviceswheretheadversarywillhaveintegratedevasion,
adversaries is going to soon make digital forensics investigations on
persistence and anti-analysis mechanisms, in a drone the adversary
dronesanorm.Insurancecompanies,lawenforcementagencies,secu-
mayhaveinstalledadditionalphysicalmechanisms,sothedronemay
rity firms and individuals will have to extract evidence from a drone
physically react, e.g. consider it being armoured, or try to fly away.
to investigate a case. Nonetheless, as already discussed in this work,
Beyondthat,sincethedroneisremotelycontrolled;evenviathecloud,
aUAVisverydifferentcomparedtotraditionalcomputingdevices.In
killswitchesorothersuchmechanismsareexpectedtocontinuebeing
fact,itsphysicalnature,itsmobility,andduality;intermsofcontrol,
relevant during the investigation. To this end, to capture a drone, it
createaverycomplexenvironment.Thelatteraspectsarenotcovered
is advised to approach it from a non-visible angle and use a non-
byexistingstandards,furtherperplexingtheinvestigations.
tampering measure such as a coat or net. Next, the drone should be
Wearguethatitisahightimeforthecorrespondingstakeholders
turnedoffwithouttamperinganypossiblewetevidenceonit.
toacknowledgetheseissuesandcollaboratetodevelopsomebaseline
Sincethereisnostandardisedproceduretoconductadigitalforen-
principlesthatwillfacilitatetheinvestigationsinthenearfuture.The
sics investigation on drones, researchers have to resolve to already
challengesaremultipleandcannotbesolvedindividuallywithmanyof
established practices that apply to similar devices. This raises the
themrequiringfurtherstepsfromthemanufacturers.Atypicalexample
following question: What kind of device is a drone or relevant to, to
can be considered the use of cryptographic primitives to authenticate
selectamethodtoproceedwiththeforensicstriage.Avalidargument
the received commands from the GCS. It is straightforward that this
would be that a drone has many similarities with a mobile phone
measure increases the overall security of a drone, preventing many
regarding the hardware (e.g. processor architecture) and the sensors
command injection attacks; nevertheless, it provides the guarantees
(e.g. GPS receiver, accelerometer). It should be noted here that there
of the audit trail for the forensic investigator. Further unification of
is also no standard for handling mobile digital forensics case, yet an
interfacesfromthemanufacturersmayalsofacilitatethedevelopment
initiativehasrecentlystartedbytheFORMOBILEH2020project.11
offorensictoolsthataddresstheneedsformoreplatforms.
Toacquiretheneededdata,theinvestigatorwillhavetoresolveto
SeveralcommonalitiesofUAVsandmobilephonesintermsofex-
thetechniquesillustratedinFig.4.Typicallytologicallyimageamobile
tractionofevidencerequireamoreholisticapproachfromtheforensics
device, the investigator has to turn on the device. If this method is
investigators for both cases. As discussed, one may need to exploit
applied to a drone, there is a high risk to alter or erase the existing
some vulnerability to gain access to such devices to gain access to
data of the UAV’s internal memory [30]. As stated in [6], turning on
theevidencewhichviolatestheprinciplesofACPOandmanyexisting
the drone will erase the previously recorded flight log, resulting in
standards. This highlights a critical issue in the collection of digital
the loss of evidence and alteration of the investigation. Although the
evidenceasitquestionsthechainofcustodyoftheevidence.Evidently,
investigatorfollowedtheprocedurecorrectly,theresultmayrenderthe
itopensthedoorforexploitationformultipleperspectivesifitisnot
wholeinvestigationuselessduetomisconceptionsaboutthedrone’sin-
correctlyaddressed.Forinstance,onemayuseittorendertheevidence
ternaloperations.Sincethestorageofdataonthedroneitselfishighly
useless or one may use it to implant evidence. Evidently, the latter
volatile, extreme caution and preparation for the acquisition should
indicatesthatalegalperspectiveisdeemednecessary.Notably,wehave
alsoidentifiedjurisdictionissuesthatrequirethelegalapproach.
10 https://www.ainonline.com/aviation-news/aerospace/2020-08-17/us- Based on our gap analysis, we believe that the development of a
nears-law-banning-chinese-drones. standard for drone forensics is necessary and timely. The aforemen-
11 https://formobile-project.eu/. tioned challenges require several fundamental changes in the drones
7E.MantasandC.Patsakis Array14(2022)100135
Fig.4. Dataacquisitiontechniques.
perseandtheestablishedforensicsproceduresandmorecoordinated [10] McKemmishR.Whenisdigitalevidenceforensicallysound?In:IFIPinternational
effortstowardsthisdirection.Tothisend,weprioritisetheharmonisa- conferenceondigitalforensics.Springer;2008,p.3–15.
tionofmanufacturerswithcommonbestpracticesfromotherplatforms [11] Herman M, Iorga M, Salim AM, Jackson RH, Hurst MR, Leo R, Lee R,
LandrevilleNM,etal.Tech.rep.,NationalInstituteofStandardsandTechnology;
that will pave the way for procedures and tools could be established
2020.
anddeveloped. [12] PalmerG,etal.Aroadmapfordigitalforensicresearch.In:Firstdigitalforensic
researchworkshop,Utica,NewYork.2001,p.27–30.
Declarationofcompetinginterest [13] BaryamureebaV,TushabeF.Theenhanceddigitalinvestigationprocessmodel.
DigitInvestig2004.
[14] Bulbul HI, Yavuzcan HG, Ozel M. Digital forensics: An analytical crime scene
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
proceduremodel(ACSPM).ForensicSciInt2013;233(1):244–56.
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to [15] KohnM,EloffM,EloffJ.Integrateddigitalforensicprocessmodel.ComputSecur
influencetheworkreportedinthispaper. 2013;38:103–15,CybercrimeintheDigitalEconomy.
[16] AgarwalA,GuptaM,GuptaS,GuptaSC.Systematicdigitalforensicinvestigation
model.IntJComputSciSecur(IJCSS)2011;5(1):118–31.
Acknowledgements
[17] Adams R, Hobbs V, Mann G. The advanced data acquisition model (ADAM):
A process model for digital forensic practice. J Digit Forensics Secur Law
This work was supported by the European Commission under the 2013;8(4):25–48.
Horizon 2020 Programme (H2020), as part of the projects Cyber- [18] WilliamsJ.ACPOgoodpracticeguidefordigitalevidence.2012,Metropolitan
PoliceService,AssociationofChiefPoliceOfficers,GB.
Sec4Europe,Greece(GrantAgreementno.830929)andLOCARD,Greece
[19] ISO/IECJTC1/SC27Informationsecurity,cybersecurityandprivacyprotection.
(Grant Agreement no. 832735). The content of this article does not
Informationtechnology—Securitytechniques—Guidanceonassuringsuitabil-
reflecttheofficialopinionoftheEuropeanUnion.Responsibilityforthe ityandadequacyofincidentinvestigativemethod.ISO/IEC27041:2015,Geneva,
informationandviewsexpressedthereinliesentirelywiththeauthors. CH:InternationalOrganizationforStandardization;2012.
[20] JointTechnicalCommitteeISO/IECJTC.Informationtechnology—Securitytech-
niques—Guidelinesforidentification,collection,acquisitionandpreservationof
References
digital evidence. ISO/IEC 27037:2012, Geneva, CH: International Organization
forStandardization;2012,URLhttps://www.iso.org/standard/44381.html.
[1] Kovar D, Dominguez G, Murphy C. UAV (aka drone) forensics. 2016, URL [21] EuropeanTelecommunicationsStandardsInstitute.Techniquesforassuranceof
https://integriography.files.wordpress.com/2016/06/uav-forensics-ts16-final- digitalmaterialusedinlegalproceedings-ETSITS103643V1.1.1(2020-01).
distribution.pdf. 2020,TechniquesforAssuranceofDigitalMaterialUsedinLegalProceedings,
[2] Kao D-Y, Chen M-C, Wu W-Y, Lin J-S, Chen C-H, Tsai F. Drone foren- ETSI, URL https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_ts/103600_103699/103643/01.01.
sic investigation: DJI spark drone as a case study. Procedia Comput Sci 01_60/ts_103643v010101p.pdf.
2019;159:1890–9, Knowledge-Based and Intelligent Information & Engineering [22] KentK,ChevalierS,GranceT,DangH.Tech.rep.,NationalInstituteofStandards
Systems:Proceedingsofthe23rdInternationalConferenceKES2019. &Technology;2006.
[3] YousefM,IqbalF.Droneforensics:AcasestudyonaDJImavicair.In:2019 [23] AyersR,BrothersS,JansenW.Guidelinesonmobiledeviceforensics,csrc.2014,
IEEE/ACS16thinternationalconferenceoncomputersystemsandapplications. URLhttps://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-101/rev-1/final.
2019,p.1–3.http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/AICCSA47632.2019.9035365. [24] INTERPOL. Framework for responding to a drone incident for first respon-
[4] YousefM,IqbalF,HussainM.Droneforensics:Adetailedanalysisofemerging dersanddigitalforensicspractitioners.2019,https://www.interpol.int/content/
DJImodels.In:202011thinternationalconferenceoninformationandcommu- download/15298/file/DFL_DroneIncident_Final_EN.pdf.
nicationsystems.2020,p.066–71.http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICICS49469.2020. [25] TippenhauerNO,PöpperC,RasmussenKB,CapkunS.Ontherequirementsfor
239530. successfulGPSspoofingattacks.In:Proceedingsofthe18thACMconferenceon
[5] KamounF,BouafifH,IqbalF.Towardsabetterunderstandingofdroneforensics: computerandcommunicationssecurity.2011,p.75–86.
AcasestudyofparrotARdrone2.0.IntJDigitCrimeForensics2019;12:1–23. [26] KernsAJ,ShepardDP,BhattiJA,HumphreysTE.Unmannedaircraftcaptureand
http://dx.doi.org/10.4018/IJDCF.2020010103. controlviaGPSspoofing.JFieldRobotics2014;31(4):617–36.
[6] ClarkD,MeffertC,BaggiliI,BreitingerF.DROP(droneopensourceparser)your [27] Gaspar Ja, Ferreira R, Sebastião P, Souto N. Capture of uavs through gps
drone: Forensic analysis of the DJI phantom III. Digit Investig 2017;22:S3–14. spoofing.In:2018globalwirelesssummit.IEEE;2018,p.21–6.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.diin.2017.06.013. [28] ArteagaSP,HernándezLAM,PérezGS,OrozcoALS,VillalbaLJG.Analysisofthe
[7] Mantas E, Patsakis C. GRYPHON: Drone forensics in dataflash and telemetry GPSspoofingvulnerabilityinthedrone3Drsolo.IEEEAccess2019;7:51782–9.
logs.In:AttrapadungN,YagiT,editors.Advancesininformationandcomputer [29] Adelstein F. Live forensics: diagnosing your system without killing it first.
security.Cham:SpringerInternationalPublishing;2019,p.377–90. CommunACM2006;49(2):63–6.
[8] YaacoubJ-P,SalmanO.Securityanalysisofdronessystems:Attacks,limitations, [30] ArshadH,JantanAB,AbiodunOI.Digitalforensics:Reviewofissuesinscientific
andrecommendations.InternetThings2020;100218. validationofdigitalevidence.JInformProcessSyst2018;14(2).
[9] Europol.Internetorganisedcrimethreatassessment.EuropeanUnionAgencyfor [31] Sunde N, Dror IE. Cognitive and human factors in digital forensics: Problems,
LawEnforcementCooperation(Europol);2020. challenges,andthewayforward.DigitInvestig2019;29:101–8.
8