Experience is at the core of virtual reality. According to Kolb's expe- riential learning cycle, the learner starts with an experience, reflects upon this experience, and then takes this newfound information to learn, un- learn, or even relearn. It is a powerful transaction that occurs between a learner and the environment where experience becomes the bedrock for learning (Kolb, 1984, 2015).

information, reflects upon it, and determines how it fits into the learner's schemata. This reflection then leads to and provokes the stage of Abstract Conceptualization where a learner forms a new idea or modifies previous thinking; this is also where the learning, unlearning, and relearning oc- curs. Once a new idea has formed, the learner tests out and applies this new knowledge in the Active Experimentation stage (Kolb, 1984, 2015).

Since learners have diverse backgrounds, different schemata, and personalized learning styles, not only does Kolb's Experiential Learning Cycle support students' individual needs, but it also offers more engaging and active learning experiences (Kolb, 1984, 2015; Konak et al., 2014). The cycle then acts as a spiral, where a learner may go through the process again or several times. Throughout this spiral of learning, the learner uses a prior experience as a guide to test out new knowledge and thereby create new experiences.

In an increasingly globalized world, understanding others and demonstrating empathy toward them is more important than ever. Krznaric (2015) asserts that while empathy is an innate capacity, it is also a skill that you can learn and develop. With teenagers demonstrating 40 percent less empathy than their counterparts 30 years ago, empathy has garnered attention from school stakeholders and become a fundamental component of K-12 SEL programs (CASEL, 2022). Since empathy has been linked to a decrease in aggressive behavior, an increase in both helping and altruistic behaviors, and a strengthening of morality (Batson & Shaw, 1991; Hoffman, 2010), there is also a concerted effort to bring empathy to the forefront of a child's education by integrating it in core curricular areas throughout the school day in order to promote children's emotional well-being (Borba, 2017; Gordon, 2009).

Adolescents are still developing both cognitive and affective empathy skills. When examining both dimensions of empathy in adolescence, research demonstrates a difference in skill level according to gender. Recent cross-sectional and longitudinal studies that include direct and self-reported data indicate that adolescent females have higher levels of both cognitive and affective empathy skills compared to males. (Alle- mand et al., 2014; Overgaauw et al., 2017; Taylor et al., 2013; Van der Graaff et al., 2014).

examine the effects this technology may have on younger individuals in K-12 educational settings. Moreover, the research on VR in K-12 settings does not distinguish between 2D VR viewed on a computer screen and immersive VR experienced in HMDs; these technologies are often referred to interchangeably in the current body of knowledge and instead should be acknowledged for their distinctions because they engage students differ- ently (Fransson et al., 2020; Maas & Hughes, 2020).

The study was conducted in a public middle school in a suburb of Chicago over a two-week period. The study was approved by the Office of Research Compliance, Integrity, and Safety at Northern Illinois Univer- sity, IRB approval number HS22-0200. A total of 80 seventh-grade stu- dents were invited to participate in the study. However, only data from those students whose parents/guardians did not submit an opt-out form as well as students who signed the assent form and were in attendance for all activities included in the study.

of affective empathy and empathic concern, they confirmed their distinction between sympathy and affective empathy in AMES. Further- more, the construct of physical aggression was uncorrelated with cognitive empathy but negatively associated with both affective empathy and sympathy, demonstrating cognitive empathy as distinct from the other two subscales (Vossen et al., 2015).

adolescent students, the AMES provides sympathy subscale scores along with empathy subscales. Therefore, the sympathy subscale data was examined, and it was determined that the data for both the pretest and posttest were not normally distributed. The attempts for adjusting the data proved unsuccessful; thus, the sympathy subscale data was removed, and non-parametric testing was later utilized.

Gain scores were calculated using the posttest and pretest scores for each of the subscales. A two-way MANOVA was performed to investigate how gender and film format affect gain scores for each of the empathy- related subscales on AMES and if an interaction effect exists. The two independent variables were gender and film format, and the two dependent variables were affective empathy gain scores and cognitive empathy gain scores.

This study extends the current body of knowledge surrounding the application of VR by exploring the effects on the empathic responses of a younger group of individuals, while distinguishing between 2D VR and VR viewed through HMDs as Fransson et al. (2020) had suggested. The current emphasis of VR research for this age group has been on secondary education with a focus on STEM-related content areas (Luo et al., 2021; Tilhou et al., 2020; Zhang & Wang, 2021) and academic growth (Ville- na-Taranilla et al., 2022). To our knowledge, there has been little research examining the emotional impact CVR has on adolescent stu- dents in K-12 classrooms; since students this age are still developing their social-emotional skills, it is especially critical to have a deeper under- standing of this experiential technology and its effects as it is more

In examining the effect that gender has on empathy subscale scores of students viewing a film in CVR format (RQ2), there were statistically significant differences for males. Males who viewed The Displaced in CVR had CE scores increase by 11.80%, compared to females who had a 2.52% increase. For AE subscale scores, males had a much more signif- icant increase, 22.60%, compared to their female counterparts who demonstrated a minimal decrease of 0.31%. These results were further confirmed upon examination of dependent variables through the two- way MANOVA. While the two-way MANOVA did not indicate a statisti- cally significant interaction effect between gender and film format on the

Furthermore, the sphere of social influence may have affected the re- sults of our study. Previous research demonstrates that females consis- tently exhibit more empathy, sympathy, and prosocial behaviors in childhood with the differences between males and females widening as they move into adolescence (Bryant, 1982; Chaplin & Aldao, 2013; Davis & Franzoi, 1991; Lam et al., 2012; Mestre et al., 2009; Rose & Rudolph, 2006). Numerous studies demonstrate social influences (Lennon & Eisenberg, 1990; Zaki, 2019) and gender stereotypes (Derntl et al., 2010) also perpetuate the notion that females are expected to be more empathic.

This study was carried out in accordance with the American Psy- chological Association Ethics Code for conducting research on human subjects. All participants, as minors, provided written informed assent, and their parents/guardians provided informed consent. However, the participants of this study did not give written consent for their data to be shared publicly, so supporting data is not available. The study was approved by the Office of Research Compliance, Integrity, and Safety at Northern Illinois University, IRB approval number HS22-0200.

