synthesize biologically active compounds against cancer [6,7], we became interested in the evaluation of a series of thiazolo[3,2-a] pyrimidin-5-one derivatives with various substituents at the 3-, 6- and 7-positions, aiming at identifying potent anticancer agents. The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway is an intracellu- lar signaling pathway that has regulatory roles in cell survival, pro- liferation, and differentiation, and a critical role in tumorigenesis [8,9]. In cancer, multiple studies have investigated the therapeutic targeting of the PI3K pathway, and multiple inhibitors targeting PI3K and its isoforms, protein kinase B/AKT, and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), have been developed [8]. A US patent reported thiazolopyrimidine compounds, substituted with a mor- pholine ring, of formulae I and II, with anticancer activity, and more specifically with PI3 kinase inhibitory activity. The com- pounds may inhibit tumor growth in mammals and may be useful

Taking the above mentioned compounds as lead, a part of the research undertaken here involved the combination of a morpholi- noalkyl moiety with the thiazolo[3,2-a]pyrimidin-5-one series in a single molecular frame of the general structure (A) with the hope of finding interesting antitumor activity through inhibiting PI3K. A morpholine ring is often introduced to enhance water solubility. The group is attached through alkyl chain in order to protrude from the binding site and be exposed to the surrounding aqueous environment [11].

DMF (10 mL) was stirred at room temperature until completion of the reaction 2 and 3 min). The progress of the reaction was moni- tored by thin-layer chromatography. On completion of the reac- tion, the reaction mixture was poured onto crushed ice, treated with an excess of aqueous Na2CO3 solution. The precipitate was separated by filtration and washed with water. The product was pure enough (single spot on TLC) for all practical purposes.

tion 5070 in DMSO. Compounds were tested in 10-dose IC50 mode with 3-fold serial dilution starting at 100 lM using PI-103 as pos- itive control (20 lM as starting concentration). The reaction was carried out at 10 lM ATP concentration. The nonlinear regression

ogy (Echo550; nanoliter range) and incubated for 20 min at room temperature. 33P-ATP (specific activity 10 lCi/ll) was delivered into the reaction mixture to initiate the reaction. After that, com- pounds were incubated for 2 h at room temperature. Kinase activ-

Reaction buffer: HEPES 50 mM (pH 7.0), NaN3 0.02%, BSA 0.01%, Orthovanadate 0.1 mM, 1% DMSO. Detection buffer: HEPES 10 mM (pH 7.0), BSA 0.02%, KF 0.16 M, EDTA 4 mM. Reaction Procedure: PIP2 substrate (10 lM) was prepared in freshly prepared reaction

