The communication primitive for wireless networks is message broadcast. How- ever in contrast to wired local area networks where broadcasted messages reach every node in the network, for wireless networks broadcast is local because mes- sages will only reach the nodes within the communication range of the emitting node. Put differently, in wired networks broadcast scope is transitive and bidirec- tional in that if nodes l and m can communicate directly and if m and n can do so also, then in turn l and n can communicate directly whereas this is not necessarily the case for wireless networks.

Our work is devoted to a particular kind of wireless networks, i.e. Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANETs). MANETs are self organizing without centralized control, and they do not contain a pre-deployed infrastructure for routing messages. A MANET may be formed when a collection of nodes join together and agree on how to route messages for each other over possibly multiple hops.

the latter carried out as an unlabelled and hence unobservable reduction. As a novelty, in this paper we instead introduce a static binder for location names, de- noted by \l, whose scope cannot be extended and we abolish the scope extensible binder mentioned above. Not only will such a binding outside its scope conceal all broadcasting events carried out at l, but also connectivity involving the node at l is restricted within the scope of the binder. For instance, in

Assume an infinite set of names N ranged over by n, an infinite set of variables X ranged over by x, and two disjoint finite sets, F and G, of constructor and destructor symbols ranged over by f and g respectively. Then the set of terms is defined by the grammar below where f is a constructor symbol with arity k. We let T denote the set of all terms with no variables.

Proof. The proof is by induction in the inference of P  l,t P '. The case where P  l,t P ' is due to the rule (empty ) is trivial. If P  l,t P ' is due to rule (new ) or rule (res 1) the result follows by induction. Suppose, due to rule (brd ), that

