The fields of opinion analysis, emotion development (e.g., happy, sad, and anger), and the identification of moods and emo- tions toward written or audio texts are vital areas in artificial intel- ligence applications and natural language processing. The Arabic language is unique in terms of the textual and phonetic structure of the vocabulary. Each word carries positive or negative implicit or explicit meanings. The arts and methods of linguistic texts in Arabic vary and there are many types of expression, such as prose, poetry, praise, criticism, etc. All these arts involve many semantic structures that give meanings on an explicit (verbally apparent) or implicit (rhetorical) level. Thus, a person can recognize the style of any writer of a text by looking at the meanings of the words and the feelings of positive or negative aspects of ridicule, praise, praise, booing, discontent, love-hate, etc.

At the beginning of this study, a literary survey was conducted to identify the methods used in this type of study, which focused on the algorithms applied in Arabic. Moreover, we then identified the advances, shortcomings, and challenges when applying intelli- gent sciences to generate benefits at a significant and practical level. What has been achieved in such applications in the Arabic language is a minimal in comparison to the other languages. Since most of the studies were conducted in English, we tried to review

In this paper, we present a novel approach to Arabic sentiment analysis based on six levels of features. Our findings will help researchers in this vital research area. This paper is organized as fol- lows: Section 2 discusses the Arabic six-level framework for the sentiment analysis process and provides a summary of the method- ologies used; Sections 3 and 4 present the machine learning of ALSA and corpus annotation, respectively. In Sections 5 and 6, this paper is concluded, and future scope is provided, respectively.

No published research has involved studying the advantage of phonetic information for Arabic. We, however, think that Arabic phonetic information could be of value to the representation and sentiment analysis of the Arabic language. We think that we should write Arabic texts phonetically to know the correct pronun- ciation for each character or sound, considering the variety of Ara- bic dialect languages. Thus, along with various sentence constructions, words in Arabic can have diverse variations when written, which leads to a large number of indications.

Ermakov et al. [15] presented a novel approach to word senti- ment prediction for the Russian language based on phonetic fea- tures. Helali et al. [16] constructed a manually labelled corpus for a speech recognition model in the Arabic Tunisian language.

Elarnaoty [19] extracted useful subjective opinions from Arabic news using a lexical parser. Moussa et al. [9] proposed a generic lexicon and developed a statistical algorithm for positive and neg- ative sentiments based on POS tags for four categories (NOUN, VERB, ADJ, ADV).

Syntax is a science examining the relationship of influence between the noun and verb of original sentences, and a modified sentence that achieves the purpose of matching the speech as appropriate meaning. It looks at multi-word expressions and syn- tactic constituents and how the arrangements of words form a sen- tence. Syntactic analysis extracts phrases that convey more meaning than just the individual words by themselves, such as in a noun phrase. The composition of noun phrases (NP) and verb phrases (VP) classifies the sentiment of sentences [5,20].

Semantics is a science in which a particular linguistic or social context inspires a particular meaning of a particular term, demon- strating the importance of the study of words through text within a particular geographical environment and a given historical period. The semantic level of Arabic processing involves the determina- tion of what a sentence means by disambiguating words with mul- tiple definitions based on the given context. This level entails the appropriate interpretation of the meaning of sentences. Sentiment is analyzed at the concept level to obtain the exact meanings in texts. The concept-based approach can detect the sentiments cre- ated by multi-word expression concepts. Semantic features focus

Arabic sentiment corpora, lexicons, and datasets are not often compared to other natural languages such as English. Arabic cor- pus annotation for sentiment analysis involves labelling features with appropriate classes in terms of meta-data for training machine learning classifiers. The Arabic annotation applies to two levels (sentence level and word level) [11,19,30]. There is a need in the Arabic annotated corpus to show an efficiently anno- tated corpus. The annotation can be manually performed by sev- eral native speakers, crowdsourcing, or automatically.

There is a clear need to build a high-quality annotated Arabic corpus for sentiment analysis that helps to build better classifiers and solve research issues considering the six levels of Arabic senti- ment analysis. A review [31] highlighted the annotation process in recent research. Another paper [11] reported the most recent annotated corpus on Arabic Language sentiment analysis.

Al-Thubaity et al. [32] developed a corpus consisting of 5400 Saudi Dialect tweets annotated as positive, negative, neutral, objective, spam, and not sure, and with emotions (anger, disgust, fear, sadness, happiness, surprise, no emotion, and not sure). The corpus-based approach helps find sentiment words that may be positive in one field and negative in another context [12]. The research work on the topic of Arabic sentiment analysis corpus annotation has focused on the corpora type and annotation process.

As we noted from the scientific papers that focused on anal- ysis of opinions and sentiments in Arabic, all or most of the levels of Arabic language have not been addressed in a single research work. All that was reported in the literature was that the levels are different, and each level of language was treated individually without considering the full language levels. There- fore, we urge all interested in this research area to address the subject of the analysis of opinions comprehensively and thor- oughly by considering all levels of language, which may produce results that are important. The focus on Arabic language levels will lead to a significant and influential development in the subject of natural language processing in general, and automatic translation, analysis of texts, and feelings/sentiments in particular.

Cignarella AT, Bosco C, Patti V, Lai M. Application and analysis of a multi- layered scheme for irony on the Italian Twitter Corpus TWITTIRO. In: Proceedings of the eleventh international conference on language resources and evaluation (LREC 2018), Miyazaki, Japan. p. 8.

