the activity e-cyanobacterium/e-photosynthesis 1 [13] has been initiated. It aims at handling the domain-specific problems profoundly. It also intends to trade on advantages arising from repository and database synthesis, which all in all allow to create complex relationships between models and ontological knowledge bases, different types of simulations and analysis, and integration of models in the domain- specific context.

We employ the idea of mapping biological models to a unified space of bio- logical objects making the core components and building blocks for models. This is inspired by the so-called Comprehensive Modeling Space (CMS) that has been first introduced in [11] as a concept for formal representation of internally consis- tent reduced models of oxygenic photosynthesis. In general, CMS should simplify model-building tasks by providing simple and clear way of notation easily under- standable by modelers and biologists. Wide model sharing can be provided only by Internet in case those models are translated to unified format with uniformly annotated components so they can be used in their original form, compared with each other and with wet-lab experiments. All those demands shape basics of CMS and its main features.

Recently, the platform is used for modeling of processes related to cyanobacteria Synechocystis sp. PCC6803. The main aim is to establish a consortium-approved biochemical space that unifies the state-of-the-art knowledge of cyanobacteria pro- cesses. On the other hand, CMP provides an environment shared by modelers focusing on different parts of cyanobacteria. This is the preliminary step on the way to obtain an integrated model of the selected organism.

It is important to note that there exist several tools that provide simulation, management, development, annotating, sharing of models, and comparing of model simulations against experimental data. Tools which are tightly related to CMP are, e.g., Biomodels.net [9], VCell [10] or JWSonline [12]. However, each of these tools is focused on general dynamic (mathematical) models and does not provide facilities for implementation of the domain-specific view. Especially, none of these tools is coupled with systematically organized biological background. Models captured in these tools have a wide scope in terms of biological organisms and phenomena modeled.

Annotations are essential for easy and fast understanding of ODE models. Their non-uniformity and incompleteness are a contemporary problem, which should not be underestimated. The main function of annotation is to put models into a well- organized biological and biochemical context provided by existing ontologies (e.g., KEGG [7], ChEBI [3], or GeneOntology [1]).

Undoubtedly, biochemical space has a significant informative potential. Since this space is complex, its representation is not easy to understand. We propose a sep- arate module allowing graphical visualisation of the biochemical space. In this module, a process-based hierarchy of biochemical data is specified first, and then graphical visualisation traversing several levels of abstraction and biological struc- tures is maintained. As a result, we obtain navigation through different levels of biochemical space based on clickable parts.

First applications of CMP are e-photosynthesis.org and e-cyanobacterium.org 1 web- sites. The former is a completed site focusing on models of photosynthetic pro- cesses [13]. It has a simplified version of biochemical space targeting biological en- tities only (not reactions). The latter site implements all of the features presented in this paper. It focuses on models explaining cellular processes of Synechocystis sp. PCC6803. The procedures of top-down and bottom-up modeling are expected to meet at the complex biochemical space traversing from the level of a bioreactor to the level of individual components of the cell (photosynthesis and respiration, metabolism, carbon fixation mechanism, circadian clock). The functional part (the software) is completed while the biochemical space and visualisation of cyanobac- terium is currently under development in the CyanoNetwork consortium 2 .

Our next aims are an offline annotation tool which will relieve hard work from annotators hands and a user-friendly online model editor supporting non-expert users. The platform is currently being tested by the consortium focusing on model- ing cyanobacteria. Application under this setting will help us to establish the plat- form as a robust technology that can be easily reused for other organism-specific modeling projects highly relevant in systems biology.

