We usually define an algebra by a set, some operations defined on this set and some propositions that the algebra must validate. In some cases, we can replace these propositions by an algorithm on terms constructed upon these operations that the algebra must validate. We show in this note that this is the case for the notion of vectorial space and bilinear function.

is defined by a set M , a function [ ] mapping values of the language to elements of M and n-ary programs to functions from Mn to M , such that the program P taking the values v1, ..., vn as input produces the value w as output if and only if [w]= [P ]([v1], ..., [vn]).

Definition 1.8 (Model of an AC-rewrite system) Let L be a first-order language containing binary function symbols f1, ..., fn, and R an algorithm defined by an AC(f1, ..., fn)-rewrite system on terms of the language L. An L-algebra M is a model of the algorithm R (M |= R) if

As we want to be able to apply the factorization rule to a term of the form (3.x+ 4.y)+ 2.x, reductions in the above rewrite system must be defined modulo the associativity and commutativity of +. This leads to the following definition.

To be complete, we should also transform the axioms of the theory of fields into a rewrite system, which is known to be difficult. However, there are many fields, for instance the field Q of rational numbers, whose addition and multiplication can be presented by a terminating and ground confluent rewrite system. Thus, we shall not consider an arbitrary vectorial space over an arbitrary field. But, we consider a given field K defined by a terminating and ground confluent rewrite system S and focus on K-vectorial spaces.

Proposition 3.6 Let t be a normal term whose variables of sort E are among x1, ..., xn, whose variables of sort F are among y1, ..., yp, and that has no variables of sort G and K. If t has sort E or F, then it has the same form as in Proposition 2.12. If it has sort G, then it has the form

We can, in a more computation-oriented way, define an algebra by a set, operations on this set and an algorithm on terms constructed upon these operations that must be valid in the algebra. For instance a K-vectorial space is defined by a set E, the operations 0, + and . and the algorithm R.

