Context: Timing side-channel attack countermeasure techniques (TSCA-CTs) evaluation is a multi-criteria decision-making (MCDM) problem based on different MPSoCs of IoT platform architectures, performance, and design overhead. Therefore, the Fermatean by fuzzy decision opinion score method (F-FDOSM) for prioritizing the powerful countermeasure technique against timing side-channel attack is the best approach because it employs the most efficient MCDM ranking technique. Nonetheless, the FDOSM method needs to weigh the criteria before being submitted for the ranking process. In order to address this theoretical challenge, the Criteria-importance through inter-criteria correlation (CRITIC) technique can be applied as an effective MCDM weighting technique to offer an explicit weight for a set of criteria with no inconsistency based on the standard deviation, which uses correlation analysis to determine the relevance of each criterion.

Results: (1) CRITIC weighting shows that MPSoC NoC throughput (packet/clock) is the highest weight cri- terion, whereas latency (clock/cycle) is the less weight criterion. (2) The Fermatean-FDOSM-based group ranking shows that the Adaptive routing countermeasure technique is the highest score alternative com- pared to the Combined with separate interface hybrid approach. (3) The TSCA-CTs priority ranks were subjected to a systematic ranking that was confirmed by strong correlation results throughout ten crite- rion weight values. A comparison with recent studies confirmed the feasibility of the proposed frame- work.

However, due to their extensive use in critical applications and resource sharing, MPSoCs have become prone to hardware and software attacks that might physically damage the system, com- promise crucial information, or interrupt the running application [3]. Attacks on MPSoCs may perform on either a computational level, i.e., Intellectual property (IP) cores such as processors, mem- ory blocks, I/O peripherals, and so on, or a communication level, i.e., Network-On-Chip (NoC) [4,5]. This fact also offers an extreme threat to semiconductor suppliers and ultimate MPSoCs customers, including mobile communications crucial applications and cyber- infrastructure like aerospace agencies, military nuclear weaponry, and medical electronics [6,7] Given the current circumstances, it is not only necessary but also difficult to research several defensive approaches and Countermeasure techniques (CTs) in order to mit- igate the possible risks to data security presented via what are known as side-channel attacks, specifically TSCAs.

The reminder of this study is organized as: Sec. 2, presented state-of-the-art literature review in terms of TSCAs in the context of MPSoCs-based IoT, studies on FDOSM, and CRITIC methods. Sect. 3 illustrated a comprehensive overview of the suggested method- ology. In addition, Sec. 4, addressed the discussion of study results produced by applying CRITIC criteria weighting and Fermatean FDOSM alternatives ranking methods. Finally, Sec. 5 concluded this study.

The literature review is organized into three subsections. First, we review some of the current research lines and studies on MPSoCs of IoT TSCAs and countermeasure techniques against TSCAs especially in the context of IP core caches and NoC. The sec- ond part focus on FDOSM. The last section focuses on some recent studies in terms of FFSs.

Traffic partitioning and route randomization are the two main categories to countermeasure TSCAs in the context of MPSoCs [25,9]. The traffic partitioning goal is to prevent packets from securing applications from interfering with non-secure applica- tions. Non-secure application latency and throughput become independent of certain application traffic behaviour. Statically dividing resources of NoC (link bandwidth, buffer, etc.) spatially or temporally may do this. Sub-optimal solutions might degrade performance.

a benchmarking framework for evaluating network congestion control methods of active queue management approach using FDOSM with interval type 2 trapezoidal fuzzy decision with the support of six experts. Furthermore, Alamoodi et al. (2022) devel- oped a benchmarking model for smart electronic-tourism applica- tions using FDOSM with fuzzy weighted with zero inconsistency method and supported the opinion of eleven expert panels [36].

This section provides the validation of group decision-making evaluation results discussed in previous Sec. 4.2 According to [34,76,77], the procedure of evaluation results validation has been followed. To justify the group decision-making evaluation results of TSCA-CTs, the validation process was implemented by dividing the countermeasure techniques into two groups and then aggre- gating all opinion matrices to produce a unified opinion matrix.

Al-Samarraay MS, Zaidan AA, Albahri OS, Pamucar D, AlSattar HA, Alamoodi AH, et al. Extension of interval-valued Pythagorean FDOSM for evaluating and benchmarking real-time SLRSs based on multidimensional criteria of hand gesture recognition and sensor glove perspectives[Formula presented]. Appl Soft Comput 2022;116. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2021.108284.

Albahri AS, Albahri OS, Zaidan AA, Alnoor A, Alsattar HA, Mohammed R, et al. Integration of fuzzy-weighted zero-inconsistency and fuzzy decision by opinion score methods under a q-rung orthopair environment: A distribution case study of COVID-19 vaccine doses. Comput Stand Interfaces 2022;80. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csi.2021.103572.

