stochastic dynamics within a basic multicellular unit (BMU) to bone mass formation. We show that after a micro-fracture the simulated bone remodeling dynamics is timescale consistent with the biological process. Our combined methodology provides a first effective stochastic model of the bone remodeling framework which could be used to test healthy and pathological conditions.

Our three dimensional shape is mainly modeled by our muscle-skeletal setting; given that bone remodeling occurs asynchronously at various sites, how the limb size and shape is controlled is a long-standing question in developmental biology. What it is known is that load-induced strains applied to bone can stimulate its de- velopment and adaptation. However, we have only little insights of the mechanisms involved in bone formation occurring at sub centimeter to micron scales.

Bone remodeling is a multiscale phenomenon, since macroscopic (tissue) and microscopic (cellular) levels are closely interdependent [12]. At the scale of single cells, the process of bone formation has in the past been viewed as a passive process where the specific cells that build new bone, the osteoblasts, become trapped or buried in the osteoid, which then passively mineralize [12]. Recent findings suggest that osteocytogenesis may actually be an active rather than a passive process but the precise mechanisms by which an osteoblast becomes buried in bone matrix and changes into an osteocyte remain elusive [10].

Here we integrate two powerful computational modeling approaches: one de- veloped in Biology, the Systems Biology framework; and the other in Computer Science, the Shape Calculus [2,1] approach which belongs to the formal specifica- tion domain. Systems Biology is the study of the interactions occurring at different scales between the components of biological systems, and how these interactions give rise to the function and the behavior of that system. While the past reductionist approach focuses on studying finer and finer details of single components, Systems Biology is about putting together rather than taking apart, integration rather than reduction. The Shape Calculus provides the actual methodology to bridge the scales through a high to low level procedure.

The paper is organized as follow. Section 2 introduces the main actors and the key events in the bone remodeling (BR) process and highlights the stochasticity and discreteness in the behavior of the system. Section 3 recalls and extends the Shape Calculus and provides an algebraic specification of the BR modeling. The implementation of stochastic rules for cells are defined in Section 4. In Section 5, we present the results of the simulation carried out with the Repast Symphony Suite. The paper concludes with a discussion of related and future work in Section 6.

The bone remodeling process is conducted by osteoclasts and osteoblasts, forming Basic Multi-cellular Units (BMUs). Osteoblasts follow osteoclasts in a highly coor- dinated manner indicates that a coupled regulative mechanism must exist. It was suggested [7] that the BMU activity is controlled by osteocytes in the bone matrix, serving as mechanosensors, and sending signals through the osteocytic canalicu- lar network to the BMU cells. Each BMU has a finite lifetime, so new units are continuously forming as old units are finishing [7].

the RANKL/RANK signaling regulates osteoclast formation, activation and sur- vival in normal bone modeling and remodeling and in a variety of pathologic conditions characterized by increased bone turnover. Osteprotegerin (OPG) pro- tects bone from excessive resorption by binding to RANKL and preventing it from binding to RANK. The relative concentration of RANKL in bone is a major determinant of bone mass and strength [6].

osteoclast precursors, the pre-osteoclasts, circulate in the blood vessels. If a new crack appears, the osteocytes near the crack undergo apoptosis. The other osteo- cytes in the canalicular network detect the strain and send biochemical signals toward the fluid part of the BMU.

A stochastic modeling approach may also provide a better fit to the experimental data which have also a noise component. The multiscale nature of the process is rendered through the combination of a low level stochastic approach to a high level algebraic approach. We believe that the stochastic modeling results more biologically sound than previously presented continuous models [13,8] due to the discrete nature of the process. The algebraic approach finds its reasoning in the global (i.e. high level) control that affects the shape and size of the bones, which inspired the Vitruvian man.

Shapes move according to their velocities that are determined by a general mo- tion law - for instance as in a force field or Brownian motion - and by the collisions occurring among shapes. In the case of inelastic collisions, objects can bind and become a compound new object with a new shape and possibly a different behavior. Established bonds can also be broken by performing a split operation. The composi- tion of compatible 3D processes is modeled in a similar way to CCS communication on complementary channels.

The movement of an osteoclast is the combination of a random walk and of the RANKL attraction. For our purposes, we can assume that osteocytes near the fracture produce RANKL. In other words, the movement of osteoclast is determined by the concentration gradient of RANKL signals exposed by both osteocytes and osteoblasts.

affects the behavior of the osteoclasts in two ways: on the one hand, they release RANKL which promotes osteoclastic activity; on the other hand, osteoblasts and osteoclast tend to inhibit each other when acting in near positions. This can explain the natural coordination between osteoclasts and osteoblast. Similarly, osteoblastic activity is fluctuating, but always with high values of bone formed per day.

