At the moment there are multiple approaches that are being subject to investiga- tion, studying e.g. the universality (computational power) of membrane computing models, their efficiency (from a computational complexity point of view), or their potential usefulness for modeling biological phenomena.

Rules are doubtless one of the basic ingredients characterizing a model. In the original paper rules were of a rewriting nature, that is, a multiset u occurring in a region is replaced by a multiset v, including target indicators for the objects in v indicating whether such objects remain in the same region or they move to an adjacent one. One can also restrict to purely communication rules (sym- port/antiport model, see e.g. [12]), and still the obtained model is very interesting and powerful.

Rules are applied in a maximal parallel way, that is, rules are applied in parallel (moreover, a rule can be applied more than once provided that there are enough objects available) and it is forbidden that a multiset of objects remains inactive during a step if it can trigger a rule. In case that there are several combinations of rules that can be applied, then the system chooses nondetermistically. In addition, priorities among rules were considered in the original definition, imposing that a rule cannot be applied if there is another rule of a higher priority that is also applicable. Nowadays, most of the models do not include priorities, but there are cases where the parallelism is bounded, either at the level of membranes or for the whole system (see e.g. [3], [5] or [9]).

We can mention here for instance one of the open problems in this direction, known as the P-conjecture: the complexity class associated with P systems with ac- tive membranes without electrical charges is exactly P. A partial affirmative answer to this conjecture was found in [6], where it is proved that the class of problems solv- able by polarizationless P systems with active membranes without dissolution rules and with division rules for non-elementary membranes is exactly P. Nevertheless, also a partial negative answer was found in [1], where it is shown (by constructing a uniform solution to QSAT) that the complexity class associated with polariza- tionless P systems with active membranes with dissolution rules and with division rules for non-elementary membranes contains PSPACE.

Thus, it turns out that dissolution rules play a key role in determining the power to solve problems of the class of polarizationless P systems with division rules for non-elementary membranes. It remains open to investigate the case when only 2-division rules for elementary membranes are allowed, or one can also redefine different division rules for non-elementary membranes, but we will not get into details here. A good summary of the results obtained up to now in this line can be found at [7].

We have given here a very brief overview on complexity theory in membrane com- puting models. It is important to mention that it is often hard to carry out formal studies within this unconventional machine-oriented model. Indeed, there does not exist up to now any standard procedure to address, given a design of a family of P systems and a problem, the formal verification proving that this family solves the problem, in the sense of Definition 3.2. The main difficulty usually comes from the fact that there may exist many possible computation paths, and many objects and membranes evolving in a maximally parallel way.

