Let I = (X, C) be an instance of 3-sat, where X denotes the set of variables, and C denotes the set of clauses. The bipartite graph of clauses and variables B(I) = (V I, EI ) is a graph constructed from a general instance I = (X, C) of 3- sat as follows. For each clause c of C, there exists a vertex c that belongs to V I . For each variable x of X, there exists a vertex x that belongs to V I . If a clause c contains the literal x or x, then the edge cx belongs to EI . We remark that the linear property of two distinct clauses having 0 or 1 variable in common implies that the girth of B(I) is greater than 4. The proposed variant is stated as follows:

We now define the truth assignment for (X, C): if an edge of B belongs to G\G1 then set the truth value of the corresponding literal to true. Suppose that two edges are corresponding to the positive and negative literals of the same variable x. This generates an H induced subgraph in G, corresponding to the Hx variable subgraph for x, a contradiction.	2

Our attempt consists in giving a simple rule (every optional edge corresponding to a true literal is added to G1 to form a sandwich graph G), and then search for a side-effect H sandwich subgraph. We remark that every vertex of the constructed instance (G1, G2) belongs to an Hc clause subgraph or to an Hx variable subgraph, and possibly to both an Hc clause subgraph and an Hx variable subgraph. Although a vertex may belong to at most one Hx variable subgraph, possibly a vertex may belong to several Hc clause subgraphs. A side-effect H is an induced subgraph isomorphic to H of some sandwich graph G, such that H is neither associated to an Hc clause subgraph nor to an Hx variable subgraph.

optional edge corresponding to a true literal in order to define a sandwich graph G. Since the simple rule destroys all Hc clause subgraphs of G1 without creating an Hx variable subgraph of G2, it remains to prove that the sandwich graph G contains no side-effect induced subgraph H, associated to neither an Hc clause subgraph nor to an Hx variable subgraph. Assume to get a contradiction that G contains such a side-effect induced subgraph H. By construction, there exists a variable x such that the side-effect subgraph H must contain at least one among the two vertices

We present next two applications by considering two particular graphs H. De- note by Kp the complete graph on p vertices, denote by 3K2 the graph consisting of an induced matching with three edges, and call p-wheel a graph consisting of a chordless cycle on p vertices and an additional vertex u adjacent to all p vertices on the cycle. Denote by E[3K2] the edge-set of the 3K2 graph.

In the present work, we provide a new variant of SAT called k-girth lcnf 2-3- sat, which yields the classification of the graph sandwich problem for H-free graph classes such that the forbidden graph H is 3-connected, H contains an anti-matching (i.e. H contains a matching) of size 3 and H contains a matching of size 2.

