system. This is based on the analogy of finding the shortest path (i.e., the shortest possible bandwidth) between two nodes in the communication networks (assuming that each edge in the network has the bandwidth value). So, applying a genetic algorithm is an interesting idea. This is clearly different from traditional algorithms that try to compare every possibility to find the best solution, which might be a time consuming

sections: Section 2 presents the problem description and how it can be solved. The genetic algorithm and its operators are pre- sented in Section 3. The proposed algorithm is presented in Section 4. Section 5 presents the experimental results and dis- plays the obtained results.

G = (N, E), where N = {1, ... , n} denotes the set of nodes and E = {e1, ... , em}, denotes the set of communication links connecting the nodes. Let M = {n0, u1, u2, .. . , um} C N be a set of form source to destination nodes, where n0 is source

widely known types of evolutionary computation methods to- day. In general, a genetic algorithm has five basic components as follows: (1) an encoding method that is a genetic represen- tation (genotype) of solutions to the program. (2) A way to create an initial population of chromosomes. (3) The objective function. (4) The genetic operators (crossover and mutation) that alter the genetic composition of offspring during reproduction.

Given a network G(N, E) with N nodes and E is the set of com- munication links connecting the nodes. Also, we consider the source node n0 and destination nodes set U = {u1, u2 ... , um}. The chromosome can be represented by a string of integers with length N. The genes of the chromosome are the nodes between the source node n0 and destination node ui. Each

the links to obtain the k shortest paths. The proposed GA has been applied on two examples network topology and the produced results are obtained by a less number of generations. The proposed algorithm is considered to be the first algo- rithm that uses the genetic algorithms to obtain the k shortest paths from a single source node to multiple destinations nodes.

