We present an algorithm for the coloring of planar graphs based on the construction of a maximal inde- pendent set S of the input graph. The maximal independent set S must fulfill certain characteristics. For example, S contains the vertex that appears in a maximum number of odd cycles of G. The construction of S considers the internal-face graph of the input graph G in order to select each vertex belonging to a maximal number of odd faces of G.

From now on, we consider only planar graphs as working graphs. The famous four coloring theorem [1,2,16] guarantees us that all planar graph is 4-colorable. However, the current known proof for the 4CT is computer assisted. In addition, the correctness of the proof is still lengthy and complicated [10].

called faces. Each face ri is represented by the set of edges that bound its inside area. All edge {u, v} in G that is not the border of some face from G is represented by its vertices label uv, and they are called acyclic edges.

Lemma 3.2 Let A = {f1, f2,..., fn} be a set of n faces where each face has at least one vertex that does not restrict color 3. If the set of faces is independent or all of them have a common vertex, then A is 3- colorable

The previous lemma is applied in the sense that for any vertex of minimal degree (e.g less than 3), 3 colors are enough to be colored. Afterwards, it can be removed at the beginning of any 4-coloring algorithm in order to simplify the resulting graph. This Lemma allow us to consider only one edge between adjacent faces, because more than two edges between adjacent faces would imply vertices of degree 2 that can be contracted to any of the extremal points of the common boundary between both faces.

Gf is called the internal-face graph of G. Notice that Gf is not the dual graph of G, since in the construction of Gf the external face is not considered. Also notice that Gf is a planar graph, where its nodes represent faces from G, but it is not necessarily a tree graph. However, if Gf has a tree topology, then we achieve a relevant property for the coloring of G.

When Gf is a tree, we say that G (its corresponding planar graph) is a polygonal tree. It means that, although G has cycles, all those cycles can be arranged as a tree, whose nodes are polygons instead of single vertices of G. In this case, an order for visiting the faces of the planar graph provides efficient procedures for the 3-coloring of G. In [12] is shown that polygonal trees are 3-colorable graphs.

An algorithm with a time-complexity of order O(n2) (where n is the number of vertices) for coloring planar graphs has been presented. Our proposal is based on the computation of a maximal independent set S from the input graph G. The maximal independent set S has some characteristics. One of those is that S contains the vertex that appears in the maximum number of odd faces of G. Also, the construction of S considers the internal-face graph of the input graph G in order to select each vertex belonging to a maximal number of odd faces of G.

