(ITAE), Integral of Squared Error (ISE), Integral of Time multiplied Squared Error (ITSE) and Integral of Absolute Error (IAE). Detailed expression of various objective functions, their comparison on the system performance are available in literature [21e23,27,28]. It has also been shown in several studies that ITAE objective function provides better system performance compared to other integral based alternatives [35,36]. Hence ITAE is chosen in the present paper as objective function which is expressed as:

process to generate random fractals. Given an initial particle posi- tioned at the beginning, new particles are then created arbitrarily in random manner around that point. Diffusion process enhances the ability of algorithm to find the global minima, as well as avoids to be struck in local minima. In the next update process, the positions of points are updated in the group depending on the other points position in the group. In this process, few best particles from the diffusing process are taken, and the remaining particles are rejec- ted. Besides well-organized examination of the search space, the algorithm uses Gaussian random approaches to update thus introducing diversification properties in SFS algorithm.

obtained in 25 runs are selected as the integral gains. In the next step, PS is applied to fine tune controller parameter. The final controller parameters found by SFS algorithm are used in PS algo- rithm as starting points. The PS is implemented with following

Sasmita Padhy was born on 29th June 1980 at Ganjam Odisha, India. She obtained her B.Engg (Electrical & Elec- tronics) from National Institute of Science and Technology (NIST) Berhampur Odisha in 2003 and M.Tech (Power System) from BPUT in 2011. Currently She is pursuing Ph.D in VSSUT, Burla and her research interest lies in Power system stability, control and computational intelligence.

Sidhartha Panda is working as a Professor in the Depart- ment of Electrical Engineering, Veer Surendrai Sai Uni- versity of Technology (VSSUT), Burla, Sambalpur, Odisha, India. He received Ph.D. degree from Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Roorkee, India, M.E. degree from Veer Surendrai Sai University of Technology (VSSUT). His areas of research include Flexible AC Transmission Systems (FACTS), Power System Stability, Soft computing, Model Order Reduction, Distributed Generation and Wind En- ergy. Dr. Panda is a Fellow of Institution of Engineers (India).

