substrate domains are often defined using a combination of normal and sliding contact formulations [7,9,10,12]. However, a recent study sug- gests a superior formulation was established based on traction separa- tion laws [15,16]. It is found that high accuracy Lagrangian finite element (FE) scheme could accurately predict the experimental rebound velocities and critical bonding conditions during the spraying of pure Cu onto Cu substrate [7]. The FE simulations revealed that about 99 % of particles kinetic energy is dissipated through plastic deformation [7]. Ti- 6Al-4 V Grade 23 coating adhesion strength onto Ti-6Al-4 V Grade 5 substrate is also predicted using a Lagrangian FE approach using his-

through preliminary parametric analyses to reduce boundary effects on the outcomes of the numerical simulation as done in previous works [24,25]. The substrate domain is assumed to be initially at the ambient temperature (i.e., 300 K). The substrate is stationary, while the particles are pre-assigned initial velocities and temperatures. The particle tem- peratures and impact velocities are varied from 300 K to 600 K and 125

mechanical constraint [10]. At the same time, the tangential contact behavior at the interface is defined via the penalty formulation and a friction coefficient of 0.5 [10,30]. A finite sliding scheme was employed to allow a finite motion of the contact surfaces. The bottom face is constraint to move in all directions to prevent rigid body motion in the SS340 substrate. According to customary practice [10], the inelastic heat dissipation index in the particle and substrate domains is set at 0.9.

The present study introduces a physics-based hybrid computational approach for modeling cold spray (CS) deposition. The hybrid approach couples simulation results obtained with the smooth particle hydrody- namics (SPH) and the Lagrangian finite element (FE) schemes to predict the thermo-mechanical deformation of cold sprayed Ni particles on SS304 steel substrate. The CS simulations are carried out for various particle characteristics and impact conditions. The numerical results are validated by comparing them with those obtained in previous experi- ments and FE-based simulations.

9b). Moreover, for the case in which the particles were preheated to 600 K before impact, the maximum temperature reaches nearly 1000 K, which is still below the melting point of Ni. Even though the dynamic recrystallization process occurring at particle boundaries could improve the coating bond strength, preheating of the Ni particles before spraying needs to be kept within a reasonable range to mitigate the possibility of the evolution of grain size or new phases during cold spraying [38,39]. It is important to note that the recrystallization process is not incorporated into the current simulations. Recrystallization takes place under the

reasons for the particle morphology effects on the impact deformation behavior are explained as follows. The hollow spherical particle is more deformed and collapses into a thin disk-like splat structure before the particle spreading phase is over. The hollow spherical particle is highly impacted by the interior hole feature (or air gap). However, the impact of the hollow spherical particles results in a very shallow substrate penetration depth. Similar to hollow spherical particles, bulk spherical particles experience significant deformation upon impact, exhibit greater flowability and reveal severe tamping action on the substrate. This results in more uniform deformation of the substrate and deeper penetration depth. The interface created by the spherical particles shows a wavy-type morphology, indicating the possibility for stronger me- chanical interlocking (or adhesion strength) between the spherical particles and substrate, as revealed in a recent study [42]. Moreover, the coating porosity is expected to be minimum with the spherical particles due to their high flow ability brought on by their curved spherical and symmetrical structure. The oblate particles have some features of spherical particles, such as good flow ability and appreciable particle deformation. However, the lower penetration depth into the substrate might affect the bond strength of oblate particles. Angular particles resulted in a highly complex and uneven deformation that makes it difficult for effective spreading of particle material, even though the impacting particle showed a higher tendency for sliding motion during

mesh. While the proposed hybrid approach leverages the advantages of both meshless and meshed Lagrangian schemes, it has some of the limitations faced with the methods mentioned earlier [19], such as: i) the meshing of deformed particle regions with a fine mesh might lead to increased computational time for simulations involving multiple coating deposition, ii) the tensile instability problem affects the accuracy of particle deformation characteristics at very high impact velocities, iii) the default contact interactions formulation between SPH and FE do- mains may not fully capture interfacial deformation across the mating boundaries due to the use of pseudo-particles. Nevertheless, the limi- tations can be the subject of future research work in this field.

The hybrid computational approach proved computationally effi- cient for predicting temperature and plastic strain distribution dur- ing the impact and interactions of multiple Ni particles across a wide range of CS parameters. Despite being three-dimensional (3D), the simulations took significantly less time than popular FE-based schemes like ALE and CEL methods. Specifically, simulations for depositing two and three Ni particles ran for about 38 and 51 h, respectively, whereas the ALE approach took around 64.5 and 114.0 h for the same cases. The hybrid method also mitigates several drawbacks in the other numerical schemes, including tensile insta- bility, high memory utilization, poor inter-particle contact in- teractions, mesh distortion, adaptive remeshing processing, and coalescence of material interfaces. As highlighted in a previous re- view by Fardan et al. [19], the hybrid approach can be an alternative module for selecting CS process parameters and modeling materials behavior.

The authors acknowledge the financial support of the Deanship of Scientific Research at King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals (KFUPM) and the Interdisciplinary Research Center for Advanced Ma- terials (IRC-AM) through the project EC221002. The author wishes to thank Dr. Khaled S. Al-Athel and Prof. Syed S. Akhtar for their helpful remarks while conducting the research.

and wavy-type substrate deformation than the non-spherical ones. Angular particles flatten less and result in a more complex and un- even particle deformation than the other particles. The rod-like and flake-like structures might not stick to the substrate properly as they undergo lower plastic deformation and show more tendency for rigid body motion during the impact period.

