During the recent development of all forms of e-life, like e-commerce, e-democracy or e-government, e-voting is an area of the permanent research. Lately, we observed that the time of classical voting systems, based on paper-cards and ID, is coming to the end. Not only the mechanical voting system can make the results of elections questionable (e.g., USA 2000 presidential election) but problems can also arise from methods used to gather results by a central authority or from errors during the counting made by people. The need for electronic voting systems is growing; some prototypes are tested within different countries.

The analysis of such systems offered by different vendors in US is presented in [20]. Most of the commercial systems offer security through obscurity, what is widely believed to be the worst possible method of protection. Those systems uti- lize cryptography, but often in an incorrect way, leaving back-doors for intruders.

The Section 2 describes most important solutions for electronic election schemes. The following section introduces cryptographic primitives utilized in the proposed protocol: zero-knowledge and secure secret sharing scheme. Section 4 gives a short overview of the authentication scheme providing revocable anonymity, which was an inspiration for the new solution. Section 5 exactly describes the developed pro- tocol. The next section contains deep analysis of the protocol, both in means of computational and communication complexity, as well as the security analysis. The last section concludes the paper and describes some possible improvements to the discussed solution.

Mixnets are similar to anonymous channels that can be used to anonymously distribute to users credentials needed for voting. A mix is a trusted party that randomly distributes messages to users, so any eavesdropper is unable to trace the sender or recipient of a given message. It was first proposed by Chaum [7]. Mixnets can be based on decryption or on re-encryption [24]. DC-nets (dining cryptogra- phers networks) are an alternative to anonymous broadcast channels, proposed also by Chaum.

ory [10]. All broadcast information is stored in the memory and any participant can read it. Voters have an access to write to specific sections of the board, where they can publish their votes. Such a board can be implemented using multiple servers.

Proofs are mainly used by voters to prove the authorities the correctness of the votes they sent. Proofs may be interactive (e.g., classical zero-knowledge proofs) or non-interactive and simply attached to the vote. They are used mainly in systems with homomorphic encryptions.

Some systems based on more practical approaches are being currently developed or tested in Switzerland: Geneva and Neuchatel developed an Internet voting sys- tems, which is offered as an extension of the postal voting. Zurich developed also mobile voting systems [13]. The other prototype was developed in Portugal [17], called REVS. It utilizes blind signatures and is based on EVOX system. The pa- per [17] describes solutions for failures of communication or problems with servers. Also a secure authentication mechanism for voters was added. A prototype of the system is utilized for student surveys.

The goal of the protocol is to provide a user and service provider with efficient method of anonymous authentication. The anonymity of the user can be revoked by the service provider with the cooperation of the organization. The protocol consists of at least five parties. TTP is the trusted third party, O is an organization, T AO is a trusted authority within the organization, SP is a service provider, and u is a user, a member of O.

Assumptions: TA is trusted to create the valid credentials for voters and validate them properly during the voting. The mix is trusted by voters not to link them to credentials created by T A. The counter is trusted to accept votes received from the voters, providing their credentials are correct, and to publish the proper proofs for verification. All three parties are independent and are trusted not to cooperate (at least, the mix and TA are trusted not to conspire).

published by the mix agent. If the two operations are successful, TA sends a reply to AC, encrypted with the key kC . The counter now decrypts the vote, adds it to the tally and sends appropriate information to the voter. The counter can use the

is easy to calculate that the total size of a set of ballots for a single voter is rather small, since for the typical cipher and one-way hash function bsize < 1Kb. Creating puzzles for such a small amount of data is very fast. So, even for a large number of users the whole operation is very efficient.

Soundness. To produce a valid ballot, an adversary has to forge the credentials: the share si and the key kM . He would also have to produce a valid proof for the vote h(g(xi), vf ). Since the keys, xi and cryptogram E M (g(xi)) are stored in the

Robustness. The non-participating voter does not influence the course of elec- tions. All appropriate authorities (counter, mix and TA) have to take part in the selected stages of elections. The single authority is not able itself to change the results of elections; all three have to collaborate to falsify the proof and/or ballot or to identify the user who casted a selected vote.

Scalability. There are multiple ways to extend the application based on the agents. One of the methods is to create hierarchical structure, based on triples of agents: AM , AC and ATA (an agent representing T A). Each triple is responsible for registering users in a certain region and for tallying. Also, a single secret can be utilized to authenticate more than one user and the system can utilize multiple mix agents (with different or the same sets of puzzles) and counter agents.

The ballot for our scheme is practical and easy to create. Moreover, other cryptographic primitives along with presented credentials can be used, e.g.: blind signatures (the user can ask TA or the mix agent to sign the vote), or a public key, distributed with credentials, unique for each xi, that is later used to encrypt the vote.

