Dealing with delayed vehicles is a necessary issue in the dispositive work of a public transportation company. If a vehicle arrives at some station with a delay, it has to be decided if the connecting vehicles should wait for changing passengers or if they should depart in time. A possible objective function is to minimize the sum of all delays over all customers using the transportation network. In this paper the delay management problem is formulated as a mixed integer linear program, and solution approaches based on this formulation are indicated.

Unfortunately, delays are a main subject of complaints in public transporta- tion, and it does not seem possible to avoid them completely. Customers using a delayed vehicle will probably arrive at their destination later as planned. Even worse, if some passengers want to change from a delayed vehicle into another bus or train, they might miss their connection and maybe have to wait a long time for the next one. In this paper we analyze these e ects and will present a model how to deal with delays.

We rst introduce some notation. To describe the transportation network, let V be the set of stations and F be the set of vehicles (the eet). For each vehicle, we introduce E i V V as the set of its driving edges within the transportation network. If it is possible to change from vehicle i to vehicle j at a station k, then (i; j; k) will be called a connection and the whole set of connections is given by

Case 1: All connections on path a have been maintained. Then the delay for passengers using this path simply is the arrival delay of their last vehicle ia at their destination station ka, given by wayka . Note that these passengers might have had a larger delay during their trip, but only the arrival delay at their destination is relevant.

Based on event-activity networks (see, e.g., [9]), the formulation can be in- terpreted graph-theoretically as follows. We construct an event-activity net- work G = (V; E), where the set of nodes V = Varr [ Vdep  F  V repre- sents all arrivals (i; k)arr of a vehicle i at some station k and all departures (i; k)dep of some vehicle i at some station k. Then three types of edges can be

are indicated in red. Currently, we are collecting real data about the customers' behavior and are implementing and testing the heuristics discussed in Section 3 (see [2]). A branch-and-bound approach, where the za are the branching variables, and which makes use of the bounds developed in the previous section is also under consideration.  Furthermore, [10] gives some

