A workflow model M in CWML is a task with one input and one output condi- tion. The underlying semantics of M is given by a Petri net; see [16] for the Petri nets underlying each of the tasks. The state of M is determined by the marking of its underlying Petri net. A path in M is defined as follows.

Suppose a variable v1 is in E, then an action v1 = 1 becomes a visible action since the variable v1 is the assignee of the action; i.e., it appears at the left hand side of the assignment operation. Note that if v1 appears on the right hand side of the assignment operation, it will not make the action visible, because in this situation the action will not affect the truth value of the property to be verified.

The complexity of the slicing algorithm is in the best case O(n), where n is the number of atomic tasks; this happens when all tasks are invisible. In this situation, the algorithm checks every task once and then stops searching. The worst case complexity is O(n2log n); this happens when the algorithm discovers a new visible element in every iteration.

The Canadian Hospice Palliative Care Association National Model (CHPCA 2002) [6] was built on an understanding of health, the illness and bereavement experiences, and the role hospice palliative care plays in relieving suffering and improving quality of life. We developed a Hospice Palliative Care (HPC) workflow, in collaboration with the local health authority the Guysborough Antigonish Strait Health Author- ity (GASHA), following the CHPCA 2002 model. This model contains general guidelines, called Norms of Care. We used the NOVA Workflow to model a HPC workflow and developed LTL formulae that the workflow must satisfy to comply with the norms.

We expect that translation of CWML to other model checkers is straightforward. Once other automated translation methods are developed, other model checkers can be used to verify large workflow models. In the future, we will consider time [13] in the model slicing algorithm as many specifications in a safety critical system such as healthcare are time sensitive. In [7] the authors defined control dependence which might be used in our approach to identify infinite loops from a model by pre- processing. In future we will enhance our work with unstructured workflow models with an infinite number of states.

