Actin is the monomeric subunit of actin filaments which form one of the three major cytoskeletal networks in eukaryotic cells. Actin dynamics, be it the polymerisation of actin monomers into filaments or the reverse process, plays a key role in many cellular activities. For example, during cell motility and phagocytosis, protrusive activity is due to the growth of actin filaments close to the cell membrane.

Stochastic pi-calculus is a process algebra where stochastic rates are imposed on processes. By using the SPiM tool (stochastic pi-calculus machine), we can run com- puter simulations that display the change in time in the populations of the different species of the system being modelled [19]. We give compositional process models of actin polymerisation. Our models incrementally reflect the different levels of com- plexity in the actin dynamics with respect to the capabilities of actin monomers. By running simulations on these models, we observe the behaviour of a system of actin filaments as the emergent behaviour of a collection of actin filaments in a meshwork, acting in concert. As the first contribution of the paper, we thus demonstrate how filaments built from monomers can be modelled compositionally as processes with

ease, also when monomers have different states or binding capabilities. Another contribution of the paper is our extension to the SPiM tool with geometric plotting capabilities which we use to plot growing actin filaments: with this extension, we now have a way of simulating not only the populations of biochemical species, but also the evolution of their spatial distribution over time with respect to the param- eters of the individual species. This novel form of computational modelling lays the foundation for building models that reflect the behaviour of the modelled systems in the geometric space.

We model each actin monomer as a stochastic pi-calculus process. Each monomer binds/unbinds at its barbed end to/from another monomer at its pointed end. Monomers first form dimers, then polymers, resulting in linear actin filaments. The process model of the Arp2/3 complex binds to the pointed end of an actin monomer to nucleate the daughter filament. On the other end, Arp2/3 complex binds to the mother actin filament. We can then run simulations to observe the collective behaviour with different numbers of monomers and filaments evolving in time where filaments are built and unbuilt. We then parametrise filaments by co- ordinates which denote abstract locations for a geometric plotting. This results in movies of actin polymerisation that are generated with respect to the simulations with our models. Our models of actin polymerisation should ultimately provide an understanding of the mechanisms underlying actin-dependent cellular events such as cell motility and phagocytosis. They can potentially also serve as a template for similar complexation models.

Processes are viewed as the choice between zero or more processes. A process with n choices is written as let P = do P1 or ... or Pn. If there is only one choice, we write let P = P1. A process can perform an input ?x(m);Q or output

!x(n);Q on a channel x or perform a delay, written as delay@r;Q, where r is a real number value denoting the rate of an exponential distribution and Q is the continuation process. Complementary input and output actions interact by means of hand shake operations on channels declared with the syntax new. The operator new x@r:t P creates a fresh channel x of rate r to be used in the process P where t is the type of the channel x which can be, e.g., chan(chan,chan) denoting that the channel can pass the names of two channels. When a process is prefixed with a declaration of a fresh channel, that channel remains private to the process and does not conflict with any other channel. A process can be the empty process, written (). Two process components P and Q can be combined using parallel composition P | Q. This constitutes the basic form of compositionality which allows to compose processes in order to gradually build bigger models.

We can model complexation of biological species using processes [22]. Let us see this on the following example: consider the situation where the biological processes A and B can interact to form AB complex, which can return to the state where A and B coexist. We can depict this as the reaction A + B  AB . This reaction is coded in SPiM as follows:

The first line of the code states that there is a channel share which takes another channel as argument. The second and third line state that the process A can interact on channel share and broadcast the private channel e, and then evolve to process Ab, which can send a message on channel e and evolve to A. The fourth line states that process B can receive a message on channel share, and then evolve to Bb which can receive a message on channel e and evolve to B.

We give a simple model of a polymer as the complexation of a potentially unbounded number of single monomers as in [3]. In our process representation of the monomers, each state of a monomer is given by a process: there are the states Af (free), Al (bound on the left), Ar (bound on the right), and Ab (bound on both sides). Each monomer can move between these states by interacting with another monomer. Actin monomers can in fact polymerise and depolymerise at both ends. However, the depolymerisation at the barbed end and the polymerisation at the pointed end are very slow. In this subsection, we consider a polymer model, which can grow only at the barbed end (left) and shrink only at the pointed end (right).

The models that we discussed so far focus on the polymerisation aspect of the actin monomers. However, actin filaments are formed as a result of more complex biochemical systems acting in concert. In this section, with the aim of getting closer to the actual biological systems that we are modelling, we extend our models with further aspects of the actin monomers and filaments.

In actin dependent events such as cell motility and phagocytosis, mechanisms of control for the actin assembly are essential. The barbed end of an actin filament is the site for rapid actin polymerisation in cells, so altering the availability of free actin filament barbed ends provides a regulation mechanism for the actin assembly. Capping of the barbed ends by capping proteins is a mechanism, which reduces the rate of drawdown on the pool of unpolymerised actin. The free end of the new filament elongates until a capping protein becomes available. Then, capping proteins bind with a high rate to barbed ends and terminate the growth. As a result of this, each filament grows only transiently (see, e.g., [24,14]).

A model that explains the mechanisms that are involved in actin assembly can be further extended with the role of ATP/ADP. Filamental or monomeric actin are bound to ATP molecules which can hydrolyse to ADP-Pi-actin which can then evolve to ADP-actin by dissociating the phosphate. Actin subunits in branched network hydrolyse their bound ATP quickly, but dissociate the phosphate slowly. Dissociation of phosphate initiates disassembly reactions, which then promote sever- ing and dissociation of ADP-actin monomers from filament ends (see, e.g., [20,21]). By using the model introduced in Subsection 4.2 as a single layer of an actin

denote the ATP-actin in its free and left and right bounds. AfPi and AfD denote the free ADP-Pi-actin and ADP-actin, respectively. We denote their left and right bound forms analogously as before. Similarly, ATC, APC, and ADC denote the monomers that are bound to a capping protein process. In this model, ADP-actin can hydrolyse to ADP-Pi-actin and ADP-Pi-actin can dissociate its phosphate to become ADP-actin. We assume that the exchange to ATP actin is quick in the free monomer and we reflect this assumption also in the structure of our model by not allowing the hydrolysis of free ATP-actin.

The output of the simulations of our process models display the change in number of the processes for the biochemical species that they represent varying over the course of the simulation. However, it is often beneficial also to have a geometric representation of the processes evolving in time. For example, when models of actin polymerisation in the context of cell motility and phagocytosis are considered, their geometric representation gains importance in analysing these systems (see, e.g., [18,13]). Because the change in the actin filament meshwork in geometric space due to their polymerisation and depolymerisation is important, their geometric representation becomes a desired feature of the models.

When the processes Af and Al interact over the channel c, the process Af receives the x- and y-coordinates of the process Al. Then, Af evolves into the state Al, while recording its coordinates as (x, y + 1). Al evolves into the state Ab, keeping its coordinates unchanged, because its position in space does not change, but its state changes.

When we are modelling branching filaments, we adopt this idea to the processes Rf that represent the free Arp2/3 proteins in the cytosol. However, in this case, we need two more parameters which give the vector for the direction of the growth. Thus, each bounded monomer process has parameters for its location in space and and also parameters for its growth direction. When a filament grows along its axis, its direction vector remains unaltered. However, in case of branching, the direction vector of the daughter filament is updated with respect to a rotation matrix for 70 degrees. This is because the angle between a mother actin filament and a daughter filament is measured as 70 degrees [25]. As an example for this, consider the following SPiM code:

In our simulations the monomers are assumed to be freely diffusing until they become bound to polymers. Each bound monomer is parameterised by a set of coordinates that represent its current location. These coordinates do not have any effect on the rate of interaction of the monomers. Thus, our geometric models re- main consistent with the hypotheses of the Gillespie algorithm. It is also important to note that in the structure of our model, we do not allow the interaction of the monomers at the two ends of a filament. This way, we prevent loops that would result in wrong coordinates.

is described in detail in [19]. At each step, this algorithm chooses a reaction from the set of possible reactions that can be one of the two types: a delay or an interaction between an output and an input. We modified the simulator such that it outputs these reactions. Then, each reaction denotes an event to be plotted: the reactants of an event denote those processes that need to be removed from the plot, while the products denote the processes that need to be added to the plot at each time step. The following events, which can be seen as ground instances of rewriting rules similar to those used in rule-based modelling approaches (see, e.g., [7,8,9]), are examples to the output of the simulator for geometric plotting. From these events, we extract the processes that are relevant for the geometric plotting together with their first two parameters which give their coordinates. By treating the left-hand- side and right-hand-side of an event as negative and positive effects of an event, we

The rules assume that each choice of actions do P1 or ... or PN is associ- ated with a corresponding process definition X(m). This constraint is enforced by the original simulator as described in [19]. It is straightforward to prove that the expansion is compatible with the structural congruence rules of the calculus, and therefore preserves the correctness of the simulator. The expanded list of products is then added to the simulator by adapting the simulation algorithm of [19].

Our models are compositional in the sense that we can describe a single compo- nent of the system as a module of internal states, and then run multiple instances of this component in parallel in order to simulate the emergence of polymers of arbitrary lengths [5]. This contrasts with previous models of actin dynamics where each polymer of a given length needed to be modelled explicitly. Furthermore, our approach also allows coordinates to be attached to the monomers in order to observe the emergent structure of the polymers.

The mechanisms underlying actin polymerisation are complex and involve many components such as ADF/cofilin, which contributes to ADP-actin dissociation, and the profilin which is the nucleotide exchange factor for actin that catalyses the exchange of ADP for ATP [21]. Compositional construction of our models should demonstrate how such components can be included at will. Furthermore, actin polymerisation is a key component of many cellular activities such as cell motility and phagocytosis. We believe that our models can be modified and integrated into models of these other systems with the aim of generating hypothesis for wet- lab experiments. Ongoing work includes integrating an analysis on actin-filament- length, also by correlating the number of bound monomers in the filaments and monomers at the barbed-end of the filaments in our models. Another topic of future work is combining the models presented here with those in [4] to obtain models of signalling in phagocytosis resulting in actin remodelling. The geometric plotting tool should also contribute to the analysis of the models such as those for cell motility and phagocytosis. We believe that it is also useful as a debugging tool, to give a precise description on the events of the simulations.

