It causes white spots on the leaves. It starts with small spots which then enlarges to cover the whole leaf surface leading to loss of chlorophyll hence affecting photosynthesis. Severe CGM also causes mottling symptoms that can be easily confused with cas- sava mosaic, the leaves affected dry out, shrink and break away from the plant.

Is carried by a vector called whiteflies. Its symptoms include characteristic yellow of the vein which sometimes enlarges and forms visually large yellow patching [35]. CBSD also shows symp- toms of dark-brown necrotic areas on the tuber root with a reduc- tion in root size.

Has many foliar symptoms of mottling, mosaic rust, twisted leaves and a general reduction in sizes of leaves as well as the affected plants. Leaves always have patches of green mixed with the different coloring of yellow and white patches [36]. The patches reduce the surface area for photosynthesis resulting in stunted growth and low yield.

The problem of this dataset was the size, very small which could lead the model to suffer from overfitting problems. Additionally, the classes were highly imbalanced being heavily biased towards CMD, CBSD classes and images were having poor resolution and low contrast. Deep learning techniques proposed in this study for addressing class imbalance to counter bias were algorithm method using class weight [12], focal loss in Lin et al. [13] as a loss function for addressing extreme class imbalance and hybrid-method through resampling minority class using SMOTE (Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique) [14,15] discussed in detail in Section 4.3.

Raw color images of both healthy and unhealthy cassava leaves in the Joint Photographic Exper Group (JPEG) file was split into 5 directories representing each class (multi-class) other than split- ting the images into healthy and unhealthy directories only (binary-class). This way, it would enable the classification of four different cassava disease categories of the high-impact yet chal- lenging problems affecting agriculture. Unfortunately, there were a number of challenges with the dataset: The first one was, dataset being small in size, the second challenge being images having low resolution and poor contrast and the last most challenging was class label skew in that, the top class has 44.45% while the least represented class has 3.16%, revealing an order of magnitude dif-

Label skew: put it that you have a dataset at your reach, whereby you can train a machine learning algorithm to reach an accuracy of 97%. Overly excited, you then convince technocrats to deploy the model because who would even refuse such a model with that kind of amazing performance, unfortunately, the model fails to perform in real world. Why? Because there are many conditions that can lead to this and one that is very common is class imbalance and there must be techniques to counter such. Balancing is not easy, for our case, we used a combination of techniques that are already in literatures: class-weight, focal loss and SMOTE coupled with data augmentation techniques to increase the size of training set which gave an improved accuracy. SMOTE [14,15] aims to balance class distribution through randomly increasing the number of minority class represen- tation by replicating them. Generation of virtual training data points occurs by mean of interpolation of minority class

In this work, the CNNs model was developed and trained with a very limited dataset having high class imbalanced. The data was heavily biased towards CMD and CBSD classes, hence, necessitated for various techniques to counter class imbalanced. Our model per- formance showed promising results and to the best of our knowl- edge, there is still no experimentation done for classification of cassava mosaic and other cassava disease detection by training CNNs from scratch using an imbalanced dataset. Techniques applied were class weight, focal loss, SMOTE and different image dimensions which we found input shape of a vector (448, 448, 3) giving the best performance. Therefore, this model can be inte- grated into mobile applications for use by farmers or agricultural extension workers in mobile devices such as smartphones or other unmanned aerial vehicles to be used for real-time monitoring and early warning of cassava infections so that necessary prevention methods be applied or large scale implementation can be deployed via satellite imagery analysis to detect areas with infestation and recommend prevention techniques since most subsistence farmers in Sub-Saharan Africa cannot afford smartphones due to low level of income.

We found it very interesting how the model performance for the imbalanced dataset can be highly improved by class-weight, SMOTE, focal loss techniques and large input shape dimensions of images. From this experiment, we got an increment of over 5% in accuracy and a log loss that dramatically reduced to 0.06% from over 20% when class-imbalanced rectification techniques coupled with data augmentation and large input image dimensions were used. One key area that still needs further research though is mul- tiple co-occurring diseases on the same plant.

