imaging during last few years due to its safety, reliability and effi- ciency features. MRI is most often used for the diagnosis and detec- tion of tumors, lesions, to observe tissues growth, treatment planning and other abnormalities in brain soft tissues. The MRI method creates scans from measured signals that come directly from the object without needs to inject contrast agents. There is no problem regarding the radiation as it works in the radio fre- quency range. Lastly, it creates different images concentrating on one specific property of a same object by changing some intrinsic parameters of the system. This technique has a problem that is related to application of magnetic fields in the encoding process. These images are subject to different noises while taking the data, which affects quality and diagnostics of the image. Investigating MRI images help the doctors to take right judgments. Nevertheless, MRI noises reduce the quality of the image that badly disturbs the work of analyzing and processing image, for instance registration, classification, segmentation, and visualization. To achieve consis- tent examination results, eliminating the noise from the MRI image is necessary before conducting image processing [2].

Thresholding method [3] uses the intensity histograms and tries to determine intensity values that is called threshold. Threshold partitions the data into target classes and all the pixels are grouped into one class based on thresholds into one class due to which the segmentation is completed. The intensity distribution in medical images, mainly in MRI is mostly complicated and hence, threshold- ing based methods cannot determine the optimal thresholding value. Tough, computationally, thresholding techniques are well- organized and simple; however, they did not take into account the spatial context of the image and pixel location information is ignored [9]. Region-growing methods [3] extract a connected region consisting of groups of pixels having similar intensities of the image [10]. These methods need starting point commonly known as seed point which is a pixel in the image that fits to the object of attention. The kernel opinion is nominated manually by the user or seed finding algorithm is used which initialize the method automatically. All the adjacent pixels and the associated pixels are added to the growing region due to its examination. Main drawback of region-growing method is the careful initializa-

Clustering segmentation approaches [12] are the methods which divide the image into classes of such image pixels which have the similar intensity characteristics without utilizing the training images. Actually these methods utilize available data of image to train themselves. In clustering methods, the training and segmentation happens in parallel. It is an iterative procedure which is performed into two phases: (i) in first step, data is clus- tered and (ii) in the second step, it estimates the characteristics of each tissue group. The clustering methods are mainly catego- rized in supervised and unsupervised clustering. Supervised clus- tering techniques need the clusters number in advance from user, whereas in unsupervised clustering, the cluster information is decided by the clustering system itself. Clustering methods are simple and works better on homogeneous and overlapped regions of the images however, their performance suffers when applied on inhomogeneous regions and also these methods are sensitive to noise. K-means and Fuzzy C-Means are unsupervised clustering techniques used in image processing and medical image segmenta- tion purpose.

from complicated variations in the membership function [14]. A brain MRI segmentation approach has been proposed by Chuang et al. [15] that is named as spatial FCM (sFCM), which adjust the membership function of standard FCM method by incorporating the spatial information. This approach is less subtle to noise and in some extent, this method provides better performance. How- ever, this method still has a problem when the outliers of the image is ruined with seriously noise then this method does not show better performance. Furthermore, this method contains those points in the clusters that are not closer to center of the clus- ters. Cai et al. [16] developed an approach for brain MR images seg- mentation using spatial information named as fast generalized Fuzzy C-Means (FGFCM). By using original image along with spa- tial coordinates and the values of gray level of local neighborhood window, a nonlinearly-weighted sub image is produced. By utiliz- ing nonlinearly-weighted sub image, grouping is applied on the histogram of gray levels for the sub images. The method performs fast; however, still has a problem when the image is ruined with

Most of the methods that have been reviewed above suffer severely from noise and other noise multiplicative parameter intensity inhomogeneity in the MRI. The intensity inhomogeneity which is also known as intensity non-uniformity (INU) is the non-uniformities of intensities over the same class of tissues or structures. This imaging artifact significantly decreases the perfor- mance of any type of image processing algorithm that uses inten- sities as a feature and also reproduces poor segmentation.

We have already described certain literature review about this field. The rest of the paper is prepared as follows: Section 2 pre- sents an overview of standard FCM algorithm. Section 3 describes the detail of proposed methodology. In Section 4, the evaluation and validation strategy of the proposed method have been repre- sented. The results and discussions have been described in Sec- tion 5. The paper will finally be concluded after some discussions in Section 6.

[25] proposed a segmentation method Wavelet Morphological Fusion Fuzzy C-Means (WMMFCM) for brain MRI image. In this approach, first wavelet transform is applied on input image till 3rd levels and obtained the wavelet coefficients at each level. Later these coefficients are fused with original image through using the morphological pyramids to increase the sharpness and decrease the effect of noise. After this the FCM algorithm is employed to the fused images for segmentation. The performance of the tech- nique is better than some previous methods but the resulting images still contains noise. Adhikari et al. [9] proposed the modi-

fied version of FCM in order to generate the conditional spatial FCM (csFCM). In this method, membership function of standard FCM is modified to incorporate conditional factors describing the pixel involvement level in order to built clusters and spatial infor- mation as well. Regardless of providing better performance, in some cases, this approach misplaces valuable information about tissues. Moreover, the authors also described the limitations that the significance of the their proposed approach decreased in the presence of high level of noise; while the intensity inhomogeneity enlarged. Deng et al. [26] developed the updated version of stan- dard FCM approach by modifying the objective function. In this

geneity. In order to face and handle these issues, a clustering based method weighted spatial fuzzy c-means (wsFCM) by considering the spatial context of images has been developed for the segmen- tation of brain MRI images. A spatial function is proposed and incorporated in the membership function of regular fuzzy c- means algorithm. The spatial function fully utilizes the spatial characteristics of the image and assigns weights to the neighboring pixels according to their correlation with central pixel in the neigh- borhood window. More weights are assigned to those pixels which have low intensity distance and high weights to those which have larger distance from the central pixel in the local neighborhood window. The incorporation of spatial function into membership function expands the heftiness of the approach to noise and inten- sity inhomogeneity thus providing excellent outcomes of segmen- tation. The spatial function strengthens the membership function which is helpful in preserving the edges of the regions in the image.

where dmin is the minimum average spatial value among all direc- tions like vertical, horizontal and diagonals. In order to differentiate edges, noisy or irregular and smooth pixels, this paper proposed the usage of a method proposed by Dong [30] with minor changes. The referred method calculated the threshold value by first fixing it and then varying during iterations. The proposed method calculated the threshold value Tw by taking the average of absolute differences along each direction and then compared it with the minimum aver- age value dmin. So, for that the following cases has been considered:

In this way, this paper differentiates the smooth, edges and irregular pixels. The edges and smooth pixels are left untreated, preserved and only irregular pixels have been corrected. In order to remove irregularity of the irregular image pixels, the central pixel is replaced with the average intensity values of those pixels which have minimum spatial distance in each direction.

replicated database of MR images are T1-weighted and T2- weighted. Functional replicas for the ground truth are presented in this dataset that is also utilized for the purpose of quantita- tive evaluation and validation. In this dataset, most of the images have a special file format named NetCDF (MINC), which is commonly used in medical domain, and window cannot read them directly. Therefore, an image-editing tool such as Medical Image Processing Analysis and Visualization (MIPAV) version

Dice Coefficient [33] measures the spatial overlap of two sets. In the segmentation frameworks, this method is used to assess the performance of the segmentation method. In this method, the one set is the segmented image from the method and the other set is the manual segmentation of the same image by the expert. The Dice Similarity Coefficient (DSC) is defined as:

In the second experiment, the paper has analyzed the robust- ness of the proposed methodology. For this purpose, a set of four sub-experiments were performed in order for showing the effectiveness of sub-components of the proposed methodol- ogy. In the first case, the performance of the proposed frame- work has been validated without performing preprocessing step and having intensity inhomogeneity. In the second case, the performance has been tested and validated without per- forming preprocessing step and without intensity inhomogene- ity. While, in the third case, the performance has been assessed with performing preprocessing step and without intensity inhomogeneity. Finally, in the last case, the performance of the proposed framework has been analyzed with performing

Lastly, in this experiment, the paper has performed a series of experiments for comparison in order to show the efficacy of the developed methodology. In this experiment, the significance of the developed methodology was compared against recent methods. The researcher borrowed the implementations for some of the methods, whereas for other methods, he has imple- mented his respective methods for fair comparison.

form better on some images while the proposed method perfor- mance is better and consistent on all tested images. The results show that overall performance of proposed method is constantly better although the efficacy degrade if brain and non-brain parts do not correctly separated.).

In this paper, a robust clustering based technique weighted spa- tial fuzzy c-means (wsFCM) by utilizing spatial context of images has been developed for the segmentation of brain MRI. In the pro- posed algorithm, a spatial function is proposed and incorporated in the membership function of regular fuzzy c-means technique. The spatial function considers and utilizes the spatial characteristics of the image and assigns weights to the neighbors according to their correlation with central pixel in the neighborhood window. The incorporation of spatial function into membership function improves the robustness of the algorithm to noise and intensity inhomogeneity thus providing excellent outcomes of segmenta- tion. The spatial function strengthens the membership function which is helpful in preserving the edges of the regions in the image. The proposed method is tested on two publicly available standard datasets, BrainWeb simulated and IBSR real. A compre- hensive set of experimentation is performed in order to evaluate and validate performance of proposed algorithm through standard metrics. The results showed that the performance of the proposed method is robust to noise and deals with the intensity inhomo- geneity issue with a better and improved way. The performance of the developed methodology is compared against recent algo- rithms and performance found to be superior to existing tech- niques in this domain.

