An approach for the automatic construction of inheritance hierarchies is presented. It is based on the strict set-theoretical point of view in the mathematical theory of Formal Concept Analysis. The resulting hierarchies are concept lattices. An extension of the approach to the induction of nonmonotonic inheritance networks is also discussed. It turns out that the main ideas of Formal Concept Analysis, i.

The present paper presents a different approach for the automatic acquisi- tion of lexical knowledge from unstructured data. The main innovation is that the mathematical theoryof Formal Concept Analysis (cf. Ganter & Wille 1999 [6]) is used to extract the monotonic inheritance relations which are inherently given by the data. This approach is implemented and has been successfully tested by computing a hierarchy of the derivational information of English resp. German lemmas in the lexical database CELEX. 2

5 Under certain circumstances the number of nodes increases extremely; for instance, the number of nodes in the concept lattice capturing the derivational information of German lemmas contained in the lexical database CELEX is greater than 72.000; however, if the same information is represented in an AOC-poset the number of nodes is less than 4.000.

Automatic induction of nonmonotonic structures leads to special problems, since the data do not reveal nonmonotonic relations as openly as monotonic ones. The set of possible representations using nonmonotonicityis much larger than the set of monotonic representations. Independently of the chosen se- mantics of nonmonotonic inheritance, it has to be decided which information may possibly be overwritten. In most approaches the idea is that the upper area of a network encodes the regular or default cases, while subregular and exceptional information is placed below these nodes. A node inherits the reg- ular properties from its ancestors if theyare not overwritten bysubregular or exceptional properties.

plur gen:* n, plur dat:* n, plur acc: n}, where the defeasible attributes are put in brackets. To model subregularities and exceptions it is possible to at- tach further default attribute sets to subnodes of the top node. In this case, one has to pay special attention to the correct inheritance of the attributes. Instead of looking at valid implications it is also possible to look at partial im- plications, which are valid except for a certain amount of exceptional objects (cf. Luxemburger 1994 [14]).

