to improve the quality of these real-time software systems and thereby reduce the risk to the public of system failure, extensive research has been carried out on formal, mathematical specification, verification and validation techniques. While these methods are beginning to show promise in improving software quality, it is not always clear to software practitioners how well these theoretical techniques model real embedded systems and how they can be applied to practical industrial systems. The jury is still out as to whether some of the formal techniques are really only useful on academic examples. On the other hand, it is also becoming clear to industry and regulators that conventional techniques based on conformance to development processes and on testing techniques, no matter how extensive, cannot guarantee system properties to a sufficiently satisfactory level.

ware, and ii) Supporters of Software Education and Research. Recommendations to the first group include: use formal methods, software development technologies and principles that are known to be effective; build dependability cases that include security concerns; do not rely solely on process and testing to provide dependabil- ity; demand transparency and accountability; base certification on inspection and analysis of dependability claims and evidence. Recommendations to the second group include: place greater emphasis on dependability in the education of software professionals/researchers; fund basic research to improve dependability of systems that contain software, with an emphasis on evidence of dependability.

The consortium represents a research endeavour, totally devoid of any explicit en- dorsement by any regulators/companies. Its aim is to understand certification is- sues with respect to systems that contain (significant) software components, and to make recommendations on processes and standards that impact on the certi- fication of such systems. We want industry, regulators and universities involved in the consortium so that our recommendations are practical and effective in the real-world. We are interested in certification of systems in medical devices, nuclear power plants, automotive and aerospace. These areas puposely cover a range from the relatively unregulated (Automotive) to heavily regulated (Nuclear). We believe that we need to look at domain specific issues, but also share ideas between the different domains and levels of regulation. If we do a good job of this, then some of our ideas could be taken up in the future by regulator driven open processes and/or standards organizations. To this end, SCC has come up with the following objectives:

