Analysing dynamics of large biological regulatory networks (BRNs) calls for innovative methods to cope with the state space explosion. Static analysis and abstract interpretation techniques seem promising approaches. In this paper, we address the Process Hitting framework, that has been shown of interest to model dynamics of BRNs with discrete values. We propose to take profit from the particular structures of Process Hitting to build efficient static analyses. We introduce a novel and original method to decide the reachability of the state of a component within a BRN modelled in Process Hitting. The decision is achieved by abstract interpretation and static analysis of Process Hittings. The scalability of our approach is illustrated by its application to the analysis of a BRN with 40 components.

This paper is structured as follows. The Process Hitting framework is formally defined in Sect. 2. The abstract interpretation of process reachability is detailed in Sect. 3. The application of the presented method to the analysis of a large BRN is done in Sect. 4. We discuss our contribution in Sect. 5.

Reachability decisions have been experimented from all possible inputs combi- nations (components CD45, CD8, TCRlig) to each output (components CRE, AP1, NFkB, NFAT). All result in conclusive decisions. The response times are around the second on a 3GHz processor with 2GB of RAM. To give a comparison, we did the same experiments with a model-checking method using state-space compression: the libddd framework [5], known for its good performances. For many reachability decisions, the program run out of memory, for others, response times range from some seconds to hours. This shows the remarkable efficiency of our method, based on abstract interpretation.

Thanks to the particular structure of Process Hittings models, a powerful static analysis and abstract interpretation method has been developed to decide the reach- ability of a process, hence of a component level in the scope of BRNs modelling. The computation is done by over- and under-approximation of the decision, and may re- veal to be inconclusive. Further improvements of our procedure are currently being done to limit the number of inconclusive cases (Sect. 3.4).

This new and original approach has been applied to the analysis of a large BRN (40 components). Response times are really fast (around the second on a desktop computer), showing the scalability of our method. Application to ever much larger networks (100 components) are expected shortly.

