Nowadays message transmission on the internet still has to face some problems such as data security, and copyright con- trol. Therefore, we need secret communication schemes for transmitting message on the internet. Encryption may provide a safe way, which transforms data into a cipher-text via cipher algorithms. However, encryption makes the message unreadable, but making message suspicious enough to attract

There are five secret keys namely R1, R2, v1, v2, T and 1 6 v1, 1 6 v2, (v1 + v2) < 6. The average different values of a four- pixel block are utilized to classify the block as a smooth area or an edge area. The range of average different value is parti- tioned into two different levels, smooth level and edge level. Q-bit of the secret data is embedded in Pixels located in the block, where Q is decided by the level in which the average dif- ferent values belong to. In the embedding process of secret data, according to the secret keys v1 and v2, the smooth level will use lower value v1 while the edge level uses greater value v1 + v2. The data embedding process is given in Section 3.1.1 and the extracting phase is described in Section 3.1.2.

Step 5: For each pixel yi in the block, according to level of that block, separated SQ = Q bits of secret data. For edge blocks, SQ divide into two pieces SQ1 and SQ2, where SQ1 contains v1 bits and SQ2 contains v2 bits. For smooth blocks, SQ divide into one piece SQ1, where contains the same v1 bits.

For instance, we extract the embedding example in our non- adaptive algorithm. The stego-pixels are 17 and 237. Set Kr Kc is: {0011,0001,0000,0010,1111,1101,1100,.. ., 0101, 0100,0110}  and  has  Q = v1 + v2= 2 + 2 = 4,  n =

7.8.0.347 (R2009a) program on Windows XP platform. We used a series of pseudo-random numbers as the secret data to be embedded into the cover images and also utilized the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) value to evaluate the stego-images quality. The PSNR is defined as follows.

In this study firstly we developed an adaptive steganographic scheme that uses average differencing value of four neighbor- hood pixels and modulus function. Our adaptive scheme is based on the concept of human vision sensitivity, so that it is more difficult to notice changes at the edge regions of cover image than those in smooth regions. Accordingly, the number of bits to be embedded into each block is variable and deter- mined by the correlation between neighborhood pixels into its block. In our adaptive scheme, the average differencing value of a four-pixel block and a threshold secret key T are fac- tors for detecting the edge or smooth areas, according to the local complexity of a cover image. The number of bits to hide in the edge blocks is greater than of those to hide in smooth blocks. Then, we represent a non-adaptive scheme which pro- duces minimum distortion for the stego-image. In both our adaptive and non-adaptive algorithms, problem of overflow and underflow will not be occurred. Experimental results indi- cate that the proposed adaptive algorithm significantly is supe- rior to the currently existing scheme, in terms of stego-image visual quality, embedding capacity, level of security and our non-adaptive algorithm is better of aspect producing stego- image with higher visual quality. Finally, the detection results for our adaptive scheme verified that the RS steganalysis algo- rithm [6] has disablement in detecting the present of secret data

