Understanding the causal relationships among the actions performed by a process is a relevant issue for all process algebras used in Systems Biology, for determining which events are necessary for another event to occur. We could benefit from this kind of information in several ways, for instance, for determining the order of some events thus limiting the size of the system to be explored. When studying a particular biological phenomenon, this would allow to only analyse the events that may have an impact on the phenomenon in hand. In drug research, for example, the study of causal relations can help in characterizing the relationships amongst molecules in a biochemical interaction network. This information can be exploited for determining the chemical species that are involved in causing the phenomenon of interest thus identifying possible drug targets.

seminal work [4] Busi proposes a causal semantics for the Mate/Bud/Drip (MBD) fragment of Brane Calculus to formally address different kinds of causal dependen- cies: the standard structural and synchronisation causality, arising from the prefix structure of terms and from the synchronisation of complementary actions, and the environment causality related to the membrane structure and due to the MBD primitives. However, the introduction of annotations on causes into the standard semantics limits its practical application for the investigation of the causal depen- dencies arising in biological systems. Actually, the transition system enriched with causal information is generally quite huge (or even infinite).

In this context, resorting to static analysis techniques is a typical way to extract information on the run-time behaviour by reducing the computational cost of dy- namic techniques, particularly high when dealing with the intrinsic complexity of biological systems. Pushing forward some ideas developed in [3], we propose here an analysis for MBD, obtained by applying Abstract Interpretation (AI) [7] tech- niques. The analysis has polynomial complexity and is based on the definition of an abstract version of the causal semantics of [4]. The analysis of a system provides approximate information on all derivatives of the initial system and a description of the set of possible causal dependencies among reduction steps. Being a safe over- approximation of the causal behaviour, our analysis can be applied for proving that a reduction step does not depend on another one.

The actions of the MBD fragment of Brane Calculi [6] are inspired by membrane fusion, called mating, and splitting, called dripping/ budding, when splitting off one/zero internal membrane, respectively. We introduce the syntax and the se- mantics for MBD, considering a labelled version of the calculus. As usual in static analysis, labels are exploited in the definition of the analysis (presented in Sect. 4) and do not affect the dynamic semantics of the calculus. As already mentioned, we consider the calculus without replication.

In [4], Busi describes and classifies different kinds of causal dependencies in MBD. As in all process algebras, there is the standard structural causality arising from the prefix structure of terms and the one, synchronisation causality, arising from the synchronisation of complementary actions. Furthermore, there are the causal dependencies coming from the membrane structure and due to the MBD primitives. In particular, the mate reaction introduces a quite subtle kind of causality, called environment causality. Actually, after the fusion of two membranes the environment is modified so that the interaction possibilities of their child membranes may result increased.

More in details, after the fusion of two membranes it is possible that: (i) two child membranes become siblings and, therefore, can perform a mate that was not possible before; and (ii) a child membrane moves out from the parent membrane by performing a bud reaction that was not possible before. Hence, such interactions of the child membranes causally depend on the mate realised by the parent membranes. By contrast, a drip reaction realised by a child membrane can be considered causally independent from the mate operation, because it can be executed regardless of the fact that the fusion of the parent membranes has been performed.

We simplify and adapt the causal semantics in [4], to make simpler the definition of its abstract version. The main difference is that we obtain the cause name k associated to a reaction step from the process labels related to the involved actions. The well-labelling condition guarantees that k is fresh.

The causal transition system is defined up to causal structural congruence (that is the expected one) and to causal reduction rules, obtained by decorating the rules of Tab. 2 with information on causes. Tab. 3 presents the causal version of the MBD axioms and omits the obvious adaptation of the rules (Par), (Brane) and (Struct) in Tab. 2.

We present some illustrative examples for the causal semantics, taken from [4]. We focus on environment causality, discussing the effect of a mate reaction on the future interactions (mate and bud) of the child membranes. For a more precise approximation, we assume that in the initial systems all membrane labels belong to Labn.

The aim of the analysis is to compute an over-approximation of all derivatives of a system with causes, together with an over-approximation of the set of causes associated to each reaction step. Following the AI approach the analysis is based on the definition of an abstract version of the causal semantics. This semantics is given by transitions among abstract states that report approximate information on systems with causes. More precisely, an abstract state provides a description of the possible hierarchical structure of membranes and of the processes with causes, associated to each membrane.

Causal Analysis. The analysis provides an over-approximation of all derivatives of a system with causes, together with a description of the possible causal depen- dencies among reaction steps. This information is derived from the abstract causal semantics describing the approximate behaviour of a system. More precisely, the result of the analysis gives an abstract state and a set of causal dependencies be-

We have presented an analysis based on Abstract Interpretation techniques for approximating the causal semantics proposed in [4] for the MBD fragment of Brane Calculus [6]. Our analysis can be used to statically verify causality properties of MBD systems and could therefore help to understand the causal relationships among membranes interactions. Specifically, the analysis can be applied to show that a reaction step does not depend on another one. In this paper we have applied the analysis to simple MBD systems that represent critical situations for environment causality, as explained in [4].

