Biochemical pathways are abstract descriptions of the interactions among the molecular species involved in a process. Different molecular species mentioned in a pathway often represent different states of the same biological entity (e.g. the unbound and bound states of a certain molecule). Hence, a pathway can be seen as a network of interactions between entities which may change state synchronously by means of reactions. We consider such biological entities as pathway components and define a semi-automatic algorithm to infer the components from their interactions described in the pathway. Since this problem is inherently ambiguous, interaction with a domain expert might be needed to resolve any ambiguity that should arise. We apply the algorithm to the identification of components in a model of the EGF signaling pathway from the literature, and discuss possible uses of the component categorization as regards (i) the extraction of

Biochemical pathways are networks of interactions between biological entities such as proteins, DNA, RNA and other molecules, taking place inside cells. The interac- tions constituting a biochemical pathway are typically bindings and unbindings of molecular species, syntheses and degradations of proteins, conformational changes and translocations of molecules (or complexes) from one compartment to another. Each biological entity involved in a pathway usually appears in several different molecular species mentioned in the pathway. For instance, the same protein may appear in its initial form (as just synthesized), but also in an activated form (e.g. phosphorylated) and as a part of some complexes. The forms that a biological en- tity may take are usually represented as different molecular species, namely with

different names. Moreover, complexes (that involve different biological entities) are often associated with a single name, that may not allow the originating biological entities to be easily identified. The reconstruction of the set of biological entities involved in a given pathway is the problem we face in this paper.

In [14] we proposed a modular verification approach based on [13] that allows properties of the pathway to be verified efficiently by applying model checking to an abstraction of the pathway semantics obtained by focusing on the behavior of a subset of the involved biological entities. To this aim we considered a notion of molecular component that is the counterpart in a pathway model of the notion of biological entity in the real world. In order to be able to identify molecular components, we assumed molecular species representing complexes to be replaced by as many different species as are the biological entities involved in it. For instance, if a complex C is obtained by the binding of two different proteins A and B, we assumed C to be replaced by CA and CB, where CA is the part of C representing the bound form of protein A, and CB is the part of C representing the bound form of protein B.

In this paper we propose an algorithm for transforming pathways into their corresponding normal forms with molecular components specified. Moreover, we show that once the molecular components are identified it is rather easy to perform syntactic transformations aimed at simplifying the visualization of the pathway itself by focusing on a subset of components (namely, on a subset of the involved biological entities). Furthermore, we show that identification of molecular components also allows formal descriptions of the pathway by means of automata or process algebra (such as those in [2,3,6,9,12,19,20]) to be automatically generated. This enables the application of formal methods such as model checking [10,17] and bisimulation [7] to analyse and compare behaviours of pathways.

intervention when one of these ambiguities occurs. When a human intervention is necessary, the algorithm asks the human (a domain expert) to normalize a single reaction. There might be cases in which human intervention is invoked more than once to solve different ambiguities in the same pathway. However, we believe that in most practical cases the need of human intervention will be very limited, if not absent. This belief is supported by our preliminary tests on SBML models from the BioModels database [18].

As an application, we consider the well-known EGF signaling pathway. In par- ticular, we consider the computational model developed by Schoeberl et al. in [21]. On this model we show that our algorithm (implemented in a Java prototype tool) can be successfully applied to infer molecular components from the reactions constituting the pathway. In this case no human intervention is needed, and the molecular components identified by the algorithm correspond to the actual biologi- cal entities involved in the pathway. We show also how to consider component-based subpathays and how to automatically generate a set of finite state automata, one for each molecular component.

In this section we recall the modeling notation for biochemical pathways presented in [14]. Pathways are networks of biochemical reactions occurring within a cell. Reactions can be influenced by catalysts and inhibitors, which are molecules (pro- teins) which can stimulate and block the occurrence of reactions, respectively. For the sake of simplicity we do not consider inhibitors in this paper, although they could be dealth with exactly as catalysts.

{y1,..., yk} = pro(Ri). However, if there are multiple reactants/products from the same component, the algorithm cannot actually univocally match each reactant with each product, since the information provided by components is not sufficient to distinguish different subspecies of the same components. Therefore, whenever there are multiple pairs (x1, y1),..., (xl, yl) of elements from the same component, it is intended that such a mapping is arbitrarily chosen by the algorithm. In such cases further help from the user is needed, in order to specify the correct mapping between multiple reactants/products which occur within the same component.

We apply our component identification algorithm to a well-established computa- tional model of the EGF signaling pathway. We consider the model of the MAP kinase cascade activated by surface and internalized EGF receptors, proposed by Schoeberl et al. in [21]. This model includes a detailed description of the reac- tions that involve active EGF receptors and several effectors named GAP, ShC, SOS, Grb2, RasGDP/GTP and Raf. Moreover, the model describes the activity of internalized receptors, namely receptors that are no longer located on the cell membrane, but on a vesicle obtained by endocytosis and floating in the cytoplasm. Such internalized receptors continue to interact with effectors and to contribute to the pathway functioning, but actually the pathway can be seen as composed by two almost identical branches: the first consisting of the reactions stimulated by receptors on the cell membrane, and the second consisting of reactions stimulated by internalized receptors.

Other species acting as catalysts are MEK-PP, Phosphatase1, Phosphatase2 and Phosphatase3. For the sake of simplicity we assumed also EGF and EGFi to act as catalysts. By applying the same transformation also to the reactions all of these species are involved in, we obtain a pathway constituted by 66 different species and 80 reactions.

Once the molecular components are identified, it is possible to automatically generate a component interaction graph. We actually already did this in [14] where we used a normal-form version of the EGF pathway constructed by hand. A com- ponent interaction graph is a graph where nodes represent molecular components of a given pathway, and (possibly directed) edges represent the existence of direct interactions among two components. In other words, we have an undirected edge in the graph connecting nodes representing two components that are both involved in the same reaction as reactants and products. Moreover, we have a directed edge connecting nodes representing two components involved in the same reaction one (the source node) as catalyst and the other (the target node) as reactant and product. The component interaction graph is a very concise representation of the pathway that allows the role of the components and the structure of the pathway to be clarified.

Finally, we plan to adapt our approach to better work with quantitative aspects of pathways such as reaction kinetics and spatial distribution of molecules. In fact, the transformation of pathways into normal form used as-is in a quantitative context would not preserve the rate of occurrence of reactions. Such a rate depends on the quantities of reactants. Since the algorithm can change the description of reactants to bring reactions into normal form, rates of reactions cannot in general be preserved. Once quantitative aspects will be correctly dealt with, the translation of pathways into stochastic and spatial formalisms [4,5,9,11,20] will be made possible.

