At the same time, in the educational domain there is a growing interest in insert- ing sustainability awareness and energy-related aspects to the science parts of the curriculum. Raising awareness among young people and changing their habits con- cerning energy usage is considered key in achieving a sustainable energy behavior. The EU specifically considers environmental education one of the most prominent instruments to influence human behavior towards sustainability [9], while educa- tional buildings constitute 17% of the EU non-residential building stock (in m2) [8]. It is thus reasonable to state that the educational community is one of the impor- tant sectors in our society that could have a sizeable impact in energy consumption reduction, granted we succeed in teaching sustainability principles and responsible consumption behaviors. Another important aspect to note is that such behavioral changes in many cases could lead to energy savings as significant as more brute force approaches, e.g., using more energy-efficient devices.

Having this in mind, a key objective of energy efficiency initiatives in schools is making students aware that energy consumption is influenced by the sum of individual behaviors. In this context, we believe that IoT technologies can support such initiatives with immediate feedback regarding the impact of our actions and automating the implementation of energy-savings policies. The availability of actual measurements of environmental parameters, such as energy consumption, indoor and outdoor luminosity, temperature, noise, and so on, could allow the realization of a number of diverse education-related applications and scenarios: teachers can use collected data and analytics during class to explain basic phenomena related to the parameters monitored. Green Awareness In Action GAIA [2], a Horizon2020 EC-funded project, is developing an IoT platform that combines sensing, web-based tools and gamification elements, in order to address the educational community. Its aim is to increase awareness about energy consumption and sustainability, based on real-world sensor data produced by the school buildings where students and teachers live and work, while also leading towards behavior change in terms of energy efficiency. The project is continuously expanding its software lineup, in order to make a stronger case for energy efficiency, while utilizing a number of current technologies.

In this work, we discuss the rationale behind using augmented reality to com- plement an in-class lab activity for the GAIA project. This activity utilizes IoT devices and real-time data from sensors, aiming to help students gain a deeper un- derstanding of some concepts related to energy consumption and efficiency inside their own school building. The augmented reality part provides an additional visual companion to these activities. Apart from the lab-specific part, it is also used as a way to directly inspect sensor data inside classrooms at any point in time, greatly simplifying the access to such data, while helping in device maintenance as well.

With respect to energy efficiency and sustainability, a significant number of research projects and activities focus on the energy efficiency domain. BuildUp [1] is a European portal presenting in a systematic manner the current state-of-the-art in research on energy-efficient buildings. Our work sees energy awareness through the prism of behavioral change towards more sustainable practices in school buildings. There are also a number of past projects, like SEACS [5], which produced material related to sustainability and STEM that tie educational content to the Internet of Things. However, few attempts are made to tie together real-world IoT data with a curriculum aiming for long-term behavioral change, like in the case of GAIA.

Regarding our own previous work, [17] provides an overview of the GAIA educa- tional lab kit and its activities, while [12] provides some insights to the cloud-based part of the GAIA software ecosystem. In [13], we utilized Google Earth to visualize sensor data inside a 3D building representation, following some similar principles to the work presented here. Our work here aims to combine real-world IoT data with AR, in order to promote sustainability awareness, while helping students understand energy consumption aspects inside buildings in a STEM context.

It is important to note here that the functionality presented in this work is a means to showcase a prototype version of the envisioned system. As such, the im- plementation is in a preliminary stage; we wanted to show mainly the opportunities in combining the different elements discussed in this work. Future revisions of the system will offer a more rich set of functionality, tested in a more systematic man- ner, i.e., for long time periods, as well as closer to the real-world daily settings of educational environments.

, 3D bars depicting energy consumption. Another direction we will be looking into in the near future is the manipulation of the current visualization by moving certain objects or by obscuring a certain part of the surface dedicated to the activity to indicate a change of visualization mode. As an example, we could have 3 modes of visualization for energy, temperature and humidity; by hiding 2 of these options and pointing with the camera to the third one, we can change the mode and draw a 2D green arrow over the respective choice to indicate the current visualization mode.

The application can communicate with both the GAIA cloud services, in order to retrieve data regarding the energy consumption of a school building and envi- ronmental sensor values, but it can also communicate directly with the Raspberry Pi devices used for the lab kit activities (which must be in the same WiFi net- work in order to establish a connection). Direct communication with such devices allows for options such as directly manipulating sensor values (e.g., change light sensor input), as well as control over visualization capabilities of the IoT device (e.g., change the status of an LED or display a message on an LCD screen). Such direct communication is also handled via MQTT.

basic functionality in a reliable manner. However, since is the first iteration of the software, we expect to make numerous changes and additions to provide a more usable and useful system. Our main aim here was to discuss the aspects of combining real-world IoT data with AR in a educational setting.

