Genetic diseases are one of the most critical diseases facing human societies, their risk lies in the trans- mission of genetic characteristics from one generation to another, where the imbalance of these charac- teristics leads to an unhealthy offspring, which negatively affects the effort of this offspring and its services to society. Genetic disease is caused by a mutation in the Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA), these genetic mutations are generated by nonlinear interactions between two or more genes and / or environ- mental exposures. The aim of this paper is to discover both of gene-environment interactions and gene- gene interactions causing a genetic disease, the proposed methodology is based on both of the filter and wrapper feature selection methods, it uses the filter method using a Relief algorithm to detect the gene- environment interactions, wrapper method using genetic algorithm to discover gene-gene interactions, and classification decision tree algorithm to generate the conditional rules of gene-gene interactions. It has been evaluated using many different classifier models on four benchmark databases, and compared its performance with an Apriori algorithm for generating rules of gene-gene interactions, the proposed methodology achieved the highest performance and better classification accuracy on all databases con- taining patients affected by gene-environment interactions or gene-gene interactions or both of gene- environment and gene-gene interactions.

The researches that based on machine learning approaches to overcome the challenges of understanding the mutagenic changes divided into two types, the first type is interested in selecting the subset of genes associated with gene-environment interactions. New artificial bee colony approach has been proposed to find the best subset of genes related to gene-environment interactions, it is based on independent component analysis approach to reduce the size of data and artificial bee colony approach to optimize the reduced genes [12]. Recursive Memetic Algorithm (RMA) model for gene selection has been developed, it is a variant of Memetic Algorithm (MA) and performs much better than MA as well as genetic algorithm [13]. Bimodal unsupervised dimension reduction algorithm (BOUNDER) has been implemented to identify the best subset of genes for downstream analysis considering the variety and redundancy across all the samples using bimodal mod- elling before it feeds into the learning method [14]. A novel Markov blanket-embedded genetic algorithm (MBEGA) for gene selection has been proposed, it based on memetic operators to add or delete genes from a genetic algorithm (GA) solution to quickly improve the solution and fine-tune the search [15]. A new combination of Teaching Learning-based Optimization (TLBO) and Simulated Annealing (SA) algorithm with Support Vector Machine to identify the subset of the most informative genes that can contribute to the accurate detection of cancer [16].

technique is a popular data discretization method [23], which takes into consideration the distribution of gene values instead of hypothesized values for partitioning boundaries of the other dis- cretization techniques. Each gene has two possible alleles {A, B}, which lead to three possible genotypes (AA, AB/BA, and BB) [1]. Therefore, K-means algorithm is applied to partition the values of each gene into three clusters and each gene value of cluster num- ber one, two and three are replaced to labels L1, L2 and L3 respectively.

expression with the highest weight, RGn is the gene expression with the lowest weight, and n is the number of genes. The subset of genes interacting with environment SGE = {RG1, RG2, .. .., RGk}, where k is the least number of rank genes in RG list that achieves the highest classification accuracy.

Stage I of the proposed methodology has been applied on the four databases for preprocessing data to achieve high quality data free of outliers and missing data, the preprocessed databases have been discretized to appropriate the stage II inputs of the proposed methodology. The performance of proposed methodology has been measured by partitioning each discretized database into indepen- dent training and testing datasets using 5-fold cross validation technique, testing datasets have been used to evaluate predictive accuracy of the proposed methodology, accuracy metric is one of the most commonly used metrics for the classification perfor- mance, which measures the percentage of correctly classified sam- ples of the testing datasets. Number of incorrectly classified samples have also been measured to indicate the number of com- plex disease cases that need more developing approaches to dis- cover it, where the decrease in this number indicates the development of the predictive model for detecting complex disease cases comparing with the other predictive models.

It can also be seen from the achieved results that the accuracy of the proposed methodology varies across the different databases, this variance is due to the data characteristics of each database. DNA contains millions of genes, and the available genetic data- bases contain few genes compared to their total number, the genes available in the database may be affecting the incidence of the dis- ease, and they may be part of the effect and the other parts are related to the genes that are not available in the database. There- fore, in order to achieve the best possible accuracy, genetic data- bases must be available with a larger number of possible genes to study and understand the gene interactions with the largest number of possible causes of the genetic diseases.

