In fact, this reconstruction process is typically an ill-posed problem, which means a small perturbation in the input would produce a huge unexpected disturbance in the output. A vari- ety of regularization techniques have been proposed, such as half-quadratic regularization (HQR) [13], directional regulari- zation [14], and adaptive regularization [15]. Nevertheless, Tik- honov regularization is still one of the most commonly used methods to solve the ill-posed problem because of easy imple- mentation and speed. The regularization is used to form a con- straint and transforms the problem into a minimization. Though it has such advantages in implementation, the result- ing image is often not able to preserve edges and possibly affected by a global smoothness and even ringing artifacts. An explanation of the phenomenon is attributed to the regu- larization parameter, which manages the degree to which the regularization is performed on the problem. Choosing appro- priate regularization parameters has been discussed in [16].

ber of ideal image pixels, then the problem of image recovery is under-determined and cannot be recovered completely. Con- versely, if the measurements greatly exceed the number of ideal image pixels, then the system may over-determined and noise will be attenuated but information will be disregarded. For a fully determined system, the number of independent measure- ments should be greater than the number of image pixels in the restored image.

The challenge for SR in MRI is to increase the resolution in the slice-select dimension (i.e. reducing the slice thickness) so as to achieve HR, isotropic, 3-D images. A further challenge is to achieve the HR outcome without decreasing the SNR. While SRR in MRI is a developing field, showing its potential in resolution enhancement, a major question from the MRI community is whether SRR has any advantage over direct HR 3D acquisition when SNR and acquisition times are taken into account. Using extensive analysis, Plenge et al. [6], have proofed (through evaluation framework) that SRR is capable

The regularization parameter k controls the degree of regular- ization on the reconstruction. The Larger values of k will gen- erally lead to a smoother solution. This is useful when only a small number of LR images are available (the problem is under-determined) or the fidelity of the observed data is low due to registration error and noise. On the other hand, if a large number of LR images are available and the amount of noise is small, small k will lead to a good solution. Generally speaking, choosing k could be either done manually, using visual inspec- tion, or automatically using methods like discrepancy principle, generalized cross-validation and the L-curve [29].

is too rough, the parameter corresponds to the minimum kmin. Combining properties of MR medical images, we can evaluate an appropriate value for every element of the parameter through three factors, a, kmin, and kmax. Local gradient infor- mation is utilized to determine where and to what degree of regularization should be imposed, which is advantageous at restoring local edges and suppressing noise according to local information.

The resolution was quantified by the measurement of the edge sharpness of the images (as the edges play a critical role in medical imaging) [31]. The mathematical formula has been suggested by Greenspan et al. [9]. The width of each edge is measured by least-squares fitting it to a sigmoid function of the form:

We have presented an efficient approach to merge multiple MRI scans under a super-resolution framework. The tech- nique depends on combining multiple MRI scans with differ- ent slice orientations (which offers a more natural avenue toward isotropic image resolution than multiple acquisitions at the same orientation with sub-pixel offsets), using a super- resolution algorithm with adaptive regularization parameter. The result of experiment has shown an outstanding resolution augmentation of the reconstructed isotropic 3D MRI volume. The modified regularization parameters method has proven to preserve the edges and improve the sharpness.

