We present a technique to tackle the parameterised probabilistic model checking problem for a particular class of randomised distributed systems, which we model as Markov Decision Processes. These systems, termed degenerative, have the property that a model of a system with some communication graph will eventually behave like a model of a system with a reduced graph. We describe an induction schema for reasoning about models of a degenerative system over arbitrary graphs. We thereby show that a certain class of quantitative LTL properties will hold for a model of a system with any communication graph if it holds for all models of a system with some base graph. We demonstrate our technique via a case study (a

Model checking of distributed systems is restricted to verifying systems with a fixed number of processes. Proving a property for a system with N identical processes, for any N > 0, is known as the parameterised model checking problem (PMCP). This problem is undecidable in general [2] but techniques can be used to solve it for certain types of system.

X are the standard until and next-time operators. See for example, [7] for a full description. LTL\X is defined as for LTL but without the next-time operator (the exclusion of this operator is not a great hardship since one seldom reasons about exactly the next state in a distributed algorithm).

We illustrate our technique with a case study. The IEEE 1394 (Firewire) Tree Identify Protocol (TIP) [11], is designed to elect a leader from a set of processes arranged in an acyclic topology. A process may send one of three messages to a neighbouring process: be my parent (bmp), be my child (bmc) or acknowledge (ack ). Any process that has received bmp messages from all or all but one of its neighbours responds with bmc messages and, if necessary, sends a bmp to the remaining neighbour. The neighbouring processes will send an ack upon receiving a bmc, from which point the processes play no further part in the protocol (and hence the protocol is degenerative). In this manner the protocol builds a spanning tree with the root process elected as leader.

more vertices from the communication graph. The base case(s) are those graphs that are not reduced. We applied this technique to the IEEE 1394 (Firewire) tree identify protocol showing that a class of QLTL\X properties that are true of the systems with a star topology will hold for a system with any acyclic topology. In this case, reduction is by removal of the leaf vertices of level-1 vertices.

Our technique is only applicable to degenerative protocols. These are, however, widespread in distributed systems e.g gossip-style multicast protocols such as [8], the weak shared coin protocol of Aspnes and Herlihy [4], the Itai Rodeh leader election protocol for rings [12]. These systems present further challenges because the pro- tocols degenerate probabilistically (whereas the TIP degenerates deterministically). This necessitates extending our induction schema. This is work in progress.

