We have observed that some jobs need immediate attention as they cannot sustain for long or are time bound in a system there- fore they are needed to be catered earlier than the others making task priority an essential concern. To handle this problem, researchers have used job Priority as a main constraint and nodded that it must be marked as main factor/parameter for effective scheduling strategies. Ghanbari et al. [9] have anticipated a priority-based-job-scheduling technique (PJSC) by considering Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) as an underlying concept. It is a multi-criteria-decision-making (MCDM) model considering mul- tiple attributes, complexity and finish time. The proposed algo- rithm can be enhanced to achieve even lesser makespan time (finish time) by considering other QoS parameters for scheduling.

Priority scheduling is a much referred conventional technique for assigning and selecting a task from a batch by using QoS parame- ters. On the contrary when priority is assigned statically to a task, it lays out many problems and difficulties. In this paper Xiao et al.

[10] have rendered a priority based strategy for discovering the optimal choices for the existing scenario. It has been found that priority based method has more advancements over FCFS tech- nique and is far more beneficial too. If more information be gath- ered on regular fashion of its usage this strategy can be advanced even further. Moreover, in this paper it was proposed to bargain with users for their waiting time and termed it as profit for others. The existing fair queuing scheduling algorithm performs well in data applications but does not guarantee a fair service in real time application like voice or interactive videos. For this Yang et al. [11] have proposed a class based weighted fair scheduling (CBWFQ) technique which improves the network performances, time delay and fairness. This algorithm is also silent in deciding scheduling strategy where the job priority is same.

For improving the overall productivity and total throughput of the datacenter, Lakra et al. [5] have suggested to aim at multiple objectives while keeping QoS as a main criterion, so that allocation of task priority relies on the Quality of Service (QoS). In this algo- rithm, the jobs which are allotted with lower_QoS are the jobs hav- ing higher priority actually, while the tasks allotted with Higher_QoS are the task having lower priority value. The whole focus of this technique is to minimize the total execution time taken by a task. It can be further improved by employment of a better arranging/categorizing technique for the VMs & Tasks and using more factors/parameters for QoS. This experimental setup has been made/simulated using CloudSim simulator.

It can be understood as a credit assigned to a task which is obtained from already fed task length values by users, using Proce- dure 1 (given below). Tasks of variable lengths are fed to cloud sys- tem for execution. For providing effective scheduling strategy, in the sorted array of the tasks, it is always advised that the tasks should be taken from both ends of the array i.e. from the front as well as rear. Further, to assign the Task-Credits following steps are taken [6]. Firstly, the length of every task (Tl_i) is calculated. Then, the average length (L_avg) of the all the tasks is calculated. Then, the difference of the length of each task with respect to aver- age length, is calculated

Existing system and elaborates in detail the proposed work. Section-IV apprises the necessary arrangements and Experimental Setup and also discusses the Simulation Results. In Section-V the proposed research has been concluded and it sheds light on the future scope of the said work and in Section VI is the References.

machines and other facilities which can be rapidly generated as per need and with utmost ease. Selecting or Choosing a simulator, majorly, depends upon the nature and kind of research. Many sim- ulators are available for different types of research issues in cloud environment namely CloudAnalyst, GreenCloud, iCanCloud, Net- workCloudSim, EMUSIM, GroudSim, MR-CloudSim, SmartSim, DCSim, SmartSim, SimIC, SPECI, DynamicCloudSim, CloudSimSDN, secCloudSim, CEPSim, PICS etc. These all have their advantages over the other and each one is best suited for its type. Due to its features and popularity, CloudSim is mostly recommended as a general purpose simulator for researchers [20].

Memory: In task scheduling strategies, the submitted jobs/ tasks utilize two types of memories viz. RAM and physical memory for transitional data & storage in virtual machines, respectively It has been observed that longer the task resides in queue for getting executed; it keeps hold of that memory for longer duration. Simulation Results show that the pro- posed system has gained huge leap in the performance for Makespan Time by providing 44.75% better results than the existing system and has saved physical memory allocated to tasks and RAM by relinquishing the occupied

Network Operations: With the improved Makespan Time and Processing Time the proposed system is saving time on net- work operations by making the channel free earlier than the existing system. Results indicate that the proposed system is 43.81% better in terms of Total Computational Cost.

To overcome that same priority issue and to appropriately map the tasks to the virtual machines, a multiple credits based schedul- ing algorithm was developed considering four parameters, which incorporates Modified K-means clustering technique for the cate- gorization of Cloudlets/tasks and VMs. CloudSim 3.0.3, a Cloud Simulation Tool has been used to implement and test the proposed algorithm using the framework of Java. The obtained results were compared against the Existing System. Results indicate that the Makespan Time, Processing Time and Total Computational Cost were reduced considerably by using the proposed system/ algorithm. Some spikes were observed while plotting the graphs for proposed system, which suggests the need to balance the load by implementing some superlative techniques of load balancing. In future, more Quality of Service factors/parameters and effective load balancing techniques can be researched for enhanced perfor- mance and improved efficiency of cloud computing system.

working as a System Manager in Panjab University Swami Sarvanand Giri Regional Centre, Hoshiarpur, an off-campus establishment of Panjab University, Chandigarh. He has worked as a casual anchor in All India Radio Jalandhar from 2000 to 2004 for Morning Broadcasts of Shows Sajjri Sawer on FM and Navi Sawer on MW. He has Published over 14 papers in reputed Journals, International and National Conferences.

Dr Manju Bala received her Ph.D. degree in Computer Science and Engineering from NIT Hamirpur, Himachal Pradesh, India. She is currently the Director of Khalsa College of Engineering and Technology, Amritsar, India. Her areas of researches include Wireless Sensor Net- works and Data Communication.

