within the scope of this application. Quasi-functions are crucial for this evaluation as a person may have received education from mul- tiple universities. The standard confidence and PCA confidence mea- sures do not consider this issue and for this reason they undervalue the strength of a logical rule.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 and Sec- tion 3 cover respectively the related work and the preliminaries. Sec- tion 4 introduces our measure for all combinations of functions and quasi-functions in the body of Horn rules. Section 5 presents the results and discussions on performance evaluation. Finally, we con- clude the paper and give remarks for the future work in Section 6.

that 3% of all the transactions show that computer and mouse are purchased together. On the other hand, 80% confidence value means that 80% of customers who purchased a computer also pur- chased a mouse. In other words, if a customer buys a computer, there is an 80% chance that he or she will buy a mouse as well. Although a huge number of association rules can be generated from a database, they are considered as interesting according to a predefined minimum support and confidence thresholds. That is, association rules are uninteresting and discarded if they do not satisfy both a minimum support threshold and a minimum confidence threshold [1].

Knowledge Base (KB) & RDF KBs. Knowledge bases create an organized set of data that includes a semantic model which differs from databases. Classes and instances for representing the knowl- edge and rules for inferencing on that knowledge are defined with respect to a formal model.

RDF KBs are specifically called as knowledge graphs. Although the ontologies involve the classes and the relationships among the classes to develop a general conceptual model, a knowledge graph is the representation of semantic data in instance level. In a traditional knowledge base, we need some inference algorithms to capture implicit knowledge whereas we can apply graph traver- sal based or graph embedding methods to capture knowledge in a knowledge graph. In this paper, we focus on RDF KBs (or knowl- edge graphs) that is commonly used on the Web and our method can be applied to any knowledge graphs on the web to make an analysis with respect to an interestingness measure.

Function & Quasi-function. A relation p is a function in KB, if p has at most one object for each subject. For example, motherOf (Alice; Kate) describes that Alice is the mother of Kate. As each human has just one mother, motherOf relation is a func-

the facts that are false for the rule in the KB. Thus, PCA confidence is the ratio of number of known true facts that are implied by the rule to the number of true and false facts in the body for bounded subjects. In other words, unknown facts do not affect the PCA con- fidence measure. Although PCA confidence evaluates the rules under OWA, it does not consider the impact of quasi-functions in the body.

The value of the denominator of any confidence formula repre- sents the total number of facts that should be considered to evalu- ate the strength of a rule. This value increases as the number of objects belonging to a relation increases. It can also be said that a good measure should consider the categories of relations in the body of a Horn rule. Standard confidence and PCA confidence for- mulas ignore the effect of quasi-functions in the body. For this rea- son, we propose a confidence measure that considers different types of atoms, namely categories of relations, in a rule. The value of the denominator of the proposed measure is calculated by con- sidering both the functions and the quasi-functions in the body of a rule. With this approach, the proposed measure is not affected by the number of objects belonging to a relation. Furthermore, the proposed measure considers whether the head atom is a function or a quasi-function.

This section first explains the two widely used measures for KBs which are standard confidence and the PCA confidence. Second, we present our proposed metric, the COR (Categories Of Relations) confidence, which considers two categories of relations, namely the functions and quasi-functions in a Horn rule. The COR confi- dence measure also handles both categories of relations in the head atom. Lastly, we show the strength of the COR confidence for i) all possible combinations of functions and quasi-functions in the body of a Horn rule, and ii) functions and quasi-functions in the head of a Horn rule.

has been already added to the grouping set. Third, we group the generated n-variable bindings in the first step according to the grouping set found in the second step. Then, the groups are recon- sidered if the atom in the head of the rule is a quasi-function. The groups are decomposed according to the objects in the head. Finally, the number of groups are counted, and is used as the denominator of the COR confidence formula. In the worst case, when the head atom is a quasi-function, the time complexity of COR confidence is O(n * m) where n is the total size of the atoms in the body of the rule and m is the generated groups according to the subjects in the head atom.

Thus, standard confidence(R2)= 2/12, because there are twelve generated facts in the body and two facts in the head follow the rule: worksAt(Kate, Yale University) and worksAt(Alice, University of Michigan). However, PCA confidence(R2) = 2/11. Since the work- ing place of Dave is unknown, (Clara, Boston University, Dave) is dis- regarded. COR confidence does not only disregard it but also considers the impact of quasi-functions.

wasBornIn(Amber, Berlin) and wasBornIn(Kori, Chicago) are the two facts which follow the rule. So, standard confidence(R3)= 2/14. However, PCA confidence(R3)= 2/10. This is because, was- BornIn relation of Jane and Foster are unknown, hence (Bobby, Ber- lin, Jane), (Bobby, Zurich, Jane), (John, Chicago, Foster), and (John, New York, Foster) bindings are disregarded.

ally it is a symmetric relation. Since its subject, x has been already added to the grouping set, its object, z is added to the grouping set, too. Hence, the generated facts are divided into four groups accord- ing to x and z: Group 1: (Brandon, Berlin, Amber), (Brandon, Amster- dam, Amber), (Brandon, Toulouse, Amber), Group 2: (Brandon, Berlin, Siena), (Brandon, Amsterdam, Siena), (Brandon, Toulouse, Siena), Group 3: (Bobby, Berlin, April), (Bobby, Zurich, April), Group 4: (John, Chicago, Kori), (John, New York, Kori). So, in this case COR confidence(R3) = 2/4.

not exist. So, (Grace, Port Moresby, US) is disregarded and PCA confidence(R4)= 3/5. COR confidence does not only disregard the mentioned triple, but also considers the quasi-function in the body that isCitizenOf (x, z). According to the proposed Algorithm 1, the bound triples must be grouped according to x: Group 1: (Martin, Rome, Italy), Group 2: (Sam, Berlin, Germany), Group 3: (Michael, Chi- cago, US), (Michael, Chicago, Italy), (Michael, Chicago, Germany). Thus, COR confidence(R4) = 3/3. This example shows once again the importance of considering different categories of relations for assessing rule quality in KBs.

The main idea of COR confidence measure is based on group- ing the instances of atoms according to the subjects in quasi- functions. When the head atom is also a quasi-function, the COR confidence measure aims to decompose the already gener- ated groups according to the subjects in the head atom. In this example, the decomposed groups according to y with all instances of body and head atoms in R6 are: Group 1: (Brandon, Berlin, Amber, Berlin), (Brandon, Amsterdam, Amber, Berlin), (Bran- don, Toulouse, Amber, Berlin), Group 2: (Brandon, Berlin, Amber, Amsterdam), (Brandon, Amsterdam, Amber, Amsterdam), (Brandon, Toulouse, Amber, Amsterdam), Group 3: (Brandon, Berlin, Siena, Chicago), (Brandon, Amsterdam, Siena, Chicago), (Brandon, Tou- louse, Siena, Chicago), Group 4: (Bobby, Berlin, April, Amsterdam), (Bobby, Zurich, April, Amsterdam), Group 5: (John, Chicago, Kori, Chicago), (John, New York, Kori, Chicago), Group 6: (John, Chicago, Kori, Istanbul), (John, New York, Kori, Istanbul). To conclude, the number of groups is 6, and 3 instances follow the rule, for this reason COR confidence(R6) = 3/6.

The COR confidence groups the instances of atoms according to the subjects when there are quasi-functions in a Horn rule. For this reason, COR confidence measures the quality of a Horn rule more appropriately as will be explained in 5.3. Although the interesting- ness of the rule is affected with the number of objects per each subject when there are quasi-functions both in the body and the head of a Horn rule, this effect is not proportional. It is obvious to represent the effect of this approach with a weight assignment method.

This section is divided into three subsections. In the first sub- section, we present a confidence weighting method which is used in the evaluation phase. In the second subsection, the properties of the generated KB are introduced. In the third subsection, the COR confidence is compared with the PCA confidence when i) there are only quasi-functions in the body, and ii) there are both func- tions and quasi-functions in the body. In the last subsection, the

in the body of this rule is a quasi-function while the head atom is a function. However, there are some instances with multiple native languages in Wikidata such as English and British English. We ignore these facts and consider the facts where each person has got only one native language when the rule consists native language relation.

We have shown through several examples in 5 that the COR confidence measures the strength of Horn rules more effectively due to consideration of categories of relations in the atoms of the rule. The COR confidence calculates the confidence value of a rule greater than the PCA confidence when there are quasi-functions in the atoms. The reason of that is the grouping property of the COR confidence which prevents considering related facts sepa- rately. In conclusion, the COR confidence measure takes a step fur- ther on the current research of confidence measures for KBs by considering categories of relations for the first time.

