The model with vacation (removable or mobile server) is another kind of model extensively studied in the literature, earlier in relation with production systems [9]. The server can be turned off and takes a vacation of random length whenever the system is empty. The server is turned on when the accumulation of units in the system is greater than a fixed threshold N or after a fixed period of time T . Managers introduced vacation periods into the models in order to model the idle time for secondary tasks (preventive maintenance, priority jobs, battery recharge, security actions etc.).

Example 1.3 [PCS Call-Terminating Control [18].] Schemes for re forward- ing call-terminating SETUP messages from a network (or a cell station)are used to guard against their loss, which would make it impossible to set up calls. The vaca- tion protocol corresponds to the fact that messages registered in the paging-channel queue in a cell station are cyclically forwarded to the wireless area, while retrial phenomena corresponds to the case in which the SETUP messages are forwarded when a response message is not received by the network.

Example 1.4 [Paging Channel Overload or Attacks on Cellular Network [17].] The paging channel at a base station is represented as a queuing system with N + 1 queues where N is the number of slots of the paging channels i.e. N = 32 or N = 64 in Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) network each cell identified by

a base station operates on 64 Walsh codes). Among the queues, N of them are used to store slotted messages and one is for non-slotted messages. The system approach used here is that the vacation state corresponds to the service of slotted traffic in the actual system. In that work, retrial and energy parameters are neglected.

We can easily consider a model with active breakdowns i.e. we neglect the break- downs which occur when the server is idle or turned off. It is sufficient to replace the service time distribution by the generalized service time or completion time in the terms of [1]; this is the period which begins when a customer access to service until he leaves the system (this period includes all repair times).

Another way to simplify the computation is to use the so-called stochastic decompo- sition property (SDP). The decomposition is understood here in the sense that some terms correspond to a well-known system (for example, the FIFO queue), and the others correspond to the effect of some other influences (in the Queuing language). Fuhrman and Cooper [11]describe a large class of queueing models satisfying the stochastic decomposition property (SDP) for the queue size. It is not surprising that we can exhibit such a decomposition for vacation and/or retrial queues, and particularly for our model.

