Based on the duration of reservation on the wavelength channel, signaling techniques can be categorized as immediate reservation or delayed reservation [9]. In the immediate reser- vation technique, the channel on which the data burst is due to arrive is reserved immediately after the BHP is processed. On the other hand, in the delayed reservation technique, the chan- nel is reserved only for the duration of the data burst. When the BHP arrives on the control wavelength, it informs the core node about the upcoming burst length, arrival time, and the wavelength used [10]. For example, JIT signaling protocol uses immediate reservation, while the JET signaling protocol adopts delayed reservation. Since the bandwidth is reserved even when there is no burst, the utilization in JIT protocol is poorer compared to JET protocol. JET protocol outperforms JIT protocol in terms of bandwidth utilization and BLP at the expense of increased computational complexity at the core nodes.

In OBS networks with multiple wavelength channels per link, a scheduling algorithm must be implemented to select the channel on which a burst should be forwarded. In general, wavelength scheduling algorithms can be divided into two dis- tinct categories: non-void filling and void filling algorithms. The non-void filling algorithm maintains the latest available unscheduled time on each wavelength and when a new burst arrives it is scheduled on a wavelength such that the void size is minimized. Examples of algorithms in this category include FFUC (First Fit Unscheduled Channel) [11] and LAUC (Lat- est Available Unscheduled Channel) [12].

Burst loss due to contention is a major concern in OBS net- works. Such contention losses can heavily degrade the perfor- mance of OBS networks. Contention occurs when two or more bursts intend to take the same output port, on the same wave- length, at the same time. OBS is a buffer-less technology and OBS networks belong to the class of loss networks [15,16]. The lack of efficient optical buffers makes the task of designing QoS differentiation mechanisms for OBS networks even more important when contention for resources leads to burst loss. The key idea of QoS differentiation mechanism is to allocate more resources to higher priority classes compared to lower priority classes. The wavelength reservation based QoS differ- entiation mechanism is studied in the literature under the fol- lowing two alternatives.

In this paper, we presented an analytical model for the wave- length reservation based QoS differentiation mechanism in OBS networks. The model is studied in depth for a single class system and then generalized to a k-class service system. Through simulation, we examined the impact of higher prior- ity traffic classes on the performance of lower priority classes in terms of blocking probability. During simulation, a shared traffic system is also examined to exhibit the QoS differentia- tion among multiple traffic classes. Through the numerical results, it is concluded that service classes with more allocated wavelengths experience lesser BLP compared to classless sys- tems, while those with lesser wavelengths suffer heavy burst losses.

