The purpose of this study is to explore the possibility to mimic, in silico, biological experiments. From the formulation of a biological model using a formal calculus, the corresponding stochastic simulations are statistically compared with measured experimental data in terms of its qualitative behavior. The result of this comparison is indicative of the possible integration of laboratory experiments with computational simulations. The biological case study concerns calcium as a second messenger which transmit external signals to intracellular targets by oscillations of its concentration in the nucleus. The experimental data refers to recent experiments of calcium responses to endosymbiotic Arbuscular Mycorrhizal (AM) fungi in the host plant root epidermis. The employed formal tool is the Calculus of Wrapped Compartments (CWC) which combines the simplicity of notation of rewrite systems with the advantage of compositionality.

Many processes in living organisms are oscillatory. Besides well known examples such as the beating of the heart or lung respiration, there are many instances of biological oscillators on a microscopic scale, such as the cell cycle or the glycolytic oscillations. Calcium oscillations had been known for a long time in heart cells and neurons. Later, they have also been found in many other animal cells as well as in plant cells. Calcium (Ca2+) is an ubiquitous second messenger 3 in all eukaryotes. An outstanding question is how this cation serves as a messenger for numerous

The information transmitted by these signals arrives as a stimulus at the plasma membrane and is translated into intracellular Ca2+ oscillations. Ca2+ release from storage compartments is controlled by channels. Ca2+ is accurately regulated by the coordination of: passive fluxes (Ca2+ channels); active transport (Ca2+-ATPases and Ca2+-antiporters) across the plasma membrane and/or endomembranes; and the buffering capacity of the cytosol. Ca2+-dependent signalling processes are broadly conserved in plants and animals.

These variations in calcium level were observed in plants in response to external stimuli such as the interaction with Arbuscular Mycorrhizal (AM) fungi. These microorganisms form mutualistic endosymbiotic interaction with the roots of the most land plants [2]. The mutualism of the AM symbiosis is witnessed by bidi- rectional nutrient exchanges: the fungus is nourished by plant photosynthates that are essential for the completion of its life cycle and, in turn, it provides the host plant mineral nutrients. The contribution of this symbiosis to plant productivity is of enormous importance for the major crops that humans rely on for nutrition. Additionally, the symbiosis plays a key role in nutrient cycling in natural ecosystems and contributes to sustain plant diversity.

[6] where Ca2+ responses to AM fungi were measured in Medicago truncatula root epidermal cells treated with exudates obtained from germinating spores of the AM fungus Gigaspora margarita. This paper expounds how internal properties of the experimental data can be determined from global observations. We show that nu- clear Ca2+ oscillations exhibit inter spike intervals (ISI) [24] with an exponential distribution in relation to their waiting time. This lead us to analyze the data with respect to the information content of spike trains using entropy as measure for information transfer.

The second aim was to develop a computational model using a formal calculus endowed with a stochastic quantitative semantics to simulate the dynamics of cal- cium in the plant cell nuclei in order to extend the statistical data analysis in a computational framework. In computer science, several modeling languages for the representation and simulation of biological systems behavior have been proposed. Rewrite systems can describe regulatory networks by notations that can be easily understood by biologists. The Calculus of Wrapped Compartments [9,8] (CWC) is a modeling language that combines the simplicity of notation of rewrite systems with the advantage of a form of compositionality allowing the component-wise study of the behavior of a network including topological structures such as the membranes.

An interpretation of the spiking phenomenon is related to the information trans- mission and its energetic and metabolic costs. The signals based on nuclear cal- cium release need ATPase pumps (energy consuming) to balance its concentrations to avoid toxicity. Thus, the temporal structure of the spiking should limit their number over time in order to maximize information transfer. The exponential dis- tribution of relative waiting times of the spike, according to the statistical principle of maximum entropy, maximize the information transmitted within the cell given a fixed internal energy to be dissipated.

In this section we show how the basic dynamical characteristics of the experimen- tal data analyzed as discussed in Section 4 are captured in a CWC model following the schema introduced in Section 3. All the simulations are performed using the CWC simulator. The model, exploits the calculus as formal grounds, enjoying the nice compositional properties, has a direct computational implementation that sup- ports simulation trials, and, to our knowledge, represents the first rewrite system based model of a plant nuclear Ca2+ spiking system.

Calcium spiking is a fundamental phenomenon of cellular signalling. Ca2+ concen- tration in plant cells nuclei fluctuates in response to external stimuli such as the interaction with mycorrhizal fungi, serving as a messenger for triggering changes inside the cell. New formalisms and computational tools are mandatory in order to deeply understand the cellular messages underneath calcium spiking.

Experimental data [6] of nuclear Ca2+ responses in plant root epidermal cells to exudates of Arbuscular Mycorrhizal (AM) fungi were analyzed with respect to the information content of the spike trains using an entropy hypothesis regarding the information transfer. Then we have explored the possibility to mimic, in silico, these experimental data using a CWC formal model to describe calcium home- ostasis process in plant cell nuclei. This model is based upon the assumption that nucleoplasmic calcium is regulated by the balance between Ca2+-channel and Ca2+- transporter activities, both located on the inner nuclear membrane of the nuclear envelope.

