the students but also enables them to find the errors in the smaller tasks which is easier to solve. In a more recent paper [2], Actionscript has been recommended as a useful step up to high-level languages such as C++. Actionscript is seen to be easier to learn due to the immediate visualization it provides. In addition citeLeEd:2007:GamesFirst argued that Actionscript is widely used in the real world

The aim of this paper is to describe and evaluate a work in progress on using animation and interactive programming to engage first year university students, from diverse educational backgrounds and subject disciplines, with programming principles. This work in progress focuses on encouraging students to learn pro- gressive programming tasks from simple commands and assignments to designing a game. The design of a BreakOut computer game is perhaps one of the most use- ful exercises the students get involved in when learning programming and scripting concepts. Students learn about collision detection between the ball, paddle, bricks and boarders, user interaction by moving the paddle using keyboard controls, up- date of scores using dynamic text and the use of sound to make the learning of programming experience more enjoyable and engaging.

Actionscript uses traditional coding techniques but allows the user to see how each piece of code effects the running or execution of the program, allowing the user to have an instant visual understanding of what the code is doing. To help with coding errors Actionscript uses a syntax checker and will inform the user of errors either before or as they run a program. This is in contrast to other programming or scripting languages such as Javascript where errors are not so easily identifiable and the simple omission of a comma can cause the entire program to fail. A Javascript program will also only execute when the whole program is complete, where as with Actionscript code written for a specific action can be run even if the program, as a whole, is unfinished.

Perhaps the most obvious and easiest example to work with when beginning to use Actionscript for animation, is to use the increment and decrement operators. Students are encouraged to experiment with moving objects in a two-dimensional and three-dimensional world. The following simple script allows an object to move in the x direction with incrementing values of x by one pixel every time the frame is rendered and displayed.

Using if and if ... else statements for conditional testing checks whether a condition is true or false. The ball object in the example above can be used to do this. Students are asked to think of ways to stop the ball object moving when it gets to a certain pixel on the screen. A routine like the one below can achieve this task very easily:

The first year course in Information and Communications Technology is common to all first year undergraduates studying for a communications degree. The course is taught taking into consideration the needs of both potentially highly numerate and technologically aware students as well as students who may have no previous experience of ICT. The first year intake has between 60-70 students, most studying for programmes on Information Technology, Media and Computer Communications. The aim of the survey below is to carry out a quantitative and qualitative evaluation of how effective Actionscript has been in helping students engage with programming and scripting principles, the data and feedback collected was intended to focus on the following three areas:

From the cohort of students studying the course, 67% said they had some previ- ous experience of programming and 47% with scripting. When asked if they found some programming concepts easy to implement, 82% said that they felt that learn- ing to program without visualisation was hard and slowed their progress. A majority said that they decided to carry on with their courses at school/college because it was too late to change. Many felt that they found difficulty in acquiring fluency in programming.

When considering the distribution of the type of programming languages used, 10%, 16% and 26% said they have had experience of C, C++ and Java respectively. It is also worth noting here that the remaining 48% who have not used C/C++, Java have used other high-level languages such as Pascal, Prolog, C#, VB.NET, and Delphi. We can summarise from this that two-thirds of first year students have some experience of programming using a high-level language at a basic level

For students who had no previous experience of programming and scripting languages 33% and 53% respectively, engaging them in learning programming prin- ciples was rather easier than anticipated. The students had no prior experiences and there was no bias towards a particular programming or scripting language. It was also noted that for this group, the majority tended to have had more experience of using video and audio editing tools with some good experience of Web design and image editing. 80% of this group found Actionscript a useful tool to understand basic programming and scripting.

The results attained from the practical assessments has shown that correct responses have progressively improved over time. Although this was somewhat expected it also demonstrated student commitment and engagement as well. The challenges presented when designing the breakout computer game is an example of how well the students have adapted to using Actionscript.

