in clear text between the LTE-A network entities. Therefore, secu- rity and privacy adversaries, such as impersonating, IMSI catching, and tracking, may exploit the open nature of the LTE-A connectivity and BSs [5]. In addition, the tradeoff between the UE privacy and authentication make it a challenge to secure such networks.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.The related work is outlined in Section 2. Section 3 discusses the network and threat models. Section 4 describes the schnorr zero knowledge protocols. The proposed schemes are explained in Section 5. The security, privacy and performance evaluations are provided in Sec- tions 6 and 7, respectively. Section 8 describes the experimental results of the proposed scheme. Finally, Section 9 concludes the paper and suggests some future works.

Tracking attacks: In the initial attachment procedure, UE uses the IMSI to authenticate itself to the network. In the next mobility procedure, UE uses a temporary identity (TMSI). An adversary can link between the IMSI and TMSI using the location information introduced in the attach- ment procedure. Therefore, the advertises can reveal the real IMSI and trace the UE [25].

We assume that the evolved packet core is secure and trusted to other network entities, because they are owned and controlled by the operator who is interested in the secure operation of the net- work. In addition, the HSS, MME and the GMLC are not vulnerable to attacks because they are not accessible to subscribers. However, we do not trust the evolved universal terrestrial radio access net- work part of the LTE-A network because the HeNBs and APs are owned and operated by the subscriber rather than the service pro- viders and the eNBs are deployed in streets and physically can be accessed to public. We consider the BSs are connected to the evolved packet core via insecure links, which bring new risks to the LTE-A network management, but the links between evolved packet core entities are secure.

Our schemes withstand these types of attack by signature as; when the attacks catches the messages, he tries to take one of the two possibility. In one hand, attacker attempts to change one of the message content without changing signature. Therefore, the other side fails to verify the signature as the variety of the transmitted variable and the computed variables causing message rejection. on the other hand, attacker tries to extract the private key of the network node to sign the new message. To reveal the

work compatibility suffer different sort of attacks such as man in the middle,and modification attacks. These attacks attempt to make undesirable actions on the transmitted packet as content modification. Therefore, Attack tries to extract the private key aski of the UEi to sign the new message. To reveal the aski, attacker has to get the xi and computes Ai. xi is a random number belong the

In SZN-auth scheme, challenge, yi , is the third level of security that our scheme achieved. yi is computed based on e; x, and d, and challenge e has been sent securely from MMEk using the signa- ture. x and d are two random number that are not been sent before.

transmission media. Also, attackers has no capability to corrupt the transmitted message by modifying the UEi location, LAi, since it is included in the assigned message, which is secured by the sig- nature. Therefore, we do not need to hide LAi since the transmis- sion of the LAi is meaningless.

CPU@2.00 GHz 2.60 GHz, 16 GB RAM and 46-bit operating system x64-based processor, the computation overhead of the crypto- graphic algorithm being used in our scheme are computed as the following: single MD5 and SHA256 hash functions consume 4 and 5 ms, respectively to hash 5 bytes, AES and ECC consumes 20 and 1 ms to encrypt 5 bytes, the single modulus operation con- sumes 0.005 ms to consumes to relocate a large number to the finite field and finally, any MILENAGE cryptographic algorithms, the cryptographic algorithms being use in LTE-A network to gener- ate the security parameters [30], consumes 36 ms to generate LTE- A security parameter such as integrity key, response, and confiden- tiality key.

ing the security parameters such as AVs. Each registration process, the authentication and authorization and accounting server com- putes five authentication vectors (AVs) for the MME and UE com- putes at least one AV. The computing of these AVs is done based on a special purpose cryptographical functions which use advanced encryption standard as the kernel function [30].

