In this study we described the synthesis and evaluation of mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSN) with large, tunable, and open cylindrical pores as potential antifungal agent against A. solani under laboratory and greenhouse conditions. The efficacy of MSN was evaluated against tomato early blight as compared with the recommended fungicide, metalaxyl.

ethylene oxide) (Pluronic P123; EO20PO70EO20) were obtained from the Sigma-Aldrich Company, Ltd. (USA). These analytical- grade chemicals were used without further purification. Metalaxyl is the recommended fungicide for the control of tomato early blight pathogen; this chemical with a trade name of Metalaxyl 25% EC Nanjing Essence Fine-Chemical Co., Ltd. was obtained from the Agricultural Development Co., Ltd. (Cairo, Egypt).

Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) images were obtained with a Hitachi S-4300 microscope. Carbon tape was used as a substrate to fix the MSN powder on a SEM stage before insertion into the chamber. The 29Si MAS NMR spectra were obtained with a Bruker AMX-500 spectrometer.

The efficacy of MSN and metalaxyl were evaluated against A. solani under laboratory conditions. The efficacy was determined as the per cent of inhibition in the growth relative to the control treatment. Potato dextrose agar (PDA) medium was poured into Petri dishes with 15 ml per dish. One well was punched in the cen- ter of each plate after solidification. The plates were inoculated in the center with a disk (5 mm diameter) bearing the mycelium growth from the A. solani culture (5 days old culture). A 50 ml ali-

The unique features of MSN such as high surface area (SBET) of 489 m2/g and small pore size (Dp) of 10.7 expected to improve the significance of its surface morphology participating in the cellular interaction i.e., the number of active sites coming in contact with the cells which render cytotoxic effect against early blight fungus. Also, it is well known that the smaller particles have larger surface area available for interaction and will give more antimicrobial effect than the larger particles.

Any management strategy for plant pathogens should not focus only on the effective control of the pathogens that attack the agri- cultural crops. It should also take in consideration its effect on growth and yield characters of crops. Significant increase in growth parameters of tomato plants treated with MSN were recorded and this is agreed with findings of [43], who reported that the applica- tion of control agents suppresses diseases incidence and can have positive effects on plant growth and yield. This increase may be attributed to the fact that MSN and metalaxyl could reduce the influence of early blight fungus on the green area in tomato leaves; thus, decreased the damaged green leaf area which finally led to increase the plant growth because the leaves can undergo more photosynthesis [44].

cability is not known. The amount needed from MSN to spray one acre depend on our results if we supposed that one acre (4046.85 m2) need 100 L water may be 40 g. We think, this amount is appli- cable and comparable to the tested fungicide amount (30 g/4046.85 m2) and cost effective.

The safety is considered one of the key factors for any agents used control agricultural pests. These control agents should not affect the environment and the public health. Recently in two stud- ies with different designs of silica nanoparticles have been found effective in killing bacterial cells without damaging human cells [45,46]. This confirms the safety of MSN to human health and its use can reduce the hazards effects caused by chemical fungicides. The physical mode of action of MSN against A. solani make it not specific to this fungus only which strongly supports the use of MSN

MSN effectively reduced the severity of early blight disease in tomato and improved tomato growth characters also. It is expected that the application of MSN nanoparticles at low concentrations will be eco-friendly and decrease farm management costs. The easy synthesis of MSN is a highly promising approach to designing and synthesizing other metal oxides with powerful antifungal activity; that can be used as a safe alternative to chemical fungi- cides to control tomato early blight.

