Rhodotorula sp. is unicellular yeast, characterized by a high growth rate. It has a yellow, orange or red color and known as care- togenic yeast or pink yeast due to its production of carotenoids [1]. It is widely distributed and isolated from several sources such as soil, fresh water, flowers, sea water, and food [2].

A lot of studies have been discussed about the importance of genus Rhodotorula in the field of biotechnology and its vital appli- cations in the future of industry, which negates the thought that genus Rhodotorula is considered as saprophytes [3]. Metal nanoparticles such as silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) possess diverse technological applications due to their particular chemical, optical, electronic and magnetic characteristics that are completely differ- ent from the characters of the bulk metals [4]. One of the synthesis techniques of AgNPs is the biological synthesis [5]. It is high yield, low cost, non-toxic and eco-friendly process which can use differ- ent biological resources such as plants, bacteria, fungi, yeast, algae and viruses in the synthesis of nanoparticles [6]. Recent studies confirmed the ability of genus Rhodotorula such as Rhodotorula minuta [7] and Rhodotorula glutinis [8] to synthesis metal nanoparticles.

One of the most vital applications of the metal nanoparticles, especially silver nanoparticles, in the field of medicine is using these nanoparticles as antimicrobial agents. The lethal activity of nanoparticles against broad spectrum of Gram-positive bacteria, Gram-negative bacteria and fungi has been approved [9]. This study aimed to add a new biological source for the synthesis of sil- ver nanoparticles besides monitoring the microbial biochemical changes and evaluating the antimicrobial activity of variable silver nanoparticles separated at different centrifugation speeds.

Streptococcus sp., Bacillus sp., Staph sp., Shigella sp., Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Klebsiella sp. and Candida sp. were provided from Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology Unit, Fac- ulty of Science, Mansoura University, Egypt, to study the antimi- crobial activity of the biosynthesized AgNPs [16]. These pathogens were activated by culturing 100 mL of each in 10 ml LB

SDS-PAGE was used to investigate the effect of AgNPs collected at different centrifugation speeds (4000 and 14,000 rpm) on selected pathogens E. coli, Candida sp. and Bacillus sp.. Total pro- teins from pellets of the treated microorganisms were extracted in 100 mM phosphate buffer at pH 7. For loading protein over

the acrylamide gel, 10 mg protein concentrations from each sample were boiled in 2X sample buffer (2.5 ml Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 10 ml Dis- tilled water, 4 ml 10%SDS, 2 ml Glycerol and 1 ml b- mercaptoethanol) for 2 min. Acrylamide gel was prepared in two

layers; 4%stacking gel above 12% separating gel [21].The elec- trophoresis was applied for 2 h at 100 V, then the gel was stained in Commassie Brilliant Blue R250 overnight, followed by de- staining on shaker for few hours. Using Gel Analyzer3 Program, the gel was analyzed.

At OD600, the growth of all pathogens including Gram positive bacteria (Streptococcus sp., Bacillus sp., Staphylococcus sp.) and Gram negative bacteria (Shigella sp., Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas areuginosa and Klebsiella sp.) as well as one fungus Candida sp. were completely inhibited after treatments by all AgNPs collected

Nanobiotechnology is a branch of the science which manipu- lates the properties and the behavior of materials at nanoscale for numerous applications for serving the mankind [5]. In the pre- sent study, a Rhodotorula sp., strain ATL72, a carotenoid producing yeast, was isolated from different localities of salt marches near Mediterranean sea, Egypt. Morphological and molecular tools were used for identification of the strain. The dendogram analysis of its 18S rRNA gene showed the similarity between it and Rhodotorula bloemfonteinensis EU075187 with percentage of 40%. This result indicated the possibility that the isolated Rhodotorula Strain ATL72 might be a new strain.

Biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles from the isolated strain Rhodotorula sp. ATL72 was performed using the cell free water extract approach. The dark brown color of the supernatant raised due to the bio-reduction of AgNO3 by the reducing proteins in the water extract of the yeast [22] and other microorganisms [23]. A novel technique depending on differential freezing and thawing of samples was applied for separating metallic nanoparti- cles from a culture of yeast MKY3 [24].Yeast strains possess more benefits over bacteria in the mass production of NPs due to the easiness of controlling yeasts in laboratory circumstances besides the synthesis of numerous enzymes and rapid growth with the use of simple nutrients [25].

has been documented for various metal nanoparticles [26]while the other peak ~ 350 may attributed to the presence of contami- nating proteins in the sample. TEM analysis of silver nanoparticles showed irregular oval or rounded shapes exhibiting sizes ranging from 8.8 to 21.4 nm as pronounced in several publications [7,8,24]. The results of antimicrobial activity of AgNPs on different Gram positive, Gram negative bacteria and yeast indicated the complete inhibition of growth of these organisms. These results were con- firmed by previous extensive studies on Candida albicans, Sal- monella enterica, E. coli, and Vibrio parahaemolyticus [27]. Also, AgNPs can be definitely used as effective antibiotics against

E. coli, Salmonella typhimurium, Staphylococcus epidermidis and Staphylococcus aureus [28]. The effect of AgNPs as antimicrobial agent depends on the shape of nanoparticles as encountered from the work monitoring the effect of different shapes of AgNPs (spherical, rod-like and triangular) on E. coli and found that triangular-shaped nanoparticles are the most effective shape [29].

The SDS-PAGE analysis showed qualitative and quantitative changes in protein profile after treatment of Candida sp. and Bacil- lus sp. by AgNPs. The appearance of new bands and the increasing in band intensity might be attributed to the ability of AgNPs to induce new proteins as a stress response [32]. While in case of

E. coli treated with AgNPs the protein profile remain unchanged, although the band intensities were comparatively less than those of the control. This implies that the affinity of AgNPs to the thiol groups of the proteins causing unfolding of the protein chain might cause degradation of the proteins. Also, previous studies reported that AgNPs may implicate in preventing the synthesis of the pro- teins by inhibiting many translation factors [33,34].

