A series of azosalicylic acid analogs were newly synthesized by coupling various aryl and heteroarylamine functionalities with salicylic acid nucleus. All the synthesized com- pounds were structurally confirmed by various modern analytical methods. The said synthesized compounds were screened to investigate their antimicrobial, analgesic and an- tioxidant activities. The compounds 4e and 4h showed excellent significant antibacterial activity against most of the bacterial strains as no compounds showed significant antifun- gal activity against Cryptococcus neoformans. The bromine substituted molecule 4e (4-bromo- 3-methyl phenyl azosalicylic acid analog) showed the highest significant analgesic activity with 46.10% of inhibition. The results of in vitro antibacterial and analgesic activity were justified with the outcome of in-silico investigation. The results of biological activities were statistically interpreted. The compounds substituted with antipyrinylazo and 4-carboxy phenylazo moiety exhibited potential antioxidant activity.

hydroxy benzoic acid [1]. The salicylic acid derivatives ex- hibited antioxidant, antiproliferative [2] and cytotoxic activities [3]. The azo salicylic acid derivative sulfasalazine is a proven drug for the last 40 years which is effective against ulcerative colitis (inflammatory bowel disease) [4]. There has been an in- crease in the side-effects due to the sulfapyridine portion which acts as a carrier. The azo bond breaks due to the bacterial enzyme azo-reductase present at the site of lumen of the colon leaving the 5-aminosalicylic acid. The azobis-salicylic acid de- rivative olsalazine could be a better alternative for sulfasalazine.

Literature survey supports that azo-salicylic acids have bio- logical activity and also are useful precursors for the synthesis of anticarcinogenic, antiviral, antimicrobial and antimalarial agents [3]. Salicylates have analgesic effects similar to that of other NSAIDs to inhibit the enzyme cyclooxygenase (COX) [5]. NSAIDs inhibit both the activity of COX-1 and COX-2 and thereby synthesis of prostaglandin and thromboxane [6]. Lit-

literature survey indicates that pyrazolone nucleus is the key pharmacophore and is responsible for various pharmacologi- cal activities such as analgesic [8] and antimicrobial activity [9]. The N-phenyl substituted anthranyl congeners also have analgesic, antirheumatic and antiinflammatory activities [10]. The above information encouraged us to synthesize a new range of azo-salicylic acid congeners with different aryl and heteroaryl functionalities and to investigate the antibacterial, analgesic and antioxidant activities. The structures were confirmed by

The above newly synthesized azosalicylic acid congeners were investigated over different microbial strains viz. Escherichia coli (MTCC 614), Salmonella enterica ser. typhi (MTCC 773), Salmo- nella enterica typhimurium (MTCC 98), Salmonella enterica paratyphi (MTCC 3220), Shigella flexneri (MTCC 1457), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (MTCC 1035), Vibrio cholera (MTCC 3906), Micrococcus luteus (MTCC 1809), Klebsiella pneumoniae (MTCC 109), Bacillus circulans (MTCC 490), Streptococcus mitis (MTCC 2695), Aspergillus niger (MTCC 9933), Candida albicans (MTCC 3017), Candida glabrata, Cryptococcus neoformans and Trichophyton rubrum, sourced from the Insti- tute of Microbial Technology and Gene bank (IMTECH), Chandigarh, India. Staphylococcus aureus and Bacillus subtilis strain hswx88 [12] were isolated in the Pharmaceutical Biotechnol- ogy Division of the University Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utkal University. Freshly subcultured microorgan- isms were used. Ampicillin and Fluconazole were used as reference antibiotics.

Acute Oral Toxicity study was performed on female Wistar rats to establish the safety dose of the synthesized compounds. OECD guideline No.420 (2000) for Acute Oral Toxicity-Fixed Dose Procedure was followed (sighting study and main study) for a period of 14 days to study the acute toxic symptoms and the behavioral changes within the animals.

pounds at different concentration aliquots was taken and the volume was adjusted up to 3 mL with methanol. To this mixture 1 mL of 0.1 mM solution of DPPH in methanol was added. The mixture was kept in the dark for 30 min. The free radical scav- enging activity of synthesized compounds was compared with standard Butylated Hydroxytoluene (BHT). Optical density was measured at 517 nm and the inhibition of concentration was calculated. One milliliter of 0.1 mM of methanolic solution of DPPH and 3 mL of methanol was considered as control.

In this research, a series of azosalicylic acid analogs were syn- thesized. The structures and their composition were confirmed by means of different spectral analysis. The 4-bromo-3- methyl phenylazo and isoxazolylazo substituted salicylic acid analogs 4e and 4h showed highest potent antibacterial activ- ity, whereas the 4-carboxy phenylazo substituted salicylic acid analog 4g showed good significant antibacterial activity which justifies the prediction by in silico studies. No compounds ex- hibited significant antifungal activity against C. neoformans. However, the 4-bromo-3-methyl phenylazo and 4-carboxy phenylazo substituted salicylic acid analogs 4e and 4g showed highest significant analgesic activity which also justifies the in silico prediction. The antipyrinylazo and 4-carboxy phenylazo substituted salicylic analogs 4f and 4g showed potential an- tioxidant activity.

