The current study was conducted to examine the antioxidant effect of grape seeds and skin (GSE and GSK) against Ehrlich solid tumor (EST)-induced oxidative stress, hepatic dysfunction and pathological changes in the liver of albino mice. GSE and GSK were mixed with the standard diet and given to mice 14 days before subcutaneous tumor cells inocu- lation and continued for 30 days. EST-bearing mice showed increase of plasma alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST), elevation in lipid peroxi- dation (MDA) level accompanied by a decline in glutathione (GSH), superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) levels in blood and liver. Histopathologically and ultrastructur- ally, liver of EST bearing group showed hepatic degeneration with sinusoidal EST and lymphocytic infiltration, increase of collagen fibers, irregular nuclei, altered mitochondria and increase of secondary lysosomes. Histochemically, total protein and DNA contents were reduced in the liver of EST group. Conversely, GSE and GSK supplementation to EST bearing mice potentially recovered liver function enzymes, reduced MDA level, augmented antioxidant parameters, normalized liver protein and DNA contents and improved the pathologically examined hepatic lesions. In conclusion, GSE and GSK revealed potent antioxidant properties by augmenting the antioxidant defense system thereby protecting the liver against oxidative stress induced by Ehrlich solid carcinoma tumors.

world. Grape contains a lot of active ingredients; chiefly exist in grape skin and seeds, including flavonoids, polyphenols, anthocyanins, proanthocyanidins, procyanidins, and resver- atrol [8,9]. The beneficial effects of grape seeds and skin are due to their antioxidant [10e12], anticancer [8,13], antimicro- bial [14], anti-inflammatory [15,16] activities and activation of apoptosis signal [14].

Our ongoing studies (not shown) indicate that GSE and GSK intake exerts a significant reduction in tumor growth of ani- mals bearing Ehrlich carcinoma. Knowledge about the effect of GSE and GSK intake on lipid peroxidation and antioxidant status has been examined in different models such as, chemical induction by DMN [9] and high fat diet [10]; however, Studies involved oxidative stress and antioxidant status in the distant organs of tumor-bearing animals are limited. There- fore, it was of particular interest to examine the antioxidant effect of GSE and GSK against Ehrlich solid tumor-induced oxidative stress in the liver of female albino mice.

mixture and 5% vitaminized starch (Egyptian Company of Oil and Soap, Kafr Elzayat, Egypt). All experiments were carried out in accordance with the protocols approved by the Local Experimental Animal Ethics Committee. The animals were randomly divided into four groups. Group 1 (10 mice) served as untreated control (received neither EST inoculation nor GSE and GSK). Group 2 received only GSE and GSK treatment (10 mice); animals were freely fed daily the diet mixed with GSE and GSK powders at concentrations of 10% (w/w) for 44 days.

enzyme activities colorimetrically as described by Reitman and Frankel [18], lipid peroxidation as malondialdehyde (MDA) was determined according to the colorimetric method of Yoshioka et al. [19], catalase (CAT) according to the colori- metric method of Johansson and Borg [20] and superoxide dismutase (SOD) according to the method of Minami and Yoshikawa [21]. A portion of whole blood sample was used for estimation of glutathione (GSH) according to the colorimetric method of Beutler et al. [22].

In the present work, untreated EST bearing mice showed sig- nificant elevation in plasma ALT and AST levels as compared with that of control group. These data indicate that the development of tumor in the animal body can affect many functions of vital organs such as liver function. These results correlated well with Gupta et al. [28] who recorded elevation of liver transaminases in EAC bearing mice indicating liver dysfunction. Conversely, EST plus GSE and GSK group showed significant decrease in plasma levels of ALT and AST to reach the normal values. These results suggest that grape skin and

seed supplementation protects the hepatocytes from injuries and improves the liver functions of EST bearing mice. These findings are in agreement with the study of Shin and Moon [9] who found that grape skin & seeds mixed with normal food to rat, significantly inhibited the elevated levels of serum AST & ALT due to dimethylnitrosamine (DMN)-induced liver injury. Malondialdehyde (MDA) the end product of lipid peroxi- dation acts as a marker of oxidative stress [10,29]. In the cur- rent study, EST bearing mice displayed significant increase in blood and liver MDA content. Previous studies demonstrated that tumor growth disrupts the antioxidant system and in- creases LPx in tumor host vital organs [2e4]. The generation of lipid peroxide and its increase in the mouse liver could result from a chain reaction or could be initiated by indirect mech- anisms that have escaped the antioxidant capacity of the liver

The present data reveal marked depletion in GSH content of blood and liver of EST bearing mice accompanied by sig- nificant inhibition of SOD and catalase activities. There is a close correlation between depletion of GSH and antioxidant enzymes and the increase in LPx [30]. GSH plays an important role as an endogenous antioxidant system that is found particularly in high concentration in liver and is known to have key function in protecting cells by scavenging ROS [31,32], modulating cellular redox status and acting as a cofactor for antioxidant enzymes [29,33,34]. On the other hand, the free radical scavenging system, CAT and SOD are to provide a guard against the potentially injurious reactivity of superoxide and hydrogen peroxide [35e37]. Level of GSH and antioxidant status during tumor growth was previously investigated by Navarro et al. [38]. Their study showed a reduction in blood glutathione redox (GSH/GSSG) in Ehrlich ascites carcinoma ebearing mice. They attributed this result to the oxidative stress that caused an elevation in peroxide formation by cancer cells. GSH oxidation occurred in the red blood cells leads to the release of GSSG from the different tissues to the blood stream [38,39].

and liver tissue of tumor-bearing mice was detected in the present study. SOD activity was also found to decline in Ehr- lich ascites carcinoma-bearing mice as reported by others [40]. They reported that such decline could be due to a loss of mitochondria that may lead to a reduction in SOD level in several tissue of the tumor-bearing animal. Similar results of SOD activity were detected by Abu-Zeid et al. [41] in plasma, lung and liver of Ehrlich carcinoma-bearing animals. It is

The current study revealed that GSE & GSK intake reduced the elevated levels of LPx and increased GSH, SOD and CAT activities in EST bearing mice, which may indicate the possible antioxidant and free radical scavenging property of GSE and GSK supplementation. These results are in agree- ment with Chis et al. [43], Al-Sowayan and Kishore [44] and Leifert and Abeywardena [45] who reported that oral admin- istration of proanthocyanidin extract improved SOD and CAT levels and reduced the levels of lipid peroxides and enhanced the antioxidant defense against reactive oxygen species pro- duced under Doxorubicin treatment, thereby protecting liver cells. These results were supposedly caused by supplemen- tation with grape seeds & skin that considered as a rich source of polyphenols, which have numerous beneficial effects on oxidative stress and protect cells and tissues from oxidative damage that could be due to their strong antioxidant activities of scavenging reactive oxygen [29].

mice displayed hepatocyte cytoplasmic vacuolation with intranulear cytoplasmic inclusions and clumps of Ehrlich tumor cells mixed with lymphocytes and erythrocytes. Confirmation of the present result comes from previous studies [46e48]. Ehrlich tumor cells infiltrations may be due to the tumor cells proliferate and migrate into the internal or- gans [17,49]. Aggregations of inflammatory cells may be due to degeneration of the mitochondria or disorganization of the cytoplasm [50]. Ballooning degeneration of hepatocytes

supposed to be caused by lysosomal enzymes and hydration [51], as evidenced in the present ultrastructural observations. In contrast, liver sections of EST plus GSE and GSK treated group showed nearly normal construction of hepatic lobules with few altered hepatic cells. Neither inflammatory cells nor Ehrlich cells could be detected and this result are agree with Sun et al. [52] who showed that grape polyphenols dietary supplementation prevented the liver injury induced by ethanol. Also, Kasdallah-Grissa et al. [53] found that resvera- trol reduced hepatic tissue injury. In addition, oral intake of grape seeds attenuated histopathological changes caused by tamoxifen in the liver of rats [54]. Moreover, another study demonstrated that grape polyphenols, including resveratrol, epicatechin, and epigallocatechin, can inhibit cancer cell

(N) were irregular with lipid droplets inclusion. Moreover, lipid droplets (LD), glycogen particles and large number of secondary lysosomes (L) and microbodies (m) were seen in most of the cells, the bile canaliculi (BC) were less similar to those of control group, blood sinusoid was wide with destructed endothelial cells (EN) and detachment of kupffer cells (KC). The liver tissue of EST plus GSE and GSK treated group (DeF) exhibit remarkable improvements.

accumulation of collagen to the decreased synthesis of colla- genolytic enzymes by the damaged hepatocytes. The presence of fibrosis suggests more advanced and severe liver injury [60]. Oxidative stress, in particular lipid peroxidation, induces collagen synthesis [61], as demonstrated in the present study. While GSE and GSK supplementation to EST bearing mice significantly reduced the collagen deposition in the liver tis- sue. These findings suggest that GSE and GSK have an addi- tional protective effect against oxidant-induced production and deposition of extracellular matrix components.

protein synthesis, thereby; this reduction in the protein and DNA contents could be attributed to the nuclear pathological changes which were evidenced in the present work as well as in previous studies [17,48,63]. Similarly, Salem et al. [64] showed a significant decrease in total protein and albumin level in EAC bearing mice. They attributed these results to an increase in mitotic division of neoplastic cells with high bloody fluid withdrawal and capillary permeability which enable the escape of plasma proteins into the peritoneal cavity and it may also be due to hepatic cell necrosis [65]. In addition, total proteins may decrease in animals with liver disease [66]. DNA damage has been also reported in tissues proximal and distant from non-metastasizing implanted tu- mors in mice due to inflammation and oxidative stress [67]. In

Ray SD, Patel D, Wong V, Bagchi D. In vivo protection of DNA damage associated apoptotic and necrotic cell deaths during acetaminophen-induced nephrotoxicity, amiodarone- induced lung toxicity and doxorubicin- induced cardiotoxicity by a novel IH636 grape seed proanthocyanidin extract. Res Commun Mol Pathol Pharmacol 2000;107(1e2):137e66.

