Bax protein level were evaluated according to [17]. Monoclonal antibody specific to Bax captured on the plateis added. After incu- bation, Streptavidin conjugated to Horseradish peroxidase is added. The reaction is terminated by the addition of acid and opti- cal density of the color produced measured at 450 nm.

The micro ELISA plate provided in this kit pre-coated with CASP7 specific antibody. A biotinylated CASP7antibodyand Avidin-Horseradish Peroxidase (HRP) conjugate was added. Aspire the excess components. The substrate solution was added. wells that contain CASP7, biotinylated detection antibody and Avidin- HRP conjugate will appear blue in color. The color turns yellowfol-

On the other hand, regarding the results of total identified pheno- lics, 18 compounds were identified from P. sativum (89.65 mg/g) of dry weight of which pyrogallol (8.61 mg/g) was the main phenolic followed by catechol (8.53 mg/g). Moreover, 17 phenolic com- pounds were identified from V.faba and the total phenolic content

Apoptosis, or programmed cell death, takes place in all living organisms. Disruption of apoptotic mechanisms could lead to the deregulation of cell proliferation. Targeting the process of apoptosis is an appropriate strategy for prevention and treatment of cancer. Based upon that apigenin effectively suppressed the growth of both

Hesperidin which is a major flavonoid in the ethyl acetate frac- tions of both plants under study, has demonstrated to protectively affect CCl4-induced oxidative stress and resultant dysfunction of rat liver which has been correlated to its antioxidant property [30]. Another study investigated hesperidin impact on the prolifer- ation of MCF-7 human breast cancer cells, and prostate cancer cells [31]. On the other hand, pyrogallol, a major phenolic compound identified from V. faba exhibited a moderate effect against prostate cancer cell in a previous study Chew et al. [32] Catechol which is another significant phenolic identified from P. sativum apparently

turned out to have a sensible effect on two breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231[33]. q-Hydroxy benzoic acid, a phenolic acid present in P. sativum and V. faba with great amounts was pre- viously proven to have strong cytotoxic activity on both colon (HCT116) and liver (HEPG2) carcinoma cell line [34]. While pyro- gallol exhibited a potential anticancer activities against renal cell carcinoma cell lines and no activity was observed with normal healthy cells [35].

In the present investigation, it can be clearly noticed that both plant peels are wealthy in phenolics and flavonoids which assumed an important role as antioxidant and anticancer as well. Our out- comes affirmed that apigenin isolated from P. sativum ethyl acetate fraction caused the loss of cell viability of MCF-7 breast cancer cells and induces mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis through Bax acti- vation, Bcl-2 down regulation and imbalance between Bcl-2 and Bax expressions which prompt mitochondria-mediated caspases pathways including activation of caspase-7. These results urge to make the best utilization of plant wastes and reconsider their advantageous use as a promising and effective remedy against many cancer diseases.

