In this paper, we build up on the results presented in [9]: in that work, the optimal number of replica necessary to serve a given transactional workload is determined for open models. In this paper we find analogous results for closed systems, and we exploit both the relations given in that work, and the ones newly presented here, to derive analytical relationships between the achieved response time as the number of replica tends asymptotically to infinity. The existence of these relationships enables the design of control policies on one or more metrics allowing at the same time to satisfy constraints on other metrics. For example, the control that the average response time of a system is less than 5 seconds implies that the response time of bottleneck resource is less than 3.5 seconds. So, to control if a threshold of a metric is not violated, we can monitor the value of another metric that is most convenient to measure. Through these relationships, it is possible to exert the control on the values of several metrics simply controlling only one of them.

This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the related work on model- analysis and optimization in cloud computing is presented. The response time metric and the corresponding number of replica to satisfy the constraints is analyzed in Section 3. The asymptotic behavior of the performance indexes with respect to the number of replica in either open and closed systems is investigated in Sections 4 and 5, respectively. Experimental validations are reported in Section 6. Section 7 concludes the paper.

The replication of resources has recently attracted new interests due to its con- nection with virtualization and cloud computing. In particular, the flexibility of provisioning Virtual Machines (VMs) has made both static and dynamic (i.e. using adaptive techniques) replication a simple and effective technique to achieve perfor- mance goals without the need of large over-provisioning. However, the use of cloud

computing has increased unpredictability of the system, making model-based anal- ysis much harder [8] and introducing further factors that must be considered. For instance, the different Virtual Machine Manager allocation policies have a strong impact on both CPU and I/O performance as evaluated in [13]. Several approaches have been proposed to account the effect of virtualization: in queuing network mod- els, the demand of CPU is scaled according to the proportion of operations that need to be emulated [12], similarly in a probabilistic model the authors in [15] de- fine the resource utilization of a virtual machine as the ratio between its resource consumption and resource allocation.

In this Section, the relations between the asymptotic behavior of the system response time and both the class and resource aggregated residence time will be derived also for a closed model. A set of situations will be considered corresponding to the combinations of two factors. The type of workload of the model, that is single (S ) or multiple classes (M ), and the characteristics of the original system to be replicated: homogeneous (H ), i.e. all its resources have the same demands or eterogeneous (N ),

service demand of a job at the node dedicated to service . If the node is replicated Mi times the service demand of each replica i will be Dj = Di/Mi. The replication process always duplicates the actual bottleneck resources. As a result, as the process goes on, the bottleneck switches among all the resources and the system converges to a state in which all the demands are similar:

We model this by a single resource queueing network, where the resource can be replicated m times. However, the resource is able to handle different actions for different applications. Each application is modeled by a job class, and the number of data that must be handled by each action, is considered as the population of the corresponding class.

It is able to work with commodity hardware across multiple data center racks, geographically dispersed. In Cassandra there is no master-slave relationship between nodes, as each one is identical to all others. A peer-to-peer protocol is present and a gossip system ensures status communication among nodes, easing the inclusion of new nodes to scale the cluster up or down.

We first collect response time by the benchmark application using different num- ber of nodes. We then determine the mean demand of each job with a fitting proce- dure on the real data and we obtain D = 0.207ms. Fitting is performed in Microsoft Excel using the GRG non-linear solver. For each N , we compare the measure re-

In this work we have shown that performance objectives based on different metrics are not independent. The replication of services to reduce a specific metric below a given threshold affects also the other performance indexes. Relationships among indices can be exploited to design smart control policies that can achieve several performance objectives by controlling a single parameter. In this paper, we have in- vestigated the relationships between system response time, per-class response time, and per-resource residence time as the number of replica tends to infinite. Through the definition of open and closed queuing network models, a set of relationships between the considered response and residence times at different levels has been derived. The optimal number of replica needed to satisfy a given performance ob- jective was identified for different system models - in previous works such results were available only for open models. The proposed relationships were validated by comparison with results obtained using MVA algorithm.

Future works will go in three directions: first the relations among different met- rics, such as utilization and queue length, will be considered. Then, we will com- plete the analytical computation of the optimal number of replica by including the case that it is still missing: multi-class closed models. Finally, dynamic replication policies that exploits the result proposed in this paper will be defined, tested and validated.

