Pulmonary fibrosis is a progressive lethal lung disorder. It is the end stage of a wide range of lung inflammatory conditions. Loss of alveolar structure, accretion of myofibroblasts, remodeling of lung parenchyma and excessive extracellular matrix depositions are the main characteristic features of pulmonary fibrosis [1].

BLM is a chemotherapeutic antibiotic used for management of lymphomas, testicular cancer, and carcinomas amongst several types of tumors. It has been reported to induce marked functional and biochemical changes promoting pulmonary fibrosis [7]. Bronchial metaplasia, reactive macrophages recruitment, atypical alveolar epithelial cells, fibrinous edema, and interstitial fibrosis are amongst microscopical changes can be induced by BLM [8].

Flavocoxid is a mixture of two flavonoids catechin and baicalin [10]. It is marketed as an FDA-regulated medical food, for manage- ment of osteoarthritis in the United States. Flavocoxid is the only currently marketed prescribed anti-inflammatory agent that mod- ulates cycloxygenase (COX) enzymes via an anti-peroxidase activ- ity. It also inhibits 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX)-mediated leukotrines (LT) production. Flavocoxid has a wide range of strong antioxidant activities mainly via down-regulation of inducible inflammatory gene expression and neutralization of ROS, preventing the conver- sion of arachidonic acid to oxidized lipids [11].

Pulmonary fibrosis was induced by intratracheal instillation of BLM (5 mg/kg) as sulfate salt dissolved in 0.1 ml of normal saline [12]. Rats were anesthetized using thiopental sodium (20 mg/kg body weight, I.P.). A midline incision was made in the neck, the tra- chea was exposed and BLM was instilled. Rats were kept in vertical position and rotated several times to ensure uniform distribution of BLM within the lung tissues. The incision was surgically sutured sodium fusidate 2% was applied topically to the wound.

0.2 ml of 0.5% carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) orally once daily for 5 weeks, BLM control: BLM was instilled intratracheally (5 mg/ kg) and rats received 0.2 ml of 0.5% CMC orally once daily for 5 weeks, flavocoxid treated group: rats were treated with flavocoxid (20 mg/kg, oral) suspended in 0.5% CMC daily for one week prior to BLM instillation and for further 4 weeks post instillation for an overall period of five weeks of flavocoxid administration.

Four weeks post BLM instillation; rats were deeply anesthetized with thiopental sodium. Blood samples were collected via punc- ture of retro-orbital venous plexus, sera were separated and used immediately for biochemical assessments. Lungs were harvested, rinsed in ice-cold saline and weighed for calculation of lung/body weight index. The left lobes from all the lungs were isolated for preparation of lung homogenate and the right lobes were sepa- rated for histopathological examination.

The current study sheds light on the pulmonary protective potential of flavocoxid against BLM-induced pulmonary fibrosis. In the current study, a well characterized rodent model involving single intratracheal instillation of BLM was adapted. BLM instilla- tion significantly impaired biochemical dynamics, histopathologi- cal architecture with marked impairment of physiological pulmonary functions.

The fact that oxidative stress plays a crucial role in the patho- logical development of pulmonary fibrosis has been referred to Daniil, Papageorgiou [27]. Generation of ROS and reactive nitrogen species has been reported to be implicated, at least, in part in the pathogenesis of fibrosis [28,29]. Markers of oxidative stress have been identified in the lungs of pulmonary fibrosis patients and aberrant antioxidant activity exacerbated pulmonary fibrosis in animal models [25]. In association, overproduction of NO has been demonstrated to play a key role in induction of pulmonary fibrosis in animal models and humans [30].

In the current study, it was observed that intratracheal BLM instillation significantly compromised oxidants/antioxidants hemostasis as manifested by the significant elevation of lung MDA content and the concomitant reduction in GSH content, SOD activity and serum TAC. In context, BLM increased lung NO content. Similar observations made by previous researches gave credence to the current notions [23,31].

In context to all of the aforementioned alteration, histological changes manifested in alterations in the lung architecture and excessive collagen deposition was confirmed following intratra- cheal BLM instillation in the current study. Excessive collagen deposition is a vital phenomenon in pulmonary fibrosis. The cur- rent study reveals increased lung hydroxyproline content follow- ing BLM instillation implying increased accumulated collagen and ECM, which was associated with elevation in semi- quantitative scoring of fibrosis. These histological alterations were significantly corrected upon flavocoxid administration. flavocoxid significantly mitigated BLM mediated hydroxyproline and collagen depositions.

