The goal of achievement-oriented tasks is to improve an individual's capabilities in relation to a standard of competency (Heckhausen, 1977) to avoid demonstrating a lack of ability (Tanaka & Yamauchi, 2001). In this way, CAM is like self-efficacy, in that an individual's belief in their own ability can lead to positive or negative learning outcomes. CAM is also known to be impacted by situational task characteristics; just as self-efficacy is considered an individual's self-perception of their capa- bilities to accomplish a task under certain conditions (Bandura, 1977). Students will differ in their strength of motive to achieve, and educa- tional activities will differ in the challenge that they pose. If an individual and the task characteristics display a good fit, CAM should influence task-related behaviour in a performance situation (Bipp, Steinmayr, & Spinath, 2008; Richardson & Abraham, 2009).

Questionnaire on Current Motivation. An 18-item instrument designed to measure the four distinct factors of current achievement motivation in specific performance situations. The Questionnaire on Current Motivation (QCM) utilises a 7-point Likert scale and has been previously shown to be a predictor of performance in a variety of com- plex problem-solving tasks (Freund, Kuhn and Holling., 2011; Rheinberg et al., 2001; Vollmeyer & Rheinberg, 2006). Previous validity and reli- ability analysis of the QCM has been undertaken (Vollmeyer & Rhein- berg, 2006), and evidence for the absence of measurement bias on the instrument has also been provided (Freund, Kuhn and Holling., 2011).

SEAr Test Instrument. A 9-item multiple choice assessment of elec- trophilic aromatic substitution chemistry achievement, developed by the authors. The assessment was administered during the pre- and post-test phases of the study. A dichotomous scoring approach is used for each item. A correct response yields a score of 10, whereas an incorrect response yields a score of 0. A two-step validation approach (internal and external) was employed to ensure that the items on the instrument were

Ethical clearance was obtained under the regulations of UEA's School of Science Research Ethics Committee, a sub-committee of the UEA Research Ethics Committee. The principle of informed consent involves researchers providing sufficient information and assurances regarding the research project to allow individuals to fully understand the impli- cations of participation, to reach a fully informed and freely given deci- sion (DuBois, 2002). This was obtained via a consent form (included as part of the participant information statement). Participants were made aware of their right to withdraw from the study, at any part of the research phase, without declaring a reason. Throughout the research period, participants were assured of data anonymity and confidentiality. Identifying information was irrevocably stripped from data documenta- tion, and study codes utilized in their place. All collected information was used only for the purposes outlined in the participant information statement. Data management was ensured through strict following of data protection principles, outlined under the Data Protection Act 2018, the United Kingdom's (UK) implementation of the General Data Protec- tion Regulation (GDPR).

Throughout the study, each group participated in only one worked example activity to eliminate carryover effects. The pre-test stage of the study was carried out in week 2 of the academic semester and consisted of the SEAr test instrument and the QCM. In week 3, a synchronous teaching session was conducted with the entire student cohort prior to the activity which introduced concepts pertaining to electrophilic aro- matic substitution. The activity was conducted in week 4, in which stu- dents also completed the CLS. At the post-test stage (in week 5), students completed the SEAr test instrument for the second time, in addition to also completing semi-structured interviews. Throughout the qualitative data collection stage, we conducted discussions with participants on topics relating to electrophilic aromatic substitution. This proved critical to evaluating whether students demonstrated a deep understanding of the topic material. Details of this can be found in the interview schedule (see supporting information).

The design of our activity draws on the principles of Cognitive Load Theory. To be effective, our learning resources were designed to optimise ICL, that is, to be at the appropriate level of complexity. Thus, it is essential to design instruction in a format that reduces working memory load to manageable proportions. To accomplish this, principles of the Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning (CTML; Mayer and Fiorella, 2014) also guided the design of the learning material. We aimed to minimise ECL by eliminating split attention and redundancy conditions wherever possible.

Based on learner characteristics, and the representation of educa- tional content, previous research has reported that diagrams are more effective than textual representations (Ainsworth & ThLoizou, 2003). Hence, the representation of the worked examples was mainly graphical. In addition, previous work has also found positive impacts for textual explanations (Atkinson, Derry, Renkl, & Wortham, 2000). With consid- eration to the spatial and temporal contiguity principle, words and pic- tures should be presented simultaneously, and near one another.

by carrying out two-tailed independent sample t-tests. No significant differences were detected for ICL, t (39) = 0.903, p = 0.372, ECL, t (39) = 0.292, p = 0.772, or GCL, t (39) = 0.361, p = 0.720. We expected the

presence of an expertise reversal effect as participants with higher prior conceptual knowledge process more redundant elements in the learning material that do not directly contribute to learning. Comparison of nor- malised change between groups shows no significant difference. How- ever, a medium effect size was calculated, with the average learning gain of students with lower prior conceptual knowledge being 0.53 standard deviations greater than the students of higher prior conceptual knowl- edge. Previous findings support this view: that example-problem pairs may be more effective for learners with lower prior knowledge (Reisslein et al., 2006; Van Gog, Kester, & Paas, 2011).

For participants with lower prior conceptual knowledge, anxiety was found to be positively correlated with probability of success, p = 0.05. In addition, probability of success was found to be strongly positively correlated with measures of challenge, p = 0.01. ECL was found to be negatively correlated with measures of interest. This correlation was approaching significance, p = 0.056. For participants of higher prior conceptual knowledge, ECL was strongly negatively correlated with both

We sought to ensure reliability in our analysis through the use of negotiated agreement. The extent of agreement between coders was measured using Krippendorff's alpha. Two of the authors independently coded the full set of interview transcripts and then negotiated in how they applied the codes. Differences were discussed and where there was a consistent disagreement, a common approach was agreed. Krippendorff's alpha is a commonly used chance-corrected reliability measure that avoids many of the limitations described for Cohen's kappa, such as its suitability to smaller samples sizes (Krippendorff, 2018). Krippendorff's

Some limitations of this study must be acknowledged. Firstly, a major limitation is the relatively small sample size that the data analysis was based upon. The sample size was the result of modest enrolment com- pounded by participant disengagement between the pre- and post-test stages. For instrument reliability analysis using approaches such as CTT, larger sample sizes are preferable where possible. In addition, we must acknowledge the possibility of self-selection bias from participants (Heckman, 1990). Students who volunteer for interviews may be different from the rest of the population regarding their communication ability or reasoning levels. Lastly, the absence of a delayed post-test, for conceptual understanding, prevents the evaluation of long-term retention.

Instructional guidance, such as that provided by worked examples, helps the novice learner deal with complex information, that may be difficult to process in limited capacity working memory. This study il- lustrates how worked examples, adopting the affordances of AR tech- nology, may support learning of electrophilic aromatic substitution. Referring to research question 1, regarding measures of cognitive load and achievement motivation, no significant differences were observed between groups. This was unaffected when introducing prior relevant chemistry experience as a covariate. QCM measures of challenge, inter- est, and probability of success were found to correlate positively with reported GCL. Reported ECL negatively correlated with reported GCL, in addition to measures of challenge and interest. Measures of challenge and interest demonstrated a stronger negative correlation with ECL for students displaying higher prior relevant chemistry experience.

Students must have provided explicit informed consent to participate, and were informed that their involvement within any aspect of this research was completely voluntary. In addition, participants were made aware of their right to withdraw from the study, at any part of the research phase, without declaring a reason. Identifying information was irrevocably stripped from data documentation, and study codes utilized in their place.

All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional research committee. Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

