The concept of picture fuzzy sets (PFS) is a generalization of ordinary fuzzy sets and intuitionistic fuzzy sets, which is characterized by positive membership, neutral membership, and negative membership functions. Keeping in mind the importance of similarity measures and applications in data mining, med- ical diagnosis, decision making, and pattern recognition, several studies have been proposed in the liter- ature. Some of those, however, cannot satisfy the axioms of similarity and provide counter-intuitive cases. In this paper, we propose new similarity measures for PFSs based on two parameters t and p, where t identifies the level of uncertainty and p is the Lp norm. The properties of the bi-parametric similarity and distance measures are discussed. We provide some counterexamples for existing similarity measures in the literature and show how our proposed similarity measure is important and applicable to the pattern recognition problems. In the end, we provide an application of a proposed similarity measure for medical diagnosis.

Yang et al. [38] defined the hybrid model of soft set and PFS and called it picture fuzzy soft set (PFSS). The generalized picture fuzzy soft set (GPFSS) and their applications in decision making were dis- cussed by Khan et al. [39]. The soft decernibility matrix approach for PFSSs and GPFSSs approach was used to solve decision making problems [38,40]. The decernibility matrix approach is important when you have to start the process with predefined conditions on membership functions, i.e., threshold values. The applications of GPFSS in concept selection were discussed in [41].

In this paragraph, we discuss the distance and similarity mea- sures of PFSs and the methods derived based on them. The distance and similarity measures have application in data mining, medical diagnosis, decision making and pattern recognition. In [42], Wei defined the picture fuzzy cross entropy and use it for MADM prob- lems. Similarity measures for PFSs based on cosine and cotangent functions and applied them for strategic decision making [43]. Peng [44], determined an algorithm for PFS that was implemented to decision making problems. In [45], Wei interpreted cosine, weighted cosine, set theoretic, weighted set theoretic, grey and weighted grey similarity measure for picture fuzzy sets and applied them to the pattern recognition problems. Wang et al.

We adopt the generalize model of fuzzy set (PFS) for medical diagnosis. The PFSs are comparatively a new extension of fuzzy sets which describe the human opinions that has more answers like acceptance, rejection, neutral and desist, which cannot be cor- rectly presented in fuzzy sets and IFSs. The PFSs are categorized by three objects, the degree of belonging (membership), the degree of neutral belonging and the degree of non-belonging (non- membership) such that the total of these three degrees must not be more than one. Basically, PFSs play an important role in situa- tions involving more types of answers like no, yes, refusal and abstain. To model such situations, a PFS is an appropriate choice.

In Section 3, we proposed the new distance and similarity mea- sures for PFSs. In Section 4, we give the explanation of both param- eters p and t, and interpretation of novel distance measure. In Section 5, we provide some counterexamples for already proposed similarity measures. To support the proposed similarity measure a numerical example of medical diagnosis is presented in Section 6. Comparison analysis and conclusion are presented in Sections 7 and 8.

and hence consistent and reliable for all value of p. This shows that if we increase or decrease the value for p, we get the same diagno- sis (order). For different values of t, we get the same diagnosis but their value depends on the data because t identifies the level of uncertainty and purely depends on the data set that we have provided.

This project was supported by Center of Excellence in Theoret- ical and Computational Science (TaCS-CoE), KMUTT. Petchra Pra Jom Klao Ph.D. Research Scholarship from King Mongkuts Univer- sity of Technology Thonburi (KMUTT) and Theoretical and Compu- tational Science (TaCS) Center. Moreover, Wiyada Kumam was supported by the Rajamangala University of Technology Thanya- buri (RMUTT).

