essential amino acids although ten of the most essentials were present. Stearic acid, a saturated fatty acid had the highest proportion while oleic acid was the main monounsaturated fatty acid. Alpha-linolenic acid was the dominant polyunsaturated fatty acid determined. The ratio of n3/n6 fatty acids was 2.82 showing that this species meat is optimal for nutritional purpose. The results of this study showed Chanodichthys erythropterus muscle is a valuable food with high quality protein and well balanced amino acids for promoting good health, prevention and healing of diseases in the human body.

Cyprinids are largely concentrated in lakes although they mul- tifariously located worldwide in various water bodies. Predatory carp Chanodichthys erythropterus (Cypriniformes, Cyprinidae, Cultrinae) is a small-sized cyprinid fish, widely distributed in East Asia. It is one of the most important commercial freshwater fish in China [12,13]. This East Asian freshwater cyprinid ranges from the Amur River south to Taiwan and the Red River, as well as Lake Buir in Mongolia. This species reaches 102 cm in length and 9 kg in

weight [14]. The Dianshan lake is composed of about 40 fish spe- cies belonging to more than 15 families. Amongst these species, members belonging to the family Cyprinidae are always very dom- inant in the Lake and are often preferred by the population as a food source. It is therefore important to know its nutrient contents. The flesh of this species is used for the preparation of good recipes in most east Asian homes; because of health cognizance, these days many people are interested in consuming more fish in view of its relatively higher nutritious qualities. The preference for its con- sumption therefore makes it important specie to study and to know its nutritional make up.

Presently, the composition of fishery products has been widely investigated to analyze their nutritional quality [15]. However, no study has been carried out focusing on the chemical composition of this fish species. This study is expected to provide the nutrient qualities of the Predatory carp (Chanodichthys erythropterus) for the benefit of consumers and scientific community as a whole. Therefore, the present study was carried out to analyze the proxi- mate composition, fatty and amino acids compositions of the Chan- odichthys erythropterus captured from lake Dianshan, China as one of the main commercial fish species (native in China).

hai with a total area of 63.7 square kilometers at an average depth of 2.5 m, and also with the deepest recorded depth to be 6.39 m. It is located in between Shanghai, Zhejiang and Kunshan of Jiangsu Province. This Lake supports a lucrative fishery in Shanghai, and fishermen involved in fishing bring in commercially important fish species.

