In this tool paper, we target the problem of unique annotation of organism-specific computational models presented in a public model database. In particular, we present Biochemical Space, a novel annotation methodology accompanied with a set of software tools that allow to create, manage and maintain the Biochemical Space content. The main idea behind is to create a transparent well-annotated reaction network of chemical entities and elemental reactions onto which the mathematical models are projected. For a given organism, the Biochemical Space represents a unifying platform for understanding of the related biological processes. The contribution of the methodology is three-fold: (i) systemic projection of models to a well-

structured biological knowledge, (ii) simplification of annotation procedure, (iii) targetting several problems such as the presence of lumped model variables, combinatorial explosion in chemical modifications of entities, and hierarchical organisation of locations of individual entities. In these aspects the Biochemical Space goes beyond the features of current standards such as SBML. Application of the framework is demonstrated on a set of annotation data compiled for complex cyanobacteria processes.

To target the issues of rigorous presentation of complex biological models without congesting the users with complicated math behind the models, we have started the activity e-cyanobacterium 1 . It aims at handling the domain-specific problems profoundly. It also intends to trade on advantages arising from repository and database synthesis, which all in all allow to create complex relationships between models and ontological knowledge bases, different types of simulations and analysis, and integration of models in the domain-specific context.

Biochemical Space (BCS) represents reaction networks linked to existing on- tologies. Since models primarily target mechanisms behind biological processes, process-based hierarchy is used to navigate through the biochemical space. To this end, for each level of the process hierarchy, a visual representation of relevant bio- chemical mechanisms allowing to understand the non-trivial biological context of models is accompanying the biochemical space data.

In contrast to the well-acclaimed standard provided by SBML [5,9] that might be also used for representation of a biochemical space, our notion of BCS totally avoids issues related with dynamical models (for that purpose we use just SBML level 2). As an annotation platform purely focused on process-level description, BCS goes beyond SBML level 2 in generalization of compartments in a hierarchy of locations, in introducing entity states, and in dealing with related combinatorial explosion. These issues are solved in detail by rule-based approaches [2,4] and there is a draft of a package for SBML level 3 in preparation (multi). Since our notation relies on a simple textual base and focuses on a simple but still reasonably precise and compact description maintainable by biologists, our notation is rather closer to KEGG.

In [7] we have presented the general database platform for domain-specific mod- els. In this paper we focus on its inherent part formed by BCS, we describe the annotation workflow, formal structure of annotation data, and the toolset developed for its maintanance. Moreover, concrete applications of BCS are demonstrated on several processes of cyanobacteria.

BCS provides well described biological background for mathematical models of pro- cesses taking place in specific type of organism. Complete BCS can act as a con- nection between existing ontologies and these models later on, which is enabled by well-defined annotations. For creation and for modifications of BCS, a textual file with specific syntax is used. This file offers a human readable format of BCS which can be easily edited in a special purpose editor and visualized on the web platform. First part of BCS is represented by set of entities while the second part contains elemental reactions working on this set. In our case, the consortium of scientists from CyanoTeam 1 is involved in modelling of several cyanobacterial processes and in creation of BCS.

The fact that most fields in entity and reaction definitions in a BCS file are tightly coupled with information from linked ontologies is the reason why anno- tation information was mentioned first. In the first place, such an attribute is a name, which is taken from ontologies or follows conventional naming of biochemical compound or process. IDs of entities are likely to be represented by aliases of names which CyanoTeam agreed on. KEGG ID, ChEBI ID or internal ID is used if no reasonable ID is available. IDs of reactions are always internal (i.e., there is no need to fill in this field).

As well as in a real biological system, compartmentalisation can be done in BCS as well. One entity can be a part of another, larger entity. Then we can say that the larger entity plays a role of location for the smaller one. An entity can have one or more locations according to its occurrence. Notation in BCS file is to use IDs of locations (entities) and comma as a separator. A set of entities can be quite large and so it would be useful to cluster entities into related groups. Locations are not best suited for this task, since entity can be found in multiple places. For this purpose, class information is used. Classification describes type of an entity in a sense of functional or structural nature and entities can be easily grouped together by this attribute.

An elemental reaction can also have an assigned classification. However, we treat them differently. The classification of reactions does not describe a type of reaction, but assigns a name of a high level process in which the reaction is involved. Moreover, unlike entity classification, there can be more than one classification for

The textual format of BCS is a readable and easy-to-use representation of reac- tion network. But, with support of a web based platform (CMS), we can enhance these features. A high level process hierarchy can be created on-line. Entities, elemental reactions and models are then mapped into this hierarchy which then becomes main connection among BCS, other ontologies and mathematical models. While creating hierarchy as well as while mapping entities and reactions inside, location and classification information are taken into account hand-to-hand with existing hierarchies in other ontologies. A whole process cannot be easily auto- mated due to high level of abstraction so the annotators have to agree on form of hierarchy. Each level of hierarchy can have an interactive visual representation of corresponding process added.

sponds to individual model parts. Entities and reactions from BCS are mapped to model species and ODEs respectively. In many cases, such direct mapping is not possible due to high level of abstraction. In case of model reaction (ODE), several reactions from BCS can be assigned to describe corresponding process. Such map- ping is the final step in establishing inter-specialisation connection between biology and mathematical modelling.

The GUI was designed to ease use and understanding in case user has basic knowledge of functions that should be supported. The main application screen consists of the menu with items at the top which provides mentioned functionality above. The remaining part of the screen is filled by two tabs containing entities and reactions. Both tabs are divided to two parts where on the left is navigation tree and right part displays detail of the selected item from navigation tree. An interesting feature is the possibility to display graph showing the selected entity or reaction in network way connecting defined items.

The basic format describing biochemical space does not support visualization and interconnection of entities and reactions to tree structure necessary for understand- ing of real-world distribution. Therefore, for e-cyanobacterium.org platform was created an online tool that provides additional functionality working as an exten- sion to Annotation editor. Mentioned tool facilitates importing of already prepared and consistent textual files to an online database which can be used to transform and incorporate imported objects into the visualization structure. This process converts relatively flat structure representing entities, states and reactions from biochemical space to visualization tree showing the interconnection of individual layers or larger units and environments.

As a case study we have developed BCS for several biological processes of cyanobac- teria. It makes a part of e-cyanobacterium.org 2 , a web site focusing on a unified presentation of partial models explaining cellular processes of Synechocystis sp. PCC6803.

In the current version (March 2014), the biochemical space deployed in e- cyanobacterium.org covers the following processes of cyanobacteria: environmental processes, respiration and photosynthesis, and metabolism. Environmental pro- cesses focus on precise positioning of cyanobacteria into the context of its envi- ronment. Since the website primarily targets in vitro cultivation conditions in a bioreactor, we have compiled relevant elemental reactions. Processes of respiration

Our BCS targets processes occuring in the bioreactor. In fact, these processes make an interface between the environment and the cells. In particular, the interface is defined by a set of bidirectional gas exchange flows transporting carbon dioxide and dioxygen between the gas head space and the liquid (bioreactor media) containing the cells. Dioxygen and dissolved carbon dioxide are transported to/from the cells through the cell membrane. Carbon dioxide and dioxygen molecules are also con- sidered to be transferred between the liquid and bubbles inside the liquid. Through the bubbles they are exported into the gas head space.

The model repository contains the model Plyusnina et al. 2014 that represents kinetics of photosynthesis and respiration. In this case, the model employes lumping of internal states and reduces the dynamics to eight state variables running on a slow time scale. BCS is therefore necessary to describe the mechanisms incorporated in the model but lost in lumping.

Metabolism makes the backbone of cyanobacteria cellular processes [14]. Genome- wide reconstruction of metabolic network for Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 has been published in [8]. The largest part of cyanobacteria BCS covers this network. Most of the metabolic reactions occur in the cell cytoplasm. Connection with respiration and photosynthesis processes at the level of BCS is interfaced through the shared simple molecules (ATP, ADP, NADPH, etc.) and through the enzyme complexes (photosystem I, photosystem II, etc.) that make locations for electron transfer reactions covered in respiration and photosynthesis.

Entities of metabolism BCS represent enzymes driving the metabolic reactions and individual simple molecules acting as metabolites. Enzymes are assigned to reactions as modifiers (catalysers) and they are annotated by EC numbers and genes via crosslinking to CyanoBase. This makes the genome-wide projection of the metabolism BCS. Since the reactions in metabolism have primarily the form of catalytic reactions and there are no combinatorial complexes, this part of BCS is compliant with SBML. Metabolism BCS is accessible on e-cyanobacterium.org home page after clicking on the Metabolism process in the navigation panel left.

Since there is currently no kinetic model describing the dynamics of the entire metabolic network due to unavailability of kinetic constants values, we currently work on kinetic models that cover small parts of the network. Additionally, we plan to enrich the model repository with a mathematical model [14] amenable for flux-balance analysis. This model will directly map onto the metabolism BCS with the exceptions of boundary conditions and metabolome composition variables that are model-specific and not covered in the biology description provided by the BCS.

We have presented the notion of biochemical space as an annotation base for com- plex cellular processes that differs from existing formalisms in several aspects. First, in contrast to model description languages, it does not incorporate model-level de- tails (kinetic or rate functions, location volume). It rather fits as a well-organized reaction network annotation platform onto which kinetic models are mapped. Sec- ond, in contrast to existing annotation formalisms and ontologies it precises the no- tation regarding the hierarchical organisation of object locations and dealing with combinatorial object states. In conclusion, it can be seen as a stand-alone inter- face that clearly connects the mathematical models with the existing annotation databases.

