such as poor water quality, temperature fluctuations, low oxygen concentrations and desiccation beside its extraordi- nary production rate in farming. The red swamp crayfish, P. clarkii, is an autochthonous species from the Northeast of Mexico and South Central USA [2], which was introduced worldwide and has become the dominant freshwater crayfish in almost all areas it occupied [3]. It accounts for at least 80% of all wild and cultured crayfish harvested around the world [4]. Over 60,000 tons of P. clarkii was produced annually in the USA and China [5].

indicator of petroleum pollution. Ibrahim et al. [10] studied the toxicological impact of the organophosphorus insectside fenthion on P. clarkii. They found that LC50 of the fenthion was 1 mg/l after exposure to 12 h. The side effect of this insectcide on P. clarkii reduced its activity only at closed aquatic habitats or some fish ponds (not in Nile or its irrigation). Abdel Mageed

[11] proved that heavy metals concentrated inside different tissues of P. clarkii collected from the River Nile. In addition, he showed that the chronic exposures to the insecticide Feni- trothion caused histpathological changes in hepatopancreas, testis and ovary of P. clarkii. The degree of change in these tissues depended on the time of exposure and the ability of animal to overcome the toxicity of Fenitrothion. Heiba [12] found that, testes of P. clarkii sustained severe damage after exposure to the copper sulfate and this degeneration caused

(pH 7.5 e 7.7). A series of concentrations that would allow the computation of LC50 and LC90 values were prepared according to WHO [15]. Three replicates were used each of ten P. clarkii (12 e 14 cm in length) being immersed in three liter of each

Sodium Dodecyle Sulfate-Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was preformed under reducing condition according to the protocol of Boswell et al. [17]. Total proteins of muscles were estimated after 1 and 4 weeks and separated on 8% resolving gel and 3.75% stacking gel using electrophoresis apparatus (Bio-Rad USA vertical minigel, double side). Cray- fishes were cut by scissors to get muscles from abdomen region from 6 samples, then it pooled in 1 ml Ependorf tube with tissue

The results of the current study showed remarkable reduction in the survival rate of P. clarkii treated with sub-lethal con- centrations of T. harzianum. The survival rate decreased by increasing the concentration during exposure periods. These results in agreement with the results of Abdul-Wahid et al.

americana) population due to fungal treatment by T. harzianum was 100% at 24 h. Sakran [22] proved that Butachlor and fluazifop-p-butyl (herbicides) caused reduction in the survival rate of Biomphalaria alexandrina. Al-Assiuty et al. [23], show that the abundance and species diversity of oribatid mites varies greatly by the effect of fungicides (T. harzianum and Pythium oligandrum) by their taxon and fungicide. These effects are not due to direct toxicity of fungicides to the mites, but they are mediated by changes in the fungal community of the soil (as an essential food item for soil microarthropods). In addition, Stephan et al. [24] reported that T. harzianum gave the favorite results against growth and reproduction of root-knot

nematode (Meloidogyne javanica). In addition, Saifullah [25,26] recorded 100% mortality of the nematodes, Globodera ros- tochien and Globodera pallida by using poisoning compound from T. harzianum on the medium after 24 h of exposure. Di Pietro [27] explained the toxicity of Trichoderma harazianum that it producing several poisoning and antibiotic compounds. Lorito et al. [28] proved that Trichoderma includes chitinase enzyme, which considered the most effective component against pathogenic fungi. Chitinase enzymes degrade the fungal cell walls, which composed of chitin. Some of the most

important examples of biopesticides are toxins from microbial pesticides group as Metarhizium anisopliae's streptozotocin. It was toxic to the shrimp (Palaemonetes pugio) when LC50 was 52 mg/l [29]. Another cause of mortality can be attributed to the blockage of fungi spores to the gills of P. clarkii, as what happened to the cockroaches; Periplaneta americana by Abdul- Wahid et al. [21].

