We design BioScape, a concurrent language for the stochastic simulation of biological and bio-materials processes in a reactive environment in 3D space. BioScape is based on the Stochastic Pi-Calculus, and it is motivated by the need for individual-based, continuous motion, and continuous space simulation in modeling complex bacteria-materials interactions. Our driving example is a bio-triggered drug delivery system for infection-resistant medical implants. Our models in BioScape will help in identifying biological targets and materials strategies to treat biomaterials associated bacterial infections.

In contrast to the now deep and multidimensional understanding of how tissue cells interact with the surface of biomaterials, comparatively little is known about the influence of surface properties on interactions with bacteria. These interactions are clearly very important, however. Biomaterials-associated infection (BAI) is a major clinical problem [1,13,35]. Current strategies to mitigate BAI concentrate on engineering antimicrobial [16,18,20,22] or antifouling [9,14,19,33] coatings for specific biomedical devices.

(AmA); and released AmA. Each has attributes, many of which are inter-related. Both bacteria, for example, can metabolize, albeit at different rates. Metabolism is particularly significant for bound AmA, since acidic products will lower the local pH, reduce the strength of electrostatic AmA-gel binding, and enable the pH-release of bound AmAs. Released AmA can then diffuse and/or flow, and potentially kill bound or planktonic bacteria, again with different efficiencies, because of the en- hanced microbial resistance of biofilm bacteria. The complexity of such a model can rapidly explode as more attributes are assigned to each object. Note that spatial coordinates and stochasticity are critical to understanding the interactions between different objects and with the substrate, because they all rely on proximity. So far, existing process-algebra modeling languages do not support this. Furthermore, while there are now a number of models being developed to explain the biofilm for- mation [31,38], none takes into account the controllable properties of the substrate and how this can influence bacterial adhesion, proliferation, and phenotypic change.

Besides standard reaction operations send, receive and delay, BioScape has a geometric operation move, that can be generalized to any affine transformation. The difference is that while reaction operations have stochastic reaction rates, the operation move is always enabled. In order to avoid an unfair competition between reactions and geometric operations, we split the semantics into two reduction relations, and we consider a heterogeneous choice operator with probabilistic and non-deterministic branches. Intuitively, it is like having two choice operators.

5. Bac is defined with movement space movB, movement step stepB, and shape shapeB. Intuitively, bacteria can move within movB, with random steps of length stepB, and the shape shapeB is at all times contained within movB. The prefix mov represents a random movement of length stepB. delay@1.0.(Bac() | Bac()) represents mitosis, the division of a bacterium into two daughter cells: Bac() | Bac(), and the delay@1.0 prefix is used to model the fact that division is not an instantaneous reaction.

Overcrowding is beyond the scope of this paper. However there could be several approaches to address it. Cells have external regulators that allow them to react to molecules on the outside of neighboring cells, and those external regulators emit a signal to inhibit mitosis in overcrowded conditions. Therefore, if it were relevant to the system being modeled, the most natural way to address overcrowding would be to program it into the model. Alternatively, the modeling language could address overcrowding in different ways. For instance, if enough movement steps fail within a given movement area in one iteration, reactions exacerbating overcrowding could be disabled. This choice would have the effect of modeling dormancy in cells such as bacteria in Maturation I or Maturation II stage of biofilm formation.

The process calculus that most closely resembles BioScape is the Shape Calculus [3], a CCS-like timed calculus, with simulating tool BioShape [5]. These are some of the differences. BioScape is stochastic, but the Shape Calculus is not. The Shape Calculus does not allow dynamic creation of channels, but BioScape does. Agents in BioScape can be modified by affine transformations useful in modeling phenomena such as cell growth, but the Shape Calculus only allows movement specified with a velocity vector. The Shape Calculus has a time primitive for describing a delay, while BioScape has a stochastic delay. The specification of an agent in BioScape de- scribes an area where it is allowed to be, but the Shape Calculus does not. This area is instrumental in describing biomaterials such as antibacterial surfaces and prevent- ing bacteria from penetrating the surface while allowing antibacterial molecules to do so. On the other hand, such behavior would have to be programmed in the description of the agent in the Shape Calculus.

