The objective of this study was to assess the protective effect of black berry juice (BBJ) on the neurological disorders and oxidative stress induced by co-exposure to ALCL3 and NaF in male albino rats. Administration of either AlCl3 (200 mg/kg bw) or NaF (10 mg/kg bw) or both of them caused a significant increase in serum and brain TL, TC, TG as well as serum LDLC and VLDLC levels while serum HDLC level was decreased significantly. Additionally, brain neurotransmitter (DA and 5-HT) levels, AChE, Na-K ATPase activity and ATP values were decreased significantly but NE level was increased in rats administered Al or F alone or in combination. Moreover, a significant increase in brain MDA, NO, H2O2 and free radical enzyme (xanthine oxidase (XO)) and a significant decrease in the level of TAC, SOD and GSH were recorded in AlCl3 or NaF intoxicated rats. In addition, the levels of serum Na, Ca, Cu and zinc (Zn) were significantly diminished, while the level of K was significantly in- creased. However ALCL3 appears to enhance the neurotoxic hazards caused by NaF. On the other hand, the administration of BBJ (1.6 g/kg bw) showed a marked neuroprotective effect against the biochemical abnormalities that occurred and oxidative stress of the brain induced by co-exposure to AlCl3 and NaF. So, it can be concluded that the consumption of BBJ might be useful for alleviating the neurological disorders and oxidative stress associated with con- current exposure of ALCL3 and NaF indicating its free radical scavenging and potent antioxidant activity.

After 2 weeks of acclimation, rats were classified into eight groups comprising six rats in each. Group 1: served as un- treated control (C). Group 2: rats were given orally black berry juice (BBJ) at dose of 1.6 g/kg bw. Group 3 (AlCl3): rats were given orally AlCl3 dissolved in distilled water at dose of 200 mg/kg bw. Group 4 (NaF): rats were given orally NaF dissolved in dis-

fluoride accumulation in the liver [40]. The hypo activity of li- poprotein lipase enzymes may be because of hepatic dysfunction appearing to be one of the most important factors responsible for the increment in serum triglycerides and cholesterol, these enzymes may be inhibited by aluminum or fluoride, for example unspecific esterase, triglyceride lipase and pyrophosphates [41]. The irregularities in lipoprotein profile may be a result of the decrease in the removal of low density lipoprotein (LDL) and VLDL from the circulation accompanied by or uncontrolled pro- duction of VLDL by the liver [42]. Moreover, the significant alterations of the brain catecholamine neurotransmitters (DA, 5-HT and NE) in the intoxicated rats may be attributed to the

Further, the present study revealed that the increased levels of MDA, H2O2, NO and XO in the brains of AlCl3 or NaF intoxi- cated rats indicate high level of oxidative stress and free radical generation. Additionally the decreased antioxidant levels of TAC, SOD and GSH reduced the ability of scavenging high levels of ROS produced in the brain. It is well known that the over- production of ROS causes oxidation of macromolecules. This leads to free radical attacks of phospholipids in membrane causing membrane damage through different mechanisms such as lipid peroxidation, mitochondrial membrane depolariza- tion and apoptosis [56]. Moreover, membrane lipid peroxidation could disturb the anatomical integrity of the membrane and

Black berry fruits are well known to have high antioxidant capacity because it was considered a rich source of polyphe- nols known with a great potential for improving short term memory performance in animal studies [65]. Blackberry was considered to be an important source of metabolites with neuro- protective properties. Digested metabolites from these black berries can protect neuronal cells against oxidative damage, one of the most critical mechanisms of neurodegeneration, through activating cellular stress response pathways like GSH modulation, reduction of ROS production and caspase activa- tion [66]. This finding was evidenced by the observed improvement of most examined biomarkers including oxida- tive stress, endogenous antioxidants system, neurotransmitters and electrolyte levels. The current anti-peroxidation and an- tioxidant activity of BBJ may be assigned to its different functional constituents of antioxidants such as flavonoids (an- thocyanin), vitamins (A, B complex, E and C), some minerals (Na, K, Ca, Zn, Se and P), phenolic polymers (ellagic acids) and phenolic acids (ferulic, p-coumaric, caffeic and gallic) [67]. An- thocyanins, the active component in BBJ, and their derivatives use different mechanisms to protect against a variety of oxi- dants. It can combat the dangerous hydroxyl radical-generating system, a main source of oxidants in the body, so it can protect lipids of cellular membranes from oxidation as well as mem- brane bound enzymes, and protects amino acids such as tyrosine from peroxynitrite, a highly reactive oxidant. Also, it has been expected that anthocyanins and non-anthocyanin phenolics in black berries act additively or synergistically to produce the detected beneficial changes via their ability to act as anti-oxidants and/or pro-oxidants in various biological environments [68]. In addition, the protective effect of BBJ may be due to the synergistic antioxidant effect of both vitamins E and C for ameliorating oxidative stress and cell degenera- tion; when vitamin E attacks free radicals, it converts into a vitamin E radical, which then acts as chelating agent and returns to its antioxidant state using vitamin C [8].

In conclusion, black berry juice administration during ex- posure to fluoride and aluminum could be recommended for reverting back brain oxidative stress and neurological disor- ders as well as modulation of antioxidant defense mechanism. The observed beneficial effect of BBJ is probably through the synergistic anti-oxidant capacity of its various nutritional con- stituents. However, the fractionation and bioavailability of the main constituents of black berry which are responsible for the antioxidant activity will be an important area in the future.

