In any natural language processing system, stemming is a common procedure. The importance of developing a competent stemmer is derived from the fact that stemming can pose a direct impact on the performance of any application in which it is used. Owing to its highly inflected and derivational structure, stemming Arabic terms is an extremely challenging task [10,21,22,28,29,30,32].

This paper describes the root-based development via the new broken plural rule (BPR) algorithm by introducing new rules and the subset rule algorithm. The preprocessing contains a new sec- tion, which is Arabized removal. The main objective of this study is to combine an Arabic stemmer with a new broken plural rules (BPR) algorithm supported by appropriate terms and conditions. The rest of this article is arranged as follows: Section 2 covers the relevant works, Section 3 contains the ISRI works, and Section 4 indicates the methods used in this study. Section 5 presents the experiments conducted to illustrate the validity of the suggested algorithm, and Section 6 shows the analysis and comparison of our proposed stemmer with two other Arabic stemmers. The con- clusion is provided in Section 7.

The stopword list is a list of words in a text that have no meaning. These words serve merely as syntactic operations and have no bearing on the topic content. They have two unique effects on NLP [12]. Multiple applications include information retrieval IR [18], text categorization [9], ontology construction [4], and many more NLP applications [14,13,3]. A new Arabic light stemmer was developed by Al-Lahham et al. [7] to amplify the precision of previous algorithms. In addition, Alshalabi et al.

Fuad et al. (2020) evaluated four state-of-the-art Arabic mor- phological analyzers and found that identification of broken plural words, specifically the plural of paucity, is lacking. Therefore, Fuad et al. (2020) presented Qillah (paucity), a morphological extension that is built on top of other morphological analyzers and uses a hybrid rule- and lexicon-based approach to enhance the identifica- tion of plural of paucity. Two versions of Qillah were developed: one is based on the FARASA morphological analyzer (https://far- asa.qcri.org/POS/), and the other is based on the CALIMA Star ana- lyzer (https://github.com/CAMeL-Lab/camel_tools).

Instances of outcomes, as reported by Taghva et al. [34] are as follows: sets of affixes are reflected in (P3, P2, P1, S3, S2, and S1), while (PR4, PR53, PR54, PR63, and PR64) refer to sets of Arabic suf- fixes and prefixes. Then, Syarief et al. [33] improved the weakness of the ISRI stemmer in processing words consisting of two letters. From the results of the experiment, the improvements increased the stemmer yield by 7.3%.

This section presents our rule-based development by using new BPRs (ISRI + BPR). The algorithm entails many steps. The preprocess- ing step involves normalization, stopword removal, and Arabized removal. The next step involves the removal of definition articles and the application of the new BPR, followed by the ISRI stemmer.

To solve the problem of stemming broken plural words, which is considered a major weakness of root-based methods for extract- ing roots from Arabic words, we designed and developed new rules for stemming BPR in accordance with accurate Arabic grammar. The first section describes the proposed algorithm for developing new BPRs, with the new rules as the latest contribution to enhanc- ing Arabic root-based approaches by overcoming their weaknesses and shortcomings. The ISRI method was improved by applying the BPR algorithm to the original ISRI stemmer, and we named it ISRI + BPR stemmer. The experimental results from the first inves- tigation showed that the BPR development had achieved remark- able success, with an encouraging number of correct extracted roots by using the BPR algorithm on a well-known Arabic dataset. In the second investigation, the results obtained by ISRI + BPR were the best compared with the benchmark Arabic stemmers: the orig- inal ISRI stemmer and ARLS 2. Both results indicated an evident increase in the percentage of correct roots and a reduction in incor- rect roots in terms of precision, recall, F-measure, and ICF mea- sures. Thus, we can conclude that the proposed BPR algorithm has solved some of the irregular broken plural problems, which eventually helped in improving the performance of a root-based Arabic stemmer. In the future work, we will extend this approach to all Arabic derived names..

Dr Sabrina Tiun is a senior lecturer at the Faculty of Information Science and Technology (FTSM) in Univer- siti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM). Her range of research interests are from Natural Language Processing, Com- putational Linguistic, Speech Processing to Social Sci- ence Computing. Currently, she is the CAIT Teaching & Learning Coordinator at the FTSM, UKM.

Assoc. Professor Dr Nazlia Omar is an Associate Pro- fessor at the Centre for AI Technology (CAIT), Faculty of Information Science and Technology (FTSM), Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM). She holds her PhD from the University of Ulster, UK. Her main research interest is in the area of Natural Language Processing and Computational Linguistics. She is currently the head of Asian Language Processing Lab (ASLAN) under the Centre of Artificial Intelligence Technology (CAIT).

Yazid Saif is currently a research assistant at Tun Hus- sien Onn (UTHM). Faculty of mechanical engineering. He is a PhD a student at the Universiti Tun Hussien Onn Malaysia, (UTHM). His research focuses in measuring models and detecting features based on Image Pro- cessing, and his concern with Artificial Intelligent focusing on the convolutional neural network.

