Abstract Image segmentation refers to the process of partitioning an image into mutually exclu- sive regions. It can be considered as the most essential and crucial process for facilitating the delin- eation, characterization, and visualization of regions of interest in any medical image. Despite intensive research, segmentation remains a challenging problem due to the diverse image content, cluttered objects, occlusion, image noise, non-uniform object texture, and other factors. There are many algorithms and techniques available for image segmentation but still there needs to develop an efficient, fast technique of medical image segmentation.

This paper presents an efficient image segmentation approach using K-means clustering tech- nique integrated with Fuzzy C-means algorithm. It is followed by thresholding and level set segmen- tation stages to provide an accurate brain tumor detection. The proposed technique can get benefits of the K-means clustering for image segmentation in the aspects of minimal computation time. In addition, it can get advantages of the Fuzzy C-means in the aspects of accuracy. The performance

of the proposed image segmentation approach was evaluated by comparing it with some state of the art segmentation algorithms in case of accuracy, processing time, and performance. The accuracy was evaluated by comparing the results with the ground truth of each processed image. The exper- imental results clarify the effectiveness of our proposed approach to deal with a higher number of segmentation problems via improving the segmentation quality and accuracy in minimal execution time.

There are many challenging issues to image segmentation like development of a unified approach that can be applied to all types of images and applications. Even, the selection of an appropriate technique for a particular kind of image is a difficult problem. Thus, there is no universal accepted method for image segmentation. So, it remains a challenging problem in image processing and computer vision fields [10].

We used image segmentation techniques based on cluster- ing to detect the brain tumor and calculating the tumor area. We developed a novel image segmentation approach, called K-means integrated with Fuzzy C-means (KIFCM), for abnormal MRI images. We integrated K-means clustering algorithm with the Fuzzy C-means algorithm to overcome the limitations and get benefits of them. After clustering stage, the extraction of the tumor is done automatically without user interaction by using thresholding and level set methods to con- tour the tumor area. The last stage of our proposed technique is calculating the tumor area in the processed image. K-means algorithm can detect a brain tumor faster than Fuzzy C-means. However, Fuzzy C-means predicted tumor cells that are not predicted by K-means algorithm. The proposed technique gives an accurate result as compared to the K-means algo- rithm. Even though, original Fuzzy C-means algorithm yields good results for segmenting noise free images, it fails to seg- ment noisy images. Therefore, we get benefits from integrating these two algorithms to reduce the number of iterations, which affects execution time and gives an accurate result in tumor detection.

This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the current scientific research in medical image segmentation is intro- duced. Section 3 presents the materials and methods used in this work. It describes the image datasets used in this work. It also shows the proposed medical image segmentation system based on clustering. Section 4 depicts the experimental results obtained from the evaluation of the proposed methods using three types of data sets and discusses the central questions derived from them. Finally, conclusion and future work are drawn in Section 5.

Tatiraju and Mehta [16] introduced image segmentation using K-means clustering, Expectation Maximization (EM), and Normalized Cuts (NC). They analyzed the two former unsupervised learning algorithms and compared them with a graph-based algorithm, the Normalized Cut algorithm. They applied the partitioning algorithm to gray-scaled images with varying value of k (number of clusters). For smaller values of k, the K-means and EM algorithms give good results. For lar- ger values of k, the segmentation is very coarse; many clusters appear in the images at discrete places. The NCuts algorithm gave good results for larger value of k, but it takes a long time.

Yerpude and Dubey [17] proposed color image segmenta- tion using K-Medoids Clustering. The idea of the algorithm is to find clusters of objects by finding the Medoids for each cluster. Each remaining object is clustered with the Medoid or representative objects to which it is the most similar. K- Medoids method uses representative objects as reference points rather than taking the mean value of the objects in each cluster. The algorithm takes the input parameter k and the number of clusters to be partitioned among a set of n objects. The segmented images are highly dependent on the number of segments or centers. They did not consider finding optimal number of segments to provide more accurate results.

Islam and Ahmed [18] proposed image segmentation tech- nique based on K-means, K-Mediods, and Hierarchical clus- tering technologies. They made a comparison between these three clustering techniques on natural images to find the advantages and disadvantages of each algorithm. After apply- ing these algorithms, they mentioned that the K-means Clus- tering method has better performance and easy to implement than other clustering methods.

Funmilola et al. [20] made the Fuzzy K-C-means method, which carries more of Fuzzy C-means properties than that of K-means. The algorithm reads the image, determines the iter- ations, reduces the iterations by distance checker, gets the size of the image, concatenates the dimension, generates large data items with distance calculation, and reduces repetition when possible distance has been attained. The iteration begins by identifying significant component of data then it stops when possible identification elapses. Fuzzy K-C-means works on grayscale images like Fuzzy C-means. It generates the same number of iterations as in Fuzzy C-means. The authors reduced the iterations by checking the distances only. The dis- advantage is that the result of their proposed method is similar to the outcome of the Fuzzy C-means algorithm except in some images. The time of Fuzzy C-means is greater than by maximum 2 s than their proposed method.

Wilson and Dhas [21] used K-means and Fuzzy C-means respectively to detect the iron in brain SWI. The extraction of the iron region in the brain is made by K-means and Fuzzy C- means clustering method. The SWI is compared for brain iron using K-means and FCM methods. The tests done on Fuzzy C-means indicates that the iron regions are easily visible than the output of K-means image. The main disadvantage of their

In this paper, we tested the performance of the most four famous clustering techniques: K-means, Fuzzy C-means, Mean Shift, and Maximization Expectation. We made a comparison between our proposed technique and these algorithms in aspects of processing time and accuracy. The tested algorithms were applied on three different data sets consist of 255 MRI images of the brain contain tumor cells. In our integration, we eliminated the user interaction, saved time, retained image information, removed the inference of points that, of course, avoided over-segmentation and under-segmentation and achieved the accuracy.

This phase is implemented by applying a series of initial pro- cessing procedures on the image before any special purposes processing. It improves the image quality and removes the noise. Since, the brain images are more sensitive than other medical images; they should be of minimum noise and maxi- mum quality. Therefore, this stage consists of the following two sub-stages:

Skull removal: Image background does not usually con- tain any useful information but increase the processing time. Therefore, removing background, skull, scalp, eyes, and all structures that are not in the interest decrease the amount of the memory used and increased the processing speed. Skull removed is done by using BSE (brain surface extractor) algorithm. The BSE algo- rithm is used only with MRI images. It filters the image to remove irregularities, detects edges in the image, and performs morphological erosions and brain isolation. It also performs surface cleanup and image masking. The output of this sub step is the free noising MRI image contains only the human brain.

On the other hand, there are some points scattered and far away from any cluster center. Therefore, the resulting new cluster centers, the clustered points, and the scattered points can be entered in the same time to the looping step that calcu- lates the new distances and clustering the points due to mem- bership value. Then, the membership and means values are updated with determining the condition of closing.

no inference between points in their clusters, because there is no huge change done by the re-clustering process. The output of the technique is the clustering image, execution time, and iteration numbers that are recorded to compare with other clustering methods. In this stage, we make a hybrid clustering method based on hard and soft clusterings. The hard clustering technique put each point to belong to only closest cluster. Whereas, the soft clustering technique gives every point a

Thresholding segmentation: It is intensity-based segmen- tation. Thresholding or image binarization is one of the important techniques in image processing and computer vision. It is used to extract the object from the back- ground. The segmented image, which is obtained by thresholding, has the advantages of smaller storage space, fast processing speed, and ease of manipulation, compared with gray level image which usually contains a large number of gray levels (maximum 256 levels) [28]. The output of this step is the segmenting image with dark background and lighting tumor area.

