Abstract This paper investigates the use of a simplified set of Arabic phonemes in an Arabic Speech Recognition system applied to Holy Quran. The CMU Sphinx 4 was used to train and eval- uate a language model for the Hafs narration of the Holy Quran. The building of the language model was done using a simplified list of Arabic phonemes instead of the mainly used Romanized set in order to simplify the process of generating the language model. The experiments resulted in very low Word Error Rate (WER) reaching 1.5% while using a very small set of audio files during the training phase when using all the audio data for both the training and the testing phases. How- ever, when using 90% and 80% of the training data, the WER obtained was respectively 50.0% and 55.7%.

In this paper, we assessed the performance of the CMU Sphinx trained language models using simplified phonemes consisting of Arabic diacritic letters, instead of the commonly used Romanized phonemes, and detailed the processes and experiments introduced in [1]. The rest of this paper is orga- nized as follows: The use of Arabic Speech Recognition Sys- tems applied to the Holy Quran is discussed in Section 2. The different processing and experimental setups are detailed in Section 3. The results of the different experiments are dis- cussed in Section 4. Finally, the conclusion and future research are discussed in Section 5.

Speech recognition systems are very popular since they allow a more intuitive and natural way for humans to interact with devices and machines. However, applying ASR tech- niques to the Arabic language is still in its early stages when compared to ASR for English. There are various challenges that are facing any project related to ASR such as stuttering, coughing, false starts, dis-fluency, pitch, and repetitions but have moreover the challenges that arise from the pace of speech as described in [2]. In the context of the Holy Quran, elongations are another challenge for accurate recognition since some Ayat allows different lengths for the pronunciation of some letters of a word, which leads to the same word being pronounced differently even by the same speaker and still be a valid pronunciation that needs to be correctly recognized.

Certainly, the use of new technologies such as AASR in order to help Muslims in their memorization and recitation review of the Holy Quran has a potential for a bright future. One of the widely available tools that have the potential to achieve this goal is the CMU Sphinx. It is a robust and flexible Open- Source framework that can be adapted for the Holy Quran. However, in order to obtain the needed high recognition accu- racy, extra care needs to be put in the generation of the lan- guage model for the Hafs narration of the Holy Quran since

Once the performance of this simplification is confirmed, the next step would be to generalize this process to include more chapters of the Holy Quran to ultimately generate the language model for all the Holy Quran chapters. This involves generating the set of simplified Arabic phonemes respecting all Arabic and Tajweed rules along with gathering a large number of recitation recordings to use for the training. At this stage, each audio file for each Ayah might need to be manually checked in order to see whether it needs some processing such as locating and tagging all pauses in the recitation in the mid- dle of the Ayah. This involves correctly determining whether

The WER is automatically computed by the Sphinx tools based on the testing data. However, when all the audio files were used for both the training and the testing, the WER is computed only on audio files seen during the training. Thus, the results obtained are strongly coupled to the training data. Nevertheless, this will allow assessing the potential perfor-

These results help to realize that this phoneme simplifica- tion using diacritic Arabic letters has the potential of attaining promising results since the WER obtained in many experimen- tal settings was less than 2% with a minimum of 1.5%. This confirms that it is possible to achieve very good word recogni- tion accuracy with simplified Arabic phonemes. Even if most of the minimum WER were obtained when the dimension of the Gaussian mixtures was set to 32, the minimal WER was similarly reached with a setting of the Gaussians to 24 and

Finally, it is very important to remember that all these results were obtained using all the audio files for both the training and the testing of the trained model. Using this exper- imental setting did not test the model on unseen audio data. This resulted in a model dependent on the trained audio files. This led to more experimental settings to be carried out. In order to assess the trained language model on unseen data, some of the audio files need to be excluded from the training phase and used only during the testing phase.

In order to assess the performance of the language model on audio files unseen during the training phase, different experi- ments were set by varying the percentage of unseen audio files during the training. Instead of always using 100% of the files for both the training and the testing, audio files were separated into two groups: one for the training and the other for the test- ing. The audio files were randomly separated into either to be used for the training of the language model or for its testing when the resulting WER is computed.

The results from these different experiments while building the language model for the Holy Quran using simplified Arabic phonemes with a small amount of training data showed that it is possible to obtain potential good recognition accuracy provided that enough training data are used. Preliminary results have shown the potential of a simplification using Ara- bic phonemes in order to facilitate and automate the genera- tion of the language model. However, more work needs to be done in terms of generalizing the process to ultimately cover all chapters of the Holy Quran. Additionally, overcoming the challenges of limited resources and processing power of mobile devices and implement a mobile application for the continuous recitation verification of the Holy Quran will increase its use. Finally, this project can lead to future work on building the language model for different known narrations of the Holy Quran such as Warsh and Qalun. Furthermore, this simplifica- tion of the language model has the potential to be applied to any Arabic corpora which open the door to a wider number of applications in which Romanized phonemes were com-

