Relations of independence and conditional independence arise in a variety of contexts. Stochastic in- dependence and conditional independence are fundamental relations in probability theory and statistics. Analogous non-stochastic relations arise in database theory; in the setting of nominal sets (a semantic framework for modelling data with names); and in the modelling of concepts such as region disjointness for heap memory. In this paper, we identify unifying category-theoretic structure that encompasses these

different forms of independence and conditional independence. The proposed structure supports the ex- pected reasoning principles for notions of independence and conditional independence. We further identify associated notions of independent and local independent product, in which (conditional) independence is represented via a (fibred) monoidal structure, which is present in many examples.

Relations of independence and conditional independence arise in multiple contexts. The aim of this paper is to provide axiomatic category-theoretic structure that, on the one hand, accounts for key constructions and reasoning principles associ- ated with relations of (conditional) independence in different contexts, and, on the other, includes a diversity of examples as instances of the structure. To emphasise the second point, the development is illustrated throughout by a series of running examples of notions of (conditional) independence that are of relevance to computer science. These examples concern three main flavours of independence.

Separatedness relations constrain the access of a number of distinct entities to an available resource, in order to ensure there is no overlap of access. Examples include: asserting that data contains disjoint names/atoms/nonces/. . . , as expressed, for example, by separatedness assertions about nominal sets [22]; and the partioning of a heap into disjoint regions, as expressed by the separating conjunction of separation logic [21].

The present paper fits in with current interest in logics of dependence and independence [26,13], the original team semantics of which is based logical (in)dependence as in point (ii) above. Athough variations of team semantics based on stochastic independence have been considered [15], no systematic semantic frame- work has been developed for general logics of dependence and independence. Our category-theoretic structure provides one possible foundation for such a develop- ment. Fleshing this out is a task for future research.

The above conditions specify that multispans in I are maps in a fat symmetric multicategory, in the sense of [19, Def. A.2.1], although we have replaced the multi- domain of loc. cit. with a multi-codomain. In this paper, we concern ourselves with multicategories of the above form only, with maps always given as multispans.

All our example categories have independent products. By Proposition 3.8, it suffices to exhibit independent terminal object and binary independent products. The former is trivial, so we just define the latter. We do not describe the projection maps, which are obvious. In each case, the independence of the multispan (3) of projections is immediate, and I-neutrality follows from Propositions 3.3 and 3.4.

Proposition 4.6 Let C be a category with independence structure I and image tuple structure J . Suppose also that C has independent products. Then a sufficient condition for (TI2) to hold is that J contains every multispan (3) of projections from an independent product.

The above construction is known in ergodic theory, see, e.g., [6, Def. 6.15]; Similar constructions have been used in computer science in the theory of Markov processes [5,3]. I have not found the universal property, as a universal independent square, in the literature.

The above can be also be given an alternative formulation that emphasises that it implies the existence of tuple independence structure on every slice category. How- ever, the chosen formulation is the one that is more convenient to work with, and to verify in examples. For example, one of its advantages is that it admits the following simplification in the presence of local independent products, cf. Proposition 4.6.

