In the membrane systems area (also referred to as P systems), it is usual to represent a membrane (that models a biological membrane) by a pair of square brackets, [ ]. As done in [19], to each topological side of a membrane, we associate the multisets u and v (over a particular alphabet V ) and this is denoted by [ u]v. We say that the membrane is marked by u and v; v is called the external marking and u the internal marking; in general, we refer to them as markings of the membrane. The objects of the alphabet V are called proteins or, simply, objects. An object is called free if it is not attached to the sides of a membrane, so is not part of a marking.

For the first case, the rule is applicable to the membrane i if the membrane is marked by multisets containing the multisets u and v on the appropriate sides, and region i contains an object a. In the second case, the rule is applicable to membrane i if it is marked by multisets containing the multisets u and v, as before, and is contained in a region (or in the environment) that contains an object a. If the rule is applicable we say that the objects defined by u, v and a can be assigned to the rule (so that it may be executed).

In the first case, the rule is applicable to membrane i if it is marked by multisets containing the multisets u and v, on the appropriate sides, and the membrane is contained in a region containing an object a. The objects defined by u, v and a can thus be assigned to the rule. If the rule is applicable and the objects a, u and v are assigned to the rule then the rule can be executed (applied) and, in this case, the object a is removed from the contents of the region surrounding membrane i and added to the contents of region i.

We also admit evolution rules that involve objects but not membranes. These can be considered to model the biochemical reactions that take place inside the compartments of the cell. They are evolution rules over the alphabet V and set of labels Lab (no indication on the destination of the produced objects is present). We define

However, from a computational point of view, it is not clear if the inclusion of membrane-evolution rules lead to higher complexity algorithms. The computational study of membrane systems with peripheral proteins and membrane evolution-rules is not the goal of this paper and is then left as research topic. The proposed membrane evolution rules can also be seen as a generalization of the protein rules used in [22], where only one single protein can be rewritten, on one side of the membrane. Moreover, similar types of rules have been included in the stochastic simulator presented in [21], [17]: in that case the attachment of an object can allow the rewriting of the multiset of embedded proteins. A survey of membrane systems with embedded proteins is [18].

3 Cyclins are a family of proteins involved in the progression of cells through the whole cell cycle. They are so named because their concentrations vary in a cyclical fashion. They are produced or degraded as needed in order to drive the cell through the different phases of its life cycle.

Markup Language, SBML [13]). Moreover, we have translated [15] the pathway in the formalism introduced in Section 1 and simulated in a stochastic manner ([23]). More precisely, we have added to the rules of the system, constants that define their rates of applications (kinetic rates). The evolution of the overall system has been then obtained by using the Gillespie algorithm (we refer the reader to [21] for details). In what follows we survey the obtained results.

Estrogens are a group of steroid compounds functioning as the primary female sex hormone. They are involved in cell cycle progression and generation/promotion of tumors as breast, uterus and prostate cancers. Estrogens actions are assumed to be mediated by estrogen receptors which are found in different ratios in the different tissues of the body and which regulate the transcription of some target genes. A certain stimulation of Efp by estrogen has been shown to promote genetic instability.

Receptors are proteins located on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that bind to specific molecules (ligands 12 ) and initiate the cellular responses. Estrogen receptors are intracellular proteins present both on the cell surface membrane and in the cytosol.  Those localized within the cytosol have a DNA-binding domain and can function as transcription factors to regulate the production of proteins. Their signaling effects depend on several factors: (i) the structure of the ligand or drug, (ii) the receptor subtype, (iii) the gene regulatory elements, and the (iv) cell-type specific proteins.

Pathways cross-talk is a fundamental factor that has to be taken into account when modelling biological processes. In fact, very often, chemicals are involved in more than one living function and they are logically and physically implicated in different pathways. In other words, thy are never fully disconnected by each other. There- fore, without an exhaustive knowledge on what happens around the processes of interest, any quantitative analysis on isolated pathways results to be unfeasible and unrealistic.

