In this paper, various continuities of posets which may not be dcpos are considered. The concepts of approximated elements and hyper-approximated elements on posets are introduced. New characterizations of continuous posets and hypercontinuous posets are given. Meanwhile, as a generalization of approximated elements, the concept of quasi-approximated elements on dcpos is introduced and some characterizations of quasicontinuous domains are also obtained. It is proved that under some reasonable conditions, the set B(L) (resp., QB(L)) of approximated elements (resp., quasi-approximated elements) in the induced order of a dcpo L is a continuous domain (resp., a quasicontinuous domain).

The notion of continuous lattices as a model for the semantics of programming lan- guages was introduced by Scott in [10]. Later, a more general notion of continuous directed complete partially ordered sets (i.e., continuous dcpos or domains) was introduced and extensively studied (see [1], [5], [6]). Since some naturally arising

In this paper, we introduce the concepts of approximated elements and hyper- approximated elements on posets and discuss some properties and relations of ap- proximated elements and hyper-approximated elements. With these new concepts, we give several characterizations of continuous posets and hypercontinuous posets, generalizing relevant results in [15]. Meanwhile, as a generalization of approximated elements, the concept of quasi-approximated elements on dcpos is also introduced and some new characterizations of quasicontinuous domains are obtained. We will prove that under some reasonable conditions, the set B(L) (resp., QB(L)) of ap- proximated elements (resp., quasi-approximated elements) in the induced order of a dcpo L is a continuous domain (resp., a quasicontinuous domain).

infimum of A is denoted by  A or inf A. A nonempty subset D of L is directed if every finite subset of D has an upper bound in D. A poset L is a directed complete partially ordered set (dcpo, for short) if every directed subset of L has a supremum. A complete lattice is a poset in which every subset has a supremum.

