Nominal rewriting generalises first-order rewriting by providing support for the specification of binding operators. In this paper, we give sufficient conditions for (local) confluence of closed nominal rewriting theories, based on the analysis of rule overlaps. More precisely, we show that closed nominal rewriting rules where all proper critical pairs are joinable are locally confluent. We also show how to refine the notion of rule overlap to derive confluence of the closed rewriting relation. The conditions that we define are easy to check using a nominal unification algorithm.

Without termination, the Critical Pair Lemma, which is the kernel of the famous Knuth-Bendix completion procedure, guarantees local confluence of term rewriting theories [13]. The most famous sufficient condition for confluence without termina- tion, giving also rise to a programming discipline, is orthogonality. Orthogonality essentially avoids ambiguity through two easily verifiable syntactic constraints on the rewriting rules: left-linearity, that constrains each variable occurring in the left-hand side of each rule to appear only once, and non-ambiguity, that constrains left-hand sides of rules to have no overlaps (except for trivial ones, at variable positions or between a rule and its copy at the root position). With these syntactic restrictions confluence of orthogonal rewriting theories is guaranteed [17].

Closed rules roughly correspond to rules without free atoms, where rewriting cannot change the binding status of an atom. They are the counterpart of rules in standard higher-order rewriting formats (see [6]). Below we first recall the definition of nominal matching and then give a structural definition and an operational characterisation of closed terms.

Since it is sufficient to consider just one freshened version of each rule when computing overlaps of closed rules, the number of fresh critical pairs for a rewrite theory with a finite number of rules is finite. Thus, Theorem 5.6 provides an effective criterion for local confluence, similar to the criterion for first-order systems.

We can deduce from Theorem 5.6 that the closed rewriting relation for the closed theory defining explicit substitution in Example 3.5 (i.e., all the rules except Beta) is locally confluent: every proper fresh critical pair is joinable. If we consider also the rule (Beta) then the system is not locally confluent. This does not contradict the previous theorem, because there is a proper fresh critical pair between (Beta)

We have presented easy-to-check criteria for confluence of nominal rewriting theories (Theorem 4.6 and Lemma 4.9, and Theorems 5.6 and 5.8), improving previous criteria [7,19]. The Critical Pair Lemma for closed rewriting yields a completion algorithm for closed rewrite rules [9]. We intend to enlarge the PVS library on term rewriting systems [10] to formalise the results of this paper.

