Motivated by some problems arising in cryptography, [1] introduces slender languages as being those languages which contain at most a con- stant number of words of any length. Roughly speaking, the following for- mal language approach of the Richelieu cryptosystem is considered in [1]: a plaintext is encripted using an encription key of length n yielding a cryp- totext of the same length of the encription key. If the legal receiver knows the key, then it can easily recover the original text. The problem appears when transmitting all possible keys to the legal receiver. In order to de- crease the recovering complexity, the keys should come from a slender language such that the receiver may test a limited number of keys for each cryptotext. The reader interestead in further details may consult [1].

over V  such that L  fx g fx g  ::: fx g . L is bounded if it is k-bounded for some k  0. For basic notions and results of combinatorics on words the reader is refered to [4,13].

Given a language L the mapping #L(n) gives the number of all words of length n in L for every n. Formally, #L(n) = card(fx 2 L j jxj = ng): For a nonnegative integer k, the language L is said to be k-poly-slender if #L(n) 2 O(nk): Furthermore, L is poly-slender if it is k-poly-slender for some k  0. Any 0-poly-slender language is called also slender.

is called a k-Dyck loop. Clearly, the same set D can be obtained by chang- ing the homomorphism h1;1;:::;1 or the Dyck word z. We say that z is a un- derlying word of D and h = h1;1;:::;1 is a underlying homomorphism of D.

Since the homomorphical image of every k-Dyck loop is a k-Dyck loop, it follows that all families of k-poly-slender context-free languages, k  0, are closed under homomorphisms. We do not know whether the family of (2k + 1)-poly-slender regular languages in the above characterization can be replaced by the family of k-poly-slender regular languages. This would imply a strong characterization of the class of k-poly-slender context-free languages for each k	0. Another related problem regards the minimal

Theorem 3.5 Let V be an alphabet; a new alphabet U and a homomor- phism h from U into V can be determined such that for each poly-slender context-free language L over V there exists a poly-slender regular language R over U such that L = h(DU \ R). Moreover, h(DU \ R) is a poly-slender context-free for any homomorphism h from U into V and any poly-slender regular language R.

V 0; where V 0 = fa0 j a 2 V g, and # is a new symbol. For w = a1a2 ::: an, ai 2 V , 1  i  n, we denote by w0 the word a0 a0 ::: a0 . Put U = W [ W  .

