In this paper, we completely answer this question by showing that there are five such classes and no others. Each class corresponds to either a subgroup of A4, the alternating group on four letters, or to a subgroup of S3, the symmetric group on three letters. Let us briefly explain why we find this to be a very surprising result. If we take the stance that classical and quantum channels are very different, then we would expect them to have only trivial structure in common. But the

Similarly, (ei, b) = 0 for all i. So b = 0 and any affine homeomorphism of the unit ball onto itself will have to take the center to the center. However, this means any such qubit channel must be unital, and as shown by elementary means in [8], M must then be an orthogonal matrix with determinant +1, i.e., it must belong to SO(3).

A quick proof that the matrices above give a copy of A4 is to first notice that a is even because it can be written as the product of two transpositions a = fg, where f swaps the first and third elements and g swaps the third and fourth. Similarly, x is also even. Thus, xa = b, bx = c and xc = d are even as the product of evens, as are their squares. Finally, y = ac2, z = xy and x2 = I are even. Since we have generated twelve distinct even permutations and a four element set only has 4!/2 = 12 even permutations, this set of matrices forms a copy of A4:

Notice that any copy of A4 can be generated from an order three element and an even involution. Let us use this intuition to generate a likely candidate for a copy of A4 within SO(3). Starting with the involutions of Lemma 4.1, we take

Proof. (i) and (ii) follow from the fact that an embedding restricts to the convex closure of a subgroup. (iii) If G is nonabelian, then it is either A4 or S3. If G is abelian, then it is either Z2, Z3 or Z2, each of which is a subgroup of A4. Thus, G is either a subgroup of A4 or a subgroup of S3. 2

However, even in the case of qubit channels, there is still much to be understood. For instance, while we have classified the groups that can be used to classically represent qubit channels, what are the classes of qubit channels which result? In the case of the Klein four group, the class represented is any maximal commutative collection of symmetric channels (for instance, the diagonal matrices). In the case of Z2, the channels described are bit flipping channels with respect to a particular spin matrix. For Z3, we know the channels described are those that are both stochastic and circulant, though we are not sure of what this means physically yet. Finally,

