Since every clone in the traditional sense (old clone) continues to fulfil the cri- teria of the more general new clones, conventional clone theory, as developed e.g. in [18,23,10,20], still remains a valuable piece of the general theory: it just focusses on the subclones of the clone OA \O(0) of all non-nullary operations. Moreover, it is interesting to ask about the connections between old and new (relational) clones,

e.g. about the position of the old clones in the complete lattice of all new clones on a fixed carrier set. We shall address these questions in Subsection 3.1 and see that no dramatic changes of the lattice structure occur. We remark that, with minor tech- nical modifications, the main results of this text are taken from the more elaborate report [1].

The author thinks that it is beneficial for an exchange of knowledge and meth- ods if the notions of term operation, clone, abstract clone and Lawvere theory are compatible with each other, and thus clones may contain nullary operations. He is not alone regarding this: the monograph [14, p. 143, Definition 4.1] and some publications such as [26,22,15] define (and use) clones possibly including nullary op- erations. Recent work such as [8,9], generalising clone theory to arbitrary categories, at least strongly suggests the possibility to include them in the theory.

In order to explore some connections between clones in the usual sense (without nullary operations) and the new, general clones, in Subsection 3.1 we are going to define four operators on sets of finitary operations and relations. They will be used to locate the lattices of traditional clones in the lattices of new clones, and, more importantly, to determine the location of those clones that are strictly new, i.e. not part of the usual theory.

j. We will see that these operators can be restricted to clones and that it turns out that the set of all kernels of clones of operations is precisely the old lattice of clones without nullary operations, while the closures of all new relational clones are exactly the old relational clones. In Subsection 3.1.3, the positions of clones in the traditional sense in the new general clone lattice are discussed.

To some extend this fact seems to have become part of folklore in the universal algebraic community within the last decades or so. Yet from time to time one faces some reluctance among authors to rely on these results also for the case of nullary operations, partly driven by the wish to be compatible with traditional clone theory, and partly to avoid running into (sometimes unexpected) minor technical modifications. We therefore consider it useful to have a reliable source for the main theorem regarding the Galois theory for clones involving nullary operations, showing that at least in this respect no modifications are necessary. In the best case this will lead to an even broader acceptance of clones with nullary operations among universal algebraists.

