It is important to look at various factors that add cost to deploy networks to serve trillions of devices interconnected together to form Internet of Things (IoT) [33]. First of all, it must be noted that the end devices are very diverse in nature. Specialized network behavior and services are needed to operate these diverse IoT devices [20,19,35]. Each type of application needs a different net- work policy to treat its data traffic differently based on underlining confidentiality, integrity, and overall security. The previous trend was to build specialized network functionality in hardware to speedup network operations. These specialized network devices have to be carefully placed in the network depending on the differ- ent kinds of services offered by the network service providers.

The key solution to all these problems is network virtualization [5]. Through the concept of network virtualization, all the network elements will be programmable using a single standard user inter- face and can be controlled remotely from any of the chosen central locations. All network operations will be automated under the new framework as network elements are implemented completely in software. The role of a certain network element can be easily chan- ged by redefining the network function of that element. The fol-

mate popularity of any typical kind of technology. The terminology used in this paper considers network operators as the end users of network services who depend on it for performing their core busi- ness operations. They are businesses such as application and con- tent providers, academic and non-academic institutions, federal public and private services, and commercial and financial agencies. Network operators rely on network functional resources that are purchased as a service from a third party as per on demand basis. By doing so, they will be relieved from having to invest and maintain their own network, upgrade it with time due to busi- ness expansion. They will instead focus on their core business and invest everything in it and avoid having to deal with continuous upfront costs involved in operating and upgrading their own pri-

So the objective of future generation networks is to have the ability to remotely create, control, and manage networks of virtual resources which are interconnected VNFs created in software. The network topology can be changed without manual intervention. The capacity of VNFs can be increased or decreased based on the need. This eliminates the situation of over-provisioning or under- provisioning resources to certain client and thus be able to always maintain the service quality based on the contractual agreement.

The other major architecture under discussion suggests a com- plete overhaul to the current network device manufacturing pro- cess. It does not advocate leaving the control plane in the device. So, it removes the control plane from the hardware, thus encourag- ing manufacturing of general purpose network devices that does only data forwarding. There will be a separate software controller

change with time, and they are also not always fixed in number as they come and go depending on their needs. Cloud networks make use of software virtualization framework discussed before to offer multitenancy features to support multiple applications on the same hardware and software infrastructure. The challenging issue here is to properly share all the underlying resources. At the same time the framework used in the cloud should provide com- plete isolation between the multitenent applications. Addition of new applications should not degrade the performance of already existing applications. To that extent, the cloud network must be elastic to gracefully respond to changing load on the network.

Many experts in industry related to information technology and data networks will immediately conclude that the obvious major sources of data in future would be IoT devices and social networks. When Big Data grows, the concern over its trustworthiness also increases. The data also has to be highly accessible through a sim- ple query mechanism. This is a necessary because the success of any data analysis activity depends on the degree of data availabil- ity. If relevant data is readily available, quick and accurate deci- sions can be drawn from the analytical activity [21,29]. Decisions based on accurate data analysis will have profound effect on taking sound decisions to improve any business activity. Another major aspect is the speed with which the data can be transferred between relevant users so that they can quickly correlate data to jointly extract and exchange knowledge as well as information. By doing so, they will be able to come up with decisions in time and do not miss any major opportunities. This is crucial for any business to remain ahead of their counterparts.

The three basic components of the VNF architecture are: (a) Physical Hardware: The hardware is any bare-metal machine that hosts resources such as CPU, Memory, and storage. (b) Virtual Hypervisor Layer: This virtual layer is the software layer that runs on the bare-metal hardware that manages the resources such as CPU power, memory, and storage capacity. (c) Virtual Machine: The guest virtual machine is a software that emulates the architec- ture and functionalities of the physical platform using a fraction of hardware resources. As a result, a particular physical hardware can host more than one VM. The maximum number of VMs that can be hosted on a physical hardware is dependant on the resources of the physical hardware and the amount of resources used by each VM [15].

The key advantage of VNF and SDN architectures is that a gen- eral purpose COTS based servers can be incorporated in enterprize class networks for Big Data handling and computation. Even the physical layer processing of the cellular mobile networks can be implemented in these COTS servers [14]. This is a big step for telecommunication industry as it will transform the entire cellular network architecture. It will dramatically reduce the capital invest- ment and reduce the energy consumption by resorting to cloud based data centers. However, it is yet to test the performance of such a network and only the future trials can be able to answer these questions through developing good test bed networks for active user trials. Multiple tenants will be able to share cloud based SDN and NFV architecture based virtualized network resources to improve profit margins and achieve reduced spending on infras- tructure [34,12].

The cost and energy consumption comparison between two completely different technologies is undoubtedly very complex as it has to take many hardware specific aspects into consideration [2]. Empirical results will be more substantial to reveal the actual cost and energy consumption. However we are already aware from industrial experts that new COTs based server platforms have evolved to become more powerful to emulate the special purpose network hardware in terms of packet processing speeds and yet consume lesser power. So we take this information in the form of variable parameters to study the relative cost and energy con- sumptions between SDN/NFV networks and 4G networks as the above model has illustrated. This model will nevertheless provide insight on cost and energy savings as function of many different important factors.

The future network challenges and the role of virtualization in addressing all issues related to cloud based SDN and NFV technolo- gies were discussed. Further, the concepts of virtualization were discussed along with the concepts from SDN and NFV frameworks. The necessity of cloud based data center networks is discussed from the view point of big data explosion and how the SDN/NFV based technology will likely handle the big data explosion over cloud networks. Furthermore, a cloud based SDN/NFV network was studied and a mathematical model is presented that compares the cost and energy consumption between the SDN/NFV network and a typical 4G network. All key metrics are taken as variable functions to study their effect on the overall cost and energy con- sumption in the SDN/NFV network. Adhering to the common assumptions in the literature, the proposed model investigates the relative cost and energy consumption for both single service provider and all the service providers in the system as a whole that are involved in SDN/NFV network sharing. By eliminating the pos- sibility of any multiplexing gain, we have still found considerable cost reductions and energy savings in SDN/NFV based networks. The results have substantiated the claims of many gains achievable through successful deployment of networks based on software vir-

