Abstract This paper proposes a new and effective framework for color image retrieval based on Full Range Autoregressive Model (FRAR). Bayesian approach (BA) is used to estimate the param- eters of the FRAR model. The color autocorrelogram, a new version of edge histogram descriptor (EHD) and micro-texture (MT) features are extracted using a common framework based on the FRAR model with BA. The extracted features are combined to form a feature vector, which is nor- malized and stored in image feature vector database. The feature vector database is categorized according to the nature of the images using the radial basis function neural network (RBFNN) and k-means clustering algorithm. The proposed system adopted Manhattan distance measure of order one to measure the similarity between the query and target images in the categorized and indexed feature vector database. The query refinement approach of short-term learning based rel- evance feedback mechanism is adopted to reduce the semantic gap. The experimental results, based on precision and recall method are reported. It demonstrates the performance of the improved EHD, effectiveness and efficiency achieved by the proposed framework.

Although, a number of techniques have been developed by the researchers, the retrieval accuracy of the existing CBIR sys- tems is still limited and unsatisfactory. Thus, there is a need of an increased attention for extracting compact and more bal- anced visual characteristics of an image. Moreover, most of the early studies extract various visual characteristics (color, texture, shape, etc.) of an image using various kinds of tech- niques, which is a cumbersome process due to the complemen- tariness of techniques.

images in HSV color space using a framework based on Full Range Autoregressive (FRAR) model with Bayesian approach (BA) [12,13,31]. In the proposed system, the effectiveness of FRAR model with BA in capturing the edge and texture fea- tures of gray-scale images is successfully incorporated into col- or images in HSV color space and the same framework is used to extract the color features of an image. The extracted fea- tures are combined, normalized and stored in a separate fea- ture vector database. The feature vectors in the feature vector database are indexed [32].

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The FRAR model is described in Section 2, while the feature extraction method is discussed in Section 3. Section 4 explains the RBFNN. The measure of similarity and performance is pro- vided in Section 5. The proposed retrieval system is explained in Section 6. Section 7 provides experiments and results. Final- ly, conclusion is formulated in Section 8.

In the proposed system, color feature is extracted from the H and S components of an image. The H and S components of the images are uniformly quantized using the Generalized Lloyd algorithm [5]. The number of quantization level (L) is fixed to 8. The autocorrelation coefficients (ak) are derived from the FRAR model coefficients Cr as follows:

where m is the lag variable, k is the order of autocorrelation coefficient and c represents the color. In the proposed system, the color autocorrelogram, which captures the spatial correla- tion between the identical colors at a distance l is computed for H and S components of an image. Since, the smallest distance gave the most detailed local properties of the image, the pro- posed system fix it to 1.

The retrieval performance of conventional EHD is im- proved in this paper by extracting the very minute and fine edges using a framework based on FRAR model with BA [31]. In the proposed system, V component image is used for edge extraction. After edge detection, orientation of each edge is computed and they are quantized into 72 bins of 5 degrees each, which is used to form an improved EHD.

While query image is posed to the proposed system, it automatically extracts the features of query image using a framework based on FRAR model with BA and finds the cat- egory of a query image using the RBFNN and performs sim- ilarity matching task using the L1 distance measure in the corresponding category of indexed feature database to fetch the target images. The retrieved images are ranked based on the similarity scores. An image with lowest similarity score is assigned higher rank. The user interaction is allowed in the fi- nal stage of retrieval process to refine the search.

