5, respectively. The complete algorithm is presented in Section 6. The execution of RBF on various multimedia data, as well as the implemen- tation and results of various analytical tests, are covered in Section 7. In Section 8, the study is concluded.

An image is made up of pixels of various values and is denoted in a matrix format. These values range from 0 to 255 for each colour of each pixel. Thus 1 byte i.e. 8 bits can be used to denote a pixel(in the case of grayscale images). There are various methods that can be used to generate the bitplanes, viz. Binary Bitplane Decomposition (BBD), Grey Code Bitplane Decomposition (GCBD), and Fibonacci p-code Bitplane Decomposition (FBD).

ing in encrypted images that preserves the correlation in the high-order bitplanes while compressing [29]. Song et al. propose an encryption al- gorithm that scrambles the bitplanes using chaotic logistic maps [30]. All of them employ the BBD (Binary Bitplane Decomposition) approach, while the suggested algorithms in [31,32], and [33] apply the Gray Code and Fibonacci p-code Bitplane Decomposition techniques[30].

This stage proves to be quite helpful in order to boost the unpre- dictability and complexity of the encryption process. Using the original keys frame rotation is applied on each bit plane separately. A frame is considered as the outline 1-pixel border square/rectangle of a plane at a particular distance from the edge. The frames in each bitplane are then rotated by a certain count in a circular manner in the clockwise direction.

This entire process is applied for three rounds. In the first round, the block size is 64x64, the block size in the next image is 32x32 and for the last round, the image is divided into 16x16 sized blocks. At the end of this step, the original image i.e. the decrypted image is retrieved.

The time complexity of an algorithm is primarily the total time re- quired for the encryption algorithm to encrypt an image. The total time increases as the size of the image gets larger. Thus the time complexity is a function of the size of the image. The following results display the time recorded for the encryption process for various images.

The combination of these methods helps the algorithm sustain vari- ous attacks. The RBF algorithm is completely lossless as the information in the image can entirely be recovered after decryption. The proposed technique is flexible in nature as it can work on images of any size. The described algorithm is robust in nature and can be used in day-to-day life for a variety of images. The evaluation and analysis of the RBF al- gorithm are explained in depth throughout the paper.

