The classical notion of minimization of an automaton has been extended to the compositional setting of Span(Graph) in [9], in particular with respect to branching bisimulation. Similar minimizations are the basis for compositional model checking (e.g. [2], [10], [12]), the attempt to circumvent the problem

of the exponential growth in state that may occur in exhaustive automated state-space searches. The method has been used in practical model checking programs (e.g. [4]) with success in a variety of problems, though the approach has been shown to have its limitations ([3]).

Every problem X1, X2, ... is bounded by the exponential function b(n)= cn, where c is the maximum number of states and transitions that an Xi may have. With regards to model checking, we are interested in problems that are bounded by polynomial functions.

Proof. The minimization of a labelled transition system with respect to branching bisimulation can be done in O(s(s + t)) time, where s is the number of states and t is the number of transitions ([7]). Since we assume the alphabet A (in which the interfaces are labelled) is finite, it can be done in polynomial time with respect to the number of states. Let us say that the time taken to minimize a span with s states is bounded by a polynomial f (s). Now suppose the polynomial q bounds the problem X1, X2,   Let c be the upper bound on

Remark 4.6 We give explicit descriptions of the four minimal spans F1, F2, F3, F4. From the proof of Lemma 4.4, it is clear that F1 has 4 states (corre- sponding to the cases 4,5,7 and 8 being empty), F2 has 6 states (cases 3 and 6 empty), and F3 (cases 3,7 and 8 empty) and F4 (cases 4,5 and 6 empty) have 5 states. We describe the minimal spans as sub-spans of the span Q which has 8 states (each state corresponds to one of the cases of the partition described in the proof of Lemma 4.4) and the following transitions:

F1 is the sub-span of Q with states 1,2,3 and 6. F2 is the sub-span of Q with states 1,2,4,5,7 and 8. F3 is the sub-span of Q with states 1,2,4,5 and 6. F4 is the sub-span of Q with states 1,2,3,7 and 8.

