such as Kronecker-based approaches [4], aggregation/disaggregation [18,5], abstrac- tion [16], approximation [25], symbolic approaches [12], and, of course, combinations thereof. One particularly attractive approach is known as compositional analysis. Here the general idea is not to analyse the model as a whole, but to analyse parts (components) of the model individually and then in some way combine the partial results in order to obtain the desired overall result.

The first contribution of this paper is to prove an impossibility result about the compositional model checking of so-called global time-unbounded CSL Until formulas. (CSL refers to the widely used Continuous Stochastic Logic [1], and the Until operator and its derivatives such as Eventually and Generally are the most important operators of this logic.) It is shown that this impossibility result holds not only for general compositional Markov models, but also for models with product form.

The further content of this paper is as follows: In Section 2, we introduce the Markovian modelling framework with a focus on product-form models, in particular models of Boucherie type. We also recapitulate the state-of-the-art of compositional model checking for such models and point out their current limitations (which are severe). In Section 3, we show that it is in general not possible to perform com- positional model checking for the CSL Until operator, if the subformulas refer to state properties of more than one component of the overall model, even for the time-unbounded case, and even for models of Boucherie product form. Section 4 is devoted to the problem of model repair by rate adaptation, which is closely related to model checking. Here we provide another impossibility result, but also state a proposition which allows compositional model repair for quite a general class of CSL global Until formulas. Section 5 concludes the paper with a short summary of its

Fourneau, Plateau and Stewart [9] assume a synchronisation-free system but with functional rates. So transitions of one component may depend on states of other components. Since the rates are functional, there is a set of transition matrices (instead of a single matrix) and using the kernel of these matrices and under certain conditions, it is proved that product form holds. By using functional rates, [9] generalises some previously published papers and it is proved that the Boucherie framework of competing Markov chains is one of them, where the rate function is an indicator function.

The paper [2] also addresses the question of compositional model checking of time-unbounded global Until formulas, but this part remains very vague and does not lead to a solution. As we will show in the next section, there is a good reason for this, and it is exactly at this point where we come in with the present paper and make our contributions. It actually turns out to be impossible to perform compositional model checking of global Until formulas, even in a Boucherie product form setting.

Note 1 The cases pk = tt and qk = tt are covered by the Proposition 4.3. In particular, if qk = tt, component Ck remains unchanged during model repair. Fur- thermore, the often used Eventually-operator (tt U . . . ) is covered by setting all pk to tt, which shows that the conditions imposed by the Proposition are not too restrictive for practical application.

Condition (ii) is important, since it guarantees that if Ck is in state sk that satisfies qk then none of the other processes is blocked by Ck, i.e. the other processes j /= k can still move along the j-dimension of the state space towards their qj-states.

Part (b): Example 4.1 is a non-Boucherie model where we saw that compositional model repair is not possible, which is a counterexample that proves the second statement of part (b). The first statement of part (b) (concerning the non-blocking condition (ii)) can also be shown by counterexample, but we do not provide such an example in this paper.	2

