This research article reports the novel UV-vis spectroscopic studies on as-synthesized conducting polyindole (PIn) through chemical polymerization route at room temperature using anhydrous ferric chloride as an oxidant. The complex optical properties of derived samples were studied by using UV-vis spectroscopy. The as-synthesized polymeric sam- ples exhibited absorption around 220e300 nm. The optical band gap was found to ranges over 4.630e5.224 eV. The maximum optical conductivity for 0.6 M FeCl3 was found to be

Now days, in the development of new efficient and enhanced materials, there was rising research focus towards the syn- thesis of conducting polymers like polyaniline (PANi), poly- pyrrole (PPy) and polythiopene (PTh) due to their high electrical conductivity, interesting electrochemical properties, and easy processability [1e3]. These electrical and electro- chemical properties of such conducting polymers show much assurance for commercial applications in battery materials [4], electrochromic devices [5], sensor technology [6], and nonlinear optics [7]. However, among various aromatic- compound-based conducting polymers, polyindole (PIn) has received excellent research interest due to its close structural similarities with the polymers mentioned above [8e10]. PIn is

This research article is intended by presenting a more systematic report on the novel complex optical study of as- synthesized PIn through chemical route using oxidant FeCl3 at room temperature. From the literature of materials science, not a single report present on the complex optical study of PIn synthesized using an oxidant FeCl3. The as-synthesized ma- terials were characterized through X-ray diffraction (XRD), field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) anal- ysis, and ultra violet-visible (UV-vis) spectroscopy.

The values of the optical band gap of PIn with different concentration of FeCl3 have been determined in the energy range 4.630e5.224 eV. The optical band gap energy values obviously  concluded  that,  this  material  has  potential

It can be observed that, the refractive index of as- synthesized material decreases with increase in photon en- ergy; it reflects that, the synthesized polymeric samples represent normal dispersion behaviour. The variation in n values with photon energy shows the interaction takes place between photon and electrons. Thus, we can attain the desired material for fabricating the optoelectronics devices by estimating the photon energy as internal energy of device depends on the photon energy. The decrease in extinction coefficient and refractive index with increase in photon en- ergy may be correlated with an increase in absorption coeffi- cient and decrease in the transmittance.

factor increases with decrease in photon energy. The real part of the dielectric constant decreases a little-bit rapidly with increase in photon energy in higher region but in lower region it decreases gradually. However, the imaginary part of the dielectric constant decreases gradually with increase in photon energy.

In the summary of present work, we successfully made attempt to discuss the complex optical properties of as- synthesized PIn samples with different concentration of FeCl3 as an oxidant through chemical polymerization method at room temperature. The amorphous nature of as-synthesized material confirmed through XRD as well as FE-SEM analysis. The absorption spectrum of as-synthesized PIn samples has been analyzed ranges over 200e500 nm for the determination of optical parameters. These as-synthesized polymeric sam- ples show absorption around the 220e300 nm. The least optical energy band gap was found to be 4.6302 eV, which corresponds

to PIn with 0.6 M of FeCl3. With the help of UV-vis study, we have represented the optical constant i.e. extinction coeffi- cient, refractive index, real dielectric constant, and imaginary dielectric constant. The optical conductivity increases with increase in wavelength and this can be attributed to increase in absorption. The as-synthesized PIn material with 0.6 M of FeCl3

