[5] communicated on the C-C thermal analysis for the porous sur- face Brinkman fluid model. Hayat et al. [6] highlight the C-C ther- mal and mass relaxation for magnetized flow using nanomaterial. Ali and Sandeep [7] researched the nonlinear radiation in Casson nanoliquid over a heated surface using C-C heat law. Entropy opti-

Entropy production is an indicator of the disorder created when thermal energy is converted into mechanical work. Any isolated closed system has it as a fundamental characteristic. Entropy addi- tionally addresses the properties of closed systems at the most minute scales and evaluates unpredictability at the molecular level. Rudolf Clausius first established the idea of entropy in 1850 by combining statistical and thermodynamic properties linked to isolated thermal systems. Entropy can be mathematically determined using the second law of thermodynamics. Bejan [11,12] provided irreversibility minimizing in the convective ther- mal flow concept. Mahesh et al. [13] covered entropy optimization in non-Fourier heat flux for hybrid nanomaterial flow towards a rotating disc with radiation impact in their study. Reddy et al.

The key characteristics of nanofluid is its ability to enhance heat conduction, which makes it one of the most significant qualities. The presence of the nanoparticles causes nanofluids to have greater thermal conductivity as compared to base fluids. Several factors have been identified as contributing to the improvement in thermal conductivity in nanofluids. The fact that nanoparticles have a large surface area and may transport heat more efficiently than bulk fluid is one of the key contributing aspects. The nanofluid entire thermal conductivity is influenced by the high thermal con-

[25] investigated radiative flow of nanofluid under variable ther- mal conductivity and diffusion using computational scheme. Naseem et al. [26] studied the occurrence of mass and heat trans- port with mutual influence of radiation, diffusion-thermo, thermal- diffusion, and fluctuating thermal conductivity over the porous surface together. On the mechanism of the effect of varying ther- mal conductivity Tarakanmu et al. [27] focused on three- dimensional nanofluid across a stretched surface. Ajibade and Umar [28] took into account how different thermal conductivity and viscosity affect the flow of mixed convection fluid and heat transmission through vertical channels. Some recent advancement relating the fluid flow and heat transfer with variable thermal con- ductivity are provided in the Refs. [29,30,31].

dies; cold doodling operations related to the production of poly- mers; and the preparation of goods in factories, hospitals, and automobiles and many others. The fluid flow across two inclined planes is a crucial and fundamental element of a physical model due to its significance in several fields, notably in mechanical, industrial, medical, and physiological activities. The flow of blood via capillaries and arteries, flows through canals, flows through cavities, and river flow are examples of converging/diverging chan- nels. The Jeffery-Hamel flow is a class of flows that Jeffery [32] and Hamel [33] first identified in 1915 and 1916, respectively. These flows explain the outflow and inflow of a viscous, incompressible

resemble biological fluids, such as blood, Xanthan gum, and poly- acrylamide gel solutions. The Carreau prototype will be helpful for comparing the characteristics of Newtonian and non- Newtonian liquids in a limiting case. The effects of the velocity slip condition with thermal radiation for a time-dependent Carreau nanofluid flow across a stationary or moving wedge have been investigated by Khan et al. [43]. They made the argument that the moving wedge velocity profile stands out more than the static wedge. The three-dimensional flow of the Carreau nanofluid past a linearly stretced heated surface has been investigated by Hayat et al. [44]. In order to evaluate the impact of Cattaneo-Christov heat through MHD stagnation point stream of Carreau fluid through an extended and diminishing substrate of the cylinder, Khan et al. [45] adopted the shooting approach (bvp4c).

In the current study, we have numerically analyzed the possible arrangements of parameter paired on the channel boundaries of an inclined porous annular enclosure for the converging channel flow of Carreau liquid and associated heat transport as well as entropy production. The effects of different parameters are investigated, including geometric inclination angle, porosity parameter, and Darcy number. Entropy generation contours and curves are used to demonstrate the flow pattern, thermal fields, and irreversibility distribution. Velocity distribution is analyzed in convergent and divergent sections. The thermal, concentration, entropy and Bejan profile are plotted and analyzed. Each effect is securitized in the

Be plot can also be used to support this. The Bejan value for lower k1 is greater than 0.5, indicating that only conduction mode may occur when heat transfer entropy is dominating. As k1 increases, the permeability improves and the resistance to liquid flow decreases, which triggers convection. With further improvement

in k1, the porous medium permeability improves and makes it easier for liquid to pass through. This increases friction irreversibil- ity, improves EG, and exhibits noticeable variety in improving k1. The strength of the flow will be larger in a non-porous container because the liquid does not encounter porous drag. This causes

tics of the Darcy parameter (k2) on EG and Be. In fact, when the value of (k2) rises, there is an increase in the amount of resistance created by friction and interactions between nanoparticles, which increases kinetic energy. For both convergent and divergent chan- nels, EG and Be are therefore enhanced.

