the literature in order to assign the formal meaning of processes. Every seman- tics determines which aspects of the behaviour of processes are of importance and which are not. Mainly because of the generality and diversity of the applications of process algebras, there is no prevailing semantics notion but rather there are a number of different proposals that have arisen from diverse approaches, contexts and applications.

In [10] many semantics were presented in a uniform way and compared with each other according to their distinction power. The result is the well known linear time- branching time spectrum. Furthermore, for most of the semantics also a complete axiomatization for a basic language of processes was provided.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, the preliminar- ies, notation, and basic definitions are presented. In Section 3, we introduce our constrained simulations that allow us to prove some general results, as the exis- tence of a conditional axiomatisation for any member of the family of semantics. These results are particularised in Section 4 for the classic nested simulation se- mantics. Constrained simulations also suggest a generalisation of nested simula- tions semantics, that is studied in Section 5. Section 6 is devoted to the definition of a bisimulation-like game for the (generalised) nested simulations semantics, the counting bisimulation game. We sum up our conclusions in Section 7, where we also discuss some lines for future work on the subject.

We also proved in [7] that other semantics can be characterised with bisimula- tions up-to, as it is the case for the n-nested simulation semantics. However, given that there exists no finite unconditional axiomatization for the n-nested simulation semantics, we cannot take advantage of their axioms. We overcome this problem in Section 6, where we get a coinductive characterisation of the nested simulation semantics based on counting bisimulations and bisimulations up-to.

After the results presented in Section 3, showing the regularity of the constrained simulations, Definition 4.2 of nested simulations can be naturally generalised. The new definition we propose, while keeping the nesting of simulations, is parameterised in its first floor by any behaviour preorder R.

symmetric condition, so that nested simulations become nearly bisimulations. But of course the symmetry is not total: the index has been decremented, so that it must be taken into account in order to differentiate the level of the nesting. In particular, when n becomes one, the bisimulation part of the game has terminated and the game reduces to checking the basic relation in the nested semantics. In particular, for classic nested simulation semantics the base game is plain simulation.

The main tool we have used to develop most of the results in the paper is the notion of constrained simulations. This notion is a generalisation of the ready simulation, which has been a recurrent topic in our recent research [7,8]. We have proved in this paper several results for constrained simulations, as the existence of a conditional axiomatisation, which can be applied in a very general setting.

Continuing with the study in [8,7], we have next addressed the problem of find- ing a coinductive characterisation for the nested semantics. For this purpose we have introduced the counting bisimulation game that, used in conjunction with the bisimulation up-to technique previously developed, allows to characterise the (generalised) nested simulation semantics. Counting bisimulation seems to be an interesting generalisation of the notion of bisimulation filling the gap between sim- ulation and bisimulation semantics. In the paper we only provide a proof of the characterisation of nested semantics by means of counting bisimulations for finite BCCSP processes, but we have also a more involved coinductive proof covering arbitrary processes.

We plan to further extend the results in this paper transferring them to the framework of nested trace semantics [13,2]. We hope in this way to achive a coin- ductive characterisation for every sematics in the linear time-branching time spec- trum. This is a much more elaborate work mainly because nested trace semantics are defined in a rather less elegant way than nested simulations, since traces in- stead of single actions are used in the transitions appearing in their definition. In particular, nested trace semantics do not coincide with the nested trace simulation semantics defined in Section 5.

