the most well-behaved system of description logic that has the broadest application, for any specific domain. As discussed in [7], considering versions of constructive de- scription logics makes sense, both from a theoretical and from a practical viewpoint. There are several possible and sensible ways of defining constructive description log- ics, whether your motivation is natural language semantics (as in [7]) or Legal AI (as in [9]).

Description logics tend to come in families of logical systems, depending on which concept constructors you allow in the logic. Since description logics came into existence as fragments of first-order logic chosen to find the best trade-off pos- sible between expressiveness and tractability of the fragment, several systems were discussed and in the taxonomy of systems that emerged the one called ALC (for Attributive Language with Complements) has come to be known as the canonical one. The basic building blocks of description logics are concepts, roles and individ- uals. Think of concepts as unary predicates in usual first-order logic and of roles as binary predicates, used to modify the concepts.

As far as constructive description logics are concerned, Mendler and Scheele have worked out a very compelling system cALC [12], based on the constructive modal logic CK [2]), a favorite 4 system of ours. However in this note we follow a different path and describe a constructive version of ALC, based on the framework for constructive modal logics developed by Simpson (the system IK) in his phd thesis [17]. We call our system iALC for Intuitionistic ALC. (For a proof-theoretic comparison between the constructive modal logics CK and IK one can see [14]).

Mendler and Scheele cite auditing of business as their motivational application. We envisage applying our system to legal AI, as one of us (Hausler) is tasked with developing prototypes for legal AI systems. We have presented a simplified case study of this application in [9] and [8]. We repeat its rationale here, in a simplified form.

The main reason to use an intuitionistic logic in legal reasoning is to have the ability to express partiality and incomplete information, beyond the standard open world assumption. Because the semantic meaning of our concepts should be context dependent, we need a constructive version of undefinedness that allows for intrinsic refinement of concepts. Classical description logic assumes that each concept is static and that at the outset either it includes a given entity or not. This corresponds to a binary truth interpretation. If we trade this static setting for a constructive notion of truth we believe this will provide us with a well-understood and more sophisticated way of dealing with refinement of concepts. Of course it remains to be seen if we can keep the other features that made description logics as useful as they have proved themselves, so far.

Besides further investigating the relationship between systems based on IK and systems based on CK, especially their semantics counterparts, we would like to implement a framework that would allow us to construct proofs in the three systems iALC, IK and IHL. The main application we envisage for our system at the moment is in knowledge engineering of juridical systems, as one of us (Hauesler) leads a project on this topic. This project is just beginning and time will tell if the initial intuitions concerning simplicity of modeling coupled with ease of implementation will bear fruit or not.

