The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 represents a brief literature review on applications of ARM in numerous areas. Section 3 elaborates on the concept and algorithm associated with ARM. Section 4 details the methodological approach used in this study. Section 5 is the results and discussion section and the paper is concluded in section 6.

a technique that may better assist in diagnosing the critical medical conditions; and finally, a programming interface was presented for such diagnosis. The interface offers a novel diag- nosis technique, based upon the relational ARs and the super- vised learning algorithm and helps in software development to report the probable approximation of the illness. The interface is flexible enough and can accommodate new types of symp- tom of any disease with very minuscule efforts. Gupta et al.

tant mining technique in many cases of health informatics. Distinguishably, this paper attempts to fan out the focus of the ARM in the recent public health concerns and implications of physical activity to regulate exercise patterns as a strategy toward healthy living. The strong association between physical activity and health benefits is widely reported in the literature already and low levels of physical activity are attributed as a major contributing factor to the higher health risk.

In this paper, we applied the concept of ARM to help explain and address the issue of physical activity and exercise patterns. More specifically, we associate mild exercise with regular sleeping pattern; there is good support and confidence that people will perform the exercise along with sleeping event. We propose that one should engage herself/himself in a mild exercise just before sleep. We further propose that the type of exercise is an open choice, but to avoid any disturbance in sleeping order, we recommend a light exercise. The next section describes the experimental evaluation of this study, utilizing the AR concept.

It is already stated that the core focus of the paper is to demonstrate the applicability of the ARM in health informat- ics instead of drawing conclusive statements about the sample dataset. This study is warranted on discovering the full potential of this important area of data mining research. The extension of ARM to health informatics presents several chal- lenging issues, for the development of effective and efficient methods and the sample of the dataset. Additional work is also needed to improve the efficiency of applying the concept to large dataset to deduce more proven concrete conclusions. We do, however, consider our approach as the first step toward more exhaustive applications of the concept that has, for the most part, focused on business applications. But, we hope this proof of concept study will invigorate additional

