We consider here time Petri nets and the covering steps graph technique proposed by Vernadat et al. for untimed Petri nets. In this technique, some transitions are put together to be fired in a single transition step. This paper investigates how this technique can be extended to be applied to time Petri nets.

Abstraction techniques aim to construct by removing some irrelevant details, a contraction of the state space, which preserves properties of interest. For better performances, the contraction should also be the smallest possible and computed with minor resources too (time and space). The preserved properties can be verified using the standard techniques on the contraction [11].

This paper investigates how the covering steps graph technique can be applied to time Petri nets (TPN in short). In section 2, we present the TPN model and its semantics. Section 3 deals with the abstraction of the TPN state space. Section 4 is devoted to the covering steps graph technique and its application to TPN.

Intuitively, the basic idea behind this relation is to eliminate information which are not needed to compute successor state classes. According with the firing rule given of the SCG, simple constraints 8 are not relevant for computing successor classes. Moreover, since the firing of a transition will disable all transitions conflicting with it, some time constraints between conflicting transitions are not relevant for com- puting successor state classes.

The relation of independence is however less appropriate for time Petri nets. In- deed, in the TPN state space abstractions, a node represents, in fact, a finite/infinite set of states (state class) and two interleavings of concurrent transitions may lead to two different state classes. We show, by means of two examples, up to which level state classes, resulting from the interleaving of concurrent transitions, may be different.

Theorem 4.4 and Lemma 4.5 below establish two sufficient conditions which ensure convexity for the union of state classes reached by different interleavings of the same set of transitions. They also show how to compute this union without computing beforehand intermediate state classes.

We proposed an extension to the covering steps graph technique [13] more appropri- ate to time Petri nets. The basic idea of this extension is to group, into an atomic step, the firing of some set of transitions such that the union of states reached by their different interleavings is convex. We proved however that this union is not necessarily convex. We then established two sufficient conditions sc1 and sc2 which ensure convexity for the contracted state class graph [3]. Moreover, we showed how to compute this union without computing beforehand intermediate state classes.

H. Boucheneb, H. Rakkay, A more efficient time Petri net state space abstraction useful to model checking timed linear properties In Proc of the 7th International Conference on Application of Concurrency to System Design (ACSD). IEEE Computer Society Press, 2007 (extended version accepted for publication in a special issue of Fundamenta Informaticae journal).

