237.2GW, with an annual growth rate of 15%. The cumulative installed capacity of pumped storage energy was less than 80% for the first time. Lithium-ion batteries still occupy an absolutely dominant position, with an annual growth rate of more than 85%, and their cumulative installed capacity in new energy storage has increased by 3.5% compared with 2021.

important for our energy industry and research, with great potential to redesign our future energy system. AI plays an important role in the field of lithium-ion batteries. It can improve the efficiency and safety of lithium-ion battery thermal management by processing large amounts of data, building models, and making predictions. [9] introduces the latest technology in battery modeling, on-board diagnostic tools, and data-driven modeling methods, and how to combine these

Given the critical role temperature plays in the performance of lithium-ion batteries, the development of lithium-ion battery thermal management systems has emerged as a prominent research focus [11]. [12] combined the long and short-term memory network (LSTM) with the temporal convolution network (TCN) for the first time and established a synthetic thermal convolutional-memory network (STCMN) for lithium-ion battery behavior diagnosis against noise interruptions. This experiment uses the commercial computational fluid dynamics software FLUENT to conduct a finite element simulation of the lithium-ion battery, and uses the lithium-ion battery terminal voltage, SOC, surface thermal image and other data in the simulation results as input to STCMN. [13] uses field experiments to prove that infrared thermal imaging can estimate thermal power well, and its value is very close to thermocouple data. In addition, the infrared method can quickly scan the measurement area and is a non-invasive analysis method. In contrast, thermocouples must be placed on the cell surface with a special highly conductive adhesive, and they have more complex acquisition systems. Therefore, infrared thermography can be considered a powerful method for not only qualitative assessment of thermal behavior, but also quantitative assessment of the heat generated by lithium-ion batteries. [14] performs infrared temperature measurement on lithium-ion batteries, obtains thermal images of lithium-ion batteries, and confirms its use for online evaluation of SOC during battery operation. [15] proposed a thermal inertia prediction model for a cylindrical battery validated using IR thermography measurements.

In the field of image generation, the current mainstream methods include the variational autoencoder (VAE)[17], deep belief network (DBN) [18], and generative adversarial network (GAN) [19]. The variational autoencoder is trained through the encoding and decoding of samples. Its primary drawback lies in producing images that may lack clarity and exhibit relatively lower quality, along with limited model generalization. The deep belief network, introduced by Geoffrey Hinton in 2006 [18], generates data based on maximum probability by training the weights between neurons. However, it faces challenges such as slow training speed, high sensitivity to parameter selection, a propensity to converge to local optima, and limited widespread application. Currently, the GAN proposed by Goodfellow et al. stands out as an algorithm with robust sample learning capabilities and finds extensive application in the field of generative modeling.

multi-layer network. If we set the clipping threshold slightly smaller, the gradient becomes smaller for each layer of the network, and it will decay exponentially after multiple layers. On the contrary, if set a little bit larger, each through a network, the gradient becomes a little bit larger, after multi-layer will be exponential explosion. WGAN optimization process is difficult because of interactions between the weight constraint and the cost

the function values of the samples of different distributions on f are obtained. By subtracting the two mean values, the mean discrepancy of the two distributions corresponding to f can be obtained. Finding a f such that the mean discrepancy has a maximum, we get MMD. Finally, MMD is taken as the test statistic to determine the similarity of the two distributions [32].

conducting experiments to assess the effectiveness of the model. We used the commercial software FLUENT to perform finite element simulation of a 10Ah prismatic LiFePO4-Graphite battery to obtain the battery data. The battery parameters are set as follows: Nominal Cell Capacity = 10Ah; Min Stop Voltage = 3V; Max Stop Voltage = 4.3V; Initial Soc = 0.7; The cathode is LiFePO4, the anode is graphite,

The data shows that the second set of experiments, compared to the first set, exhibited significant improvements across all metrics, indicating a positive impact of augmenting the dataset on the model's performance. The increase in both average accuracy and average recall suggests an overall enhancement in the model's performance. The improvement in fault detection accuracy also indicates a noticeable enhancement in the model's ability to classify different types of faults. In summary, the utilization of CWGAN-GP with ResNet for data augmentation has played a positive role in enhancing the model's performance in lithium-ion battery fault detection. This may provide more accurate results for fault diagnosis in practical applications.

Our research addresses the gap in using GAN to augment faulty samples in the field of lithium-ion battery thermal imaging. However, there is still a discernible gap in quality between the generated images and real ones. In the future, our efforts will primarily focus on two aspects: firstly, we will enhance the quality of generated lithium-ion battery thermal fault images by increasing network depth and adjusting its architecture. Secondly, we plan to conduct experiments to acquire genuine thermal images of faulty lithium-ion batteries. These images will be used as a dataset for CWGAN-GP with ResNet sample augmentation, allowing us to validate the effectiveness of this approach in practical applications.

