[3]; the third most in the world however, farmers in Pakistan face huge financial losses owing to a lack of technology and rapid cli- mate change. In recent past, it has greatly affected the production of dairy products and healthy meat that ultimately declines the economic condition of agricultural dependent countries like Pak- istan [4]. Therefore, the livestock farming sector must employ the newest technology to monitor and regulate livestock herds. Farm scientific technologies must be used to continuously monitor cattle health data to reduce production costs and battle diseases.

farmer to take intelligent and accurate precautions to avoid any loss [5]. This solution will include a reliable authentication scheme to guarantee only trustworthy nodes send data to the base station [6]. This ensures the authenticity and transportation of sensor data to the base station. Using an artificial neural network on real-time data will allow us to predict diseases. This information will also be provided on a web-based application for end-users to monitor cat- tle behavior. Only users who have authenticated can access this information.

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides the literature review of different health monitoring systems. Section 3 presents the IoT-based livestock infrastructure consisting of three layers i.e. physical layer, network layer, and application layer. Section 4 presents the research issues and the challenges. Section 5 presents the future research directions. Lastly, the article has been concluded in Section 6.

Handcock et al. presented a satellite, WSN, and GPS animal monitoring system and its ecological impact. Animal landscape interactions were created using satellite pictures and ground- based sensors [10]. Nadimi et al. designed a ZigBee-based animal monitoring system. The authors used a single-hop 2.4-GHz WSN to measure dairy cow motion. WSNs address animal behavior and pasture time [8].

MQ138 gas sensor is used for the detection of acetone [20]. To detect any gas, the sensor must be located near the mouth of the calf, or if it is placed in the sensor box, it must have an opening, which is impractical because the sensor box must be waterproof to protect other electrical components. Intake of food(grazing and rumination) can also be used to detect ketosis.

Outsider Security concerns the security of user-to-web applica- tion communication. It is implemented using Django-two-factor authentication. TOTP devices are generated per user to allow for multi-user 2FA [25]. TOTP allows for unique passwords generated through a standardized algorithm that uses time as an input. This allows the user to get their TOTP key even when they are offline.

with categorical values converted into nominal values using Scikit Learn Library [28]. One-Hot encoding and Label encoders both were used during the preprocessing phase. Label Encoder was used to convert each categorical value into a numeric value and then One-hot encoding was used to convert the data by splitting the output column into multiple columns depending on the initial value in the dataset.

The initialization procedure involved providing weights ran- domly and biases to the layer using Keras library. Following the completion of the initialization procedure, the created neural net- work must be trained Adaptive estimate of first-order and second- order moments was employed to update the weights of the neural network using the stochastic gradient descent approach called Adam optimization [32]. To learn something new, the learning algorithm must go through the training dataset a certain number of times, and this hyperparameter is expressed as epochs. The error between the target and computed output values is minimized iter- atively until the termination condition is fulfilled, i.e. the total net- work error is reduced to a predefined level or a predefined number of training steps has been reached. The model was fit on the train- ing set with a batch size of 10 and 100 epochs.

Access to the web dashboard is available to authenticated users only. Among numerous security techniques, authentication is the first line of defense and the foundation for access control. For Authentication, users must first be validated prior to being granted access to application data. Authentication is the process of estab- lishing that a person is who he or she claims to be [36] Authenti- cation allows the recipient of a message to verify that it has not been altered or corrupted.

SQLite is a C library that provides a fast, reliable SQL database engine [37]. This project uses SQLite, the most popular database engine. Using a valid id and password, the admin may access the database management system. The admin may add, remove, or change any product, gadget, or cow. Administrators may download any information. The admin may monitor new devices. The dash- board allowed for all of these functions.

