We investigate the enhanced mobile membranes, a new class of mobile membrane system in which new rules are introduced. The contextual evolution rules describe how an object from a membrane can evolve only in some context. The other rules describe the objective endocytosis and exocytosis. We use the class of enhanced mobile membrane system to model some evolutions in the immune system.

The immune system is described in [6], a book which is revised every few years to keep the pace with the new discoveries in this field. The cells of the immune system work together with different proteins to seek out and destroy anything foreign or dangerous which enters our body. It takes some time for the immune cell to be activated, but once this happens there are very few hostile organisms having a chance. Immune cells are white blood cells produce in huge quantities in the bone marrow. There are a wide variety of immune cells, each of them with its own strength and weakness. Some seek out and engulf the invaders, while other destroy the infected or mutated body cells. Another type of cells, namely the B cells, have the ability to release special proteins called antibodies which mark intruders in order to be destroyed by macrophages. The immune system has also the ability to produce some cells able to remember enemies which it fought in the past. In this way, once the immune system recognizes an invader it attacks more quickly and strongly against it.

The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we give a short introduction to the immune system, whereas in Section 3 we present the enhanced mobile mem- branes, namely the mobile membranes presented in [7] with additional rules. Some examples are given in Section 4, where we express some mechanisms of the immune system using the new class of mobile membranes. Some structural properties of the mobile membranes are presented in Section 5. Conclusion and references end the paper.

White blood cells called lymphocytes originate in the bone marrow but migrate to parts of the lymphatic system such as the lymph nodes, spleen, and thymus. There are two main types of lymphatic cells: T cells and B cells. The lymphatic system also involves a transportation system - lymph vessels - for transportation and storage of lymphocyte cells within the body. The lymphatic system feeds cells into the body and filters out dead cells and invading organisms such as bacteria. On the surface of each lymphatic cell are receptors that enable them to recognize foreign substances. These receptors are very specialized - each can match only one specific antigen. Once a macrophage phagocytizes a cell, it places portions of its proteins, called T cell epitopes, on the macrophage surface. These surface markers serve as an alarm to other immune cells which then infer the form of the invader. Macrophages engulf bacteria, process them internally, and display antigen parts on the cell surface together with MHC molecules. The MHC molecules (major histocompatibility complex) are molecules that display peptide antigen to T cells.

The only known function of dendritic cells is to present antigen to T cells, and the mature dendritic cells found in lymphoid tissues are by far the most potent stim- ulators of naive T cells. Immature dendritic cells persist in the peripheral tissues for variable lengths of time. When an infection occurs, they are stimulated to migrate via the lymphatics to the local lymphoid tissues, where they have a completely different phenotype. The dendritic cells in lymphoid tissue are no longer able to engulf antigens by phagocytosis or by macropinocytosis. However, they now express very high levels of long-lived MHC class I and MHC class II molecules; this fact enables them to stably present peptides from proteins acquired from the infecting pathogens. Tissue dendritic cells reaching the end of their life-span without having been activated by infection also travel via the lymphatics to local lymphoid tissue. Because they do not express the appropriate costimulatory molecules, these cells induce tolerance to any self antigens derived from peripheral tissues that they dis- play.

T cells undergo a selection process which retains those cells whose receptors interact effectively with various self peptide:self MHC ligands (positive selection), and removes those T cells that either cannot participate in such interactions (death by neglect) or recognize a self peptide:self MHC complex so well that they could damage host cells if allowed to mature; such cells are removed by clonal deletion (negative selection). Those T cells which mature and emerge into the periphery have therefore been selected for their ability to recognize self MHC:self peptide complexes without being fully activated by them. Cytotoxic or killer T cells (CD8+) do their work by releasing lymphotoxins, which cause cell lysis. Helper T cells (CD4+) serve

The B lymphocyte cell searches for antigen matching its receptors. If it finds such antigen, it connects to it, and inside the B cell a triggering signal is set off. Then a B cell needs proteins produced by helper T cells to become fully activated. When this happens, the B cell starts to divide to produce clones of itself. During this process, two new cell types are created: plasma cells and memory B cells.

h and m remain unchanged, but the multiset of objects u is transformed into the possibly new multiset of objects v during the operation. Mem- brane m is not necessarily elementary. The effect of this rule is similar to the effect of rule (c). The main difference from rule (c) is that the move- ment is not controlled by an object inside the moving membrane h, but by a multiset of objects u placed inside the membrane m which engulfs mem- brane h. Namely, the membrane which initiates the move is the passive membrane m, and not the active membrane h as in rule (c).

membranes remain unchanged, and the multiset of objects u is transformed into the possibly new multiset of objects v during the operation. Membrane m is not necessarily elementary. The effect of this rule is similar to the one of rule (d). The main difference from rule (d) is that the movement is not controlled by an object inside the moving membrane h, but by a multiset of objects u placed inside the membrane m which engulfs membrane h. Namely, the membrane which initiates the move is the passive membrane m, and not the active membrane h as in rule (d).

In each step we apply a maximal set of rules such that no further rule can be added to the set. The involved rules, objects and membranes are chosen nondeterministically, as follows: each object can participate in exactly one rule, while each membrane can participate as active in exactly one rule, or as passive in an arbitrary number of chosen rules. The application of the rules from the maximal set form an evolution step, called a transition step.

Dendritic cells can engulf bacteria, viruses, and other cells. Once a dendritic cells engulfs a bacterium, it dissolves this bacterium and places portions of bac- terium proteins on its surface. These surface markers serve as an alarm to other immune cells, namely helper T cells, which then infer the form of the invader. This mechanism makes sensitive the T cells to recognize the antigens or other foreign agents which triggers a reaction from the immune system. Antigens are often found on the surface of bacterium and viruses.

The mobile membranes are related to mobile ambients [4], having certain similar- ities and some common concepts. Ambients can also be nested, having a hierarchical structure. An ambients has a name, and can move with all the computations and subambients it contains. However the mobile membrane systems has local rules, very useful in modelling different behaviours of the system components. A for- mal relationship is given in [1] where a translation from mobile ambients to mobile membranes of [7] is defined; the soundness of this translation is provided by an operational correspondence result. Both formalisms can be used to model biolog- ical phenomena. In [5] we describe the sodium-potassium exchange pump using both mobile membrane systems and mobile ambients. A description of the sodium- potassium pump is given in [3] by using simply P systems (membrane systems

