The grammar builds on an approach in which standard generalisations about dependency relations interact with constraints on topology and ex- traction in the definition of a hierarchy of construction types of non-trivial coverage. More specifically, constituent order patterns well-known from field grammar analyses of Scandinavian languages are recast in terms of a hierarchy of constituent order types allowing for a succinct distinction between main and subordinate clauses on the one hand, and declarative and interrogative clauses on the other. Furthermore, different kinds of ex- tracted phrases are distinguished: this provides the basis for an account of topicalised constructions and various relative clause types. The constraint system set up also allows for multiple gap examples.

Field schemata have often been assumed necessary to account for the topology in languages exhibiting topological properties diverging from those found in English, e.g. German, Swedish and Danish, cf. [10] and [9]. In these accounts, instead of applying to local constituents in phrase struc- tures, a separate domain is assumed to which precedence statements based

on field schemata can be applied, cf. [5]. Importantly, constituents are lin- earised in this domain enabling precedence statements referring beyond local constituents. Here an account is presented which claims that Dan- ish topology and the relation between topology and clause type can be accounted for without such a separate linearised domain. The present account is based on a hierarchy of constructions with the two dimensions headedness and clausality, cf. [15] and [8]. In the headedness dimension, a marking feature encodes topology information in a subset of phrase types. The clausality dimension specifies clause types. A number of construc- tions are subsumed by both dimensions relating topology and clause type. This allows for a straightforward account of the relation between topo- logical properties such as subject-main verb inversion and adverb place- ment, and different clause types such as declaratives, interrogatives, main clauses, subclauses and topicalised clauses 3 .

An inverted subject (examples (1c) and (1d)) and nexus adverbs (exam- ples (1a) and (1b)) appear in the nexus field, and they mark constructions with values that are subtypes of marked. The inverted subject marks a construction as BCOMARKvn, a preverbal adverb as BCOMARKav, and a postverbal adverb as BCOMARKva. Non-inverted subjects and comple- ments mark a construction as BCOMARKunmarked, they appear outside the nexus field 6 .

Marking values change values throughout a construction. This means that on the top node of a construction, no record of lower level markings is kept. As it is the markings inside the nexus field that are interesting from the point of view of clause type, a second feature is needed, the BCObco feature (Basic Constituent Order). BCO is an attribute of head, also with

BCOMARK and BCO constrain the basic constituent order in (1a) as shown in (3) through (5). (3) is an example of a head-adjunct construc- tion. The verb is lexically underspecified wrt. BCO and BCOMARK. Its BCO value is constrained to va in a construction type, the hd-nexadjunct- non-cl type, and its BCOMARK value is constrained to marked in the same type ensuring that the adverb appears inside the nexus field. The value of BCO is structure shared by the head daughter and the mother, as BCO is a head feature. The marking feature BCOMARK, on the other hand, is structure shared between the non-head daughter and the mother.

In (4) a complement is attached. A complement marks the boundary of the nexus field, and the BCOMARK value passed on from the complement daughter to the mother is unmarked. A complement does not constrain the BCO and BCOMARK values of the head daughter, the former value be- ing passed on via the Head Feature Principle to the mother which remains BCOva.

Finally, in (5) a subject is attached. A subject also marks the boundary of the nexus field, and BCOMARKunmarked is passed on from the subject daughter to the mother. The head daughter is constrained to BCOsv-nv in a construction type, the subj-hd-ph type, and as the head daughter is BCOva, the values resolve to BCOsv, the only common subtype of sv-nv and va. This means that the subject is a non-nexus subject. In this way the postverbal adverb resolves the underspecification presented by a pre- verbal subject.

Our treatment of extraction builds in short on a proposal by Bouma et al [3], where a type gap-ss is used to establish a sharing of values be- tween the local features of the extracted constituent and an element of the SLASH list. In Section 3.2, we shall see that to account for the different types of extraction site, three different extracted phrases are distinguished corresponding to complement, subject and adjunct extraction. The hi- erarchy of Danish clause types is then extended in Section 3.3 with the relative construction types we are interested in 8 .

As already shown, topicalised clauses (decl-filler-hd-cl) are a type of declarative clause and filler-head phrase. Relative clauses are also declar- ative clauses, further constrained by the fact that they modify a nominal, and are grouped into three types. Som-relatives are filler-head phrases: the relative pronoun is the filler, and shares its REL value with the INDEX value of the modified noun. Bare relatives, on the other hand, are subject- head phrases: due to the absence of a relative pronoun, the INDEX value of the noun they modify is structure shared directly with the INDEX value of the first element on their SLASH list. Finally, the so-called resumptive der-clause, where the pronoun der is always used with subject function, is also a subject-head phrase. We claim that the pronoun in this case does not represent an extracted subject, although other complements may well be extracted from a resumptive der-clause. Therefore, no subject gap is posited, see example (7d). Evidence of this is provided in example (14):

The topmost S node is of type decl-fill-hd-cl, the higher SBAR is a som- subj-rel, the lower SBAR a hd-extracted-subj-ph, and finally the lowest VP is a hd-extracted-comp-ph. As for extraction, looking at the tree bottom- up, the first element on the SLASH list is introduced on the lowest VP node, and passed all the way up to the highest VP node to be bound to the LO- CAL value of the topicalised NP. The second element is introduced on the lower SBAR node to be bound to the LOCAL value of the relative som.

We hope to have shown that the constraints on topology and extraction relevant to Danish grammar can be expressed clearly and economically in a costruction-oriented approach. The implementation described here covers a number of Danish construction types of non-trivial complexity so far. However, expanding the size of the implementation is an ongoing pro- cess and we aim to achieve a coverage large enough for the implementa- tion to provide a good starting point for future applications. In the imme- diate future, we would like to deal with other clause types such as imper- atives, conditionals and wh-interrogatives. Also, we would like to extend the coverage to light objects and negated constituents which in Danish are positioned in the nexus field. The addition of other unbounded de- pendency constructions such as clefts are also planned. Further research is also needed to study the issue of extraction in presentational relative clauses, and to set up a typology of this interesting costruction for Danish.

