The Metaverse, as it gradually becomes a reality, offers great possibilities for education, providing a new dimension of engagement, interaction, and experiences for students and educators alike. Yet, researchers lack tools that would allow them to simultaneously examine a satisfactory number of factors that shape one's expe- rience when engaged in educational applications in the Metaverse. The study at hand is an attempt to fill this gap, as it reports the steps followed for the development and testing of the Metaverse Learning Experience Scale. The statistical analyses of data coming from 462 university students who participated in its testing, established the scale's validity and reliability. Its final version can capture the views of users using forty-three items, examining ten factors (namely, perceived quality of the virtual environment's graphics, perceived cognitive load, perceived ease of use/control of the virtual environment, immersion/presence, perceived feedback and content quality, perceived degree of interaction, motivation to learn and use the virtual environment, perceived usefulness/ knowledge gains, simulator sickness, and positive feelings. The scale's factorial structure together with the im- plications it has for research and practice are also discussed.

levels of interaction and engagement, people mostly associate it with 3D virtual environments and the use of AR and VR headsets (Doug, 2020). Moreover, it is questionable whether computers, smartphones, and tab- lets can offer high levels of such experiences. In light of the above, in this study, the Metaverse is defined as the sum of 3D virtual spaces in which users can experience high levels of immersion, engagement, and inter- activity through the use of xR headsets/devices.

Nevertheless, setting aside the problems in defining it, experts believe that the Metaverse can connect individuals from all over the world; thus, it can function as a central hub for various activities, including but not limited to gaming, socializing, education, and commerce (Ball, 2021). As a result, it can change how people access information and communicate. Though society has transitioned with the advent of remote workplaces, distance learning, and telemedicine, the Metaverse will expand the boundaries further, by bringing the workplace to the employee, the classroom to students, healthcare to patients, and shopping to consumers via immersive virtual worlds.

Similarly, Hair, LDS Gabriel, Silva, and Braga (2019) suggested a five-stage process: (i) definition of the domain (i.e., what the scale is supposed to measure), (ii) literature review for identifying items or, alternatively, interviews with experts, (iii) face validation, (iv) semantic validation/validation with possible responders, and (v) statistical validation.

When developing a questionnaire or scale examining factors affecting or shaping a variable of interest, researches usually have in mind which ones to include, depending on their interests, literature, context, and field of study. Yet, this can be viewed as a form of predetermination. For example, why a researcher decided to include factor A and not factor B or both; what makes a given factor more important than another; what if researcher A defines/views a factor differently than researcher B, resulting in different items examining the same concept; what to do when the phenomenon is too complex and many factors have to be considered? These are valid questions raising concerns not for the validity of the in- struments (as this can be established through robust procedures) but for their comprehensibility. Thus, in this study, a different, more holistic approach was followed.

As mentioned in the introduction, in this study, the Metaverse is viewed as the sum of highly immersive and interactive 3D spaces, accessed using xR headsets/devices. On the other hand, according to a recent systematic literature review on the educational uses of the Meta- verse, in which studies published from 2011 to 2022 were included, the authors found that, among the Metaverse's technologies, VR is, by far, the most researched one (Alfaisal, Hashim, & Azizan, 2022). There was a similar finding in the review of Tlili et al. (2022). As a result, it was decided to review the instruments used in past research in which educational applications were used together with VR headsets, and the impact on learning (or on factors related to learning) was examined. Besides selecting items to include in the scale under development, the objective was to have a better understanding of which factors other re- searchers considered important in shaping one's learning or learning

experience in the Metaverse. A scoping review that analyzed eighty-seven studies provided the basis for this endeavor (Atsikpasi & Fokides, 2022). That is because its focus was on the educational uses of immersive VR and the use of VR headsets; thus, it was closely related to how the Metaverse is viewed in this study. The papers included in the review of Alfaisal et al. (2022) were also considered, as a precautionary measure, given that it examined technologies other than VR.

The papers included in the above-mentioned reviews were examined in terms of the instruments they used. When a study adapted another study's instrument the original was included, together with any other factors/items the researchers added. Sixty-two questionnaires/scales were located (as some studies used the same instruments), having a total of 1634 items, examining 172 factors and sub-factors.

re-checked and the conceptually similar ones were removed, regardless of the factor to which they initially belonged (374 items). It should be noted that the purpose was to transfer to another stage the control of whether or not an item examines one of the above difficult-to-define factors and whether or not it should be included, instead of deciding this at the present -early- stage, in which the personal opinion of the researcher might influence these decisions. It was also decided to create the following constructs: (i) learning enjoyment and enjoyment while using the virtual environment and (ii) motivation to learn and motivation to use the virtual environment. That is because in some cases the re- searchers were interested in motivation and enjoyment in relation to learning and in other in relation to the devices or applications that were used.

The procedure resulted in MLES's initial draft, consisting of 208 items, coming from thirty-eight questionnaires/scales. Readers can find the complete list of the contributing questionnaires and scales in Appendix I. The items were theorized to belong to fifteen constructs, namely (i) im- mersion and presence, (ii) motivation to learn, (iii) motivation to use the virtual environment, (iv) learning enjoyment, (v) enjoyment while using the virtual environment, (vi) perceived ease of use/control of the virtual environment, (vii) positive feelings, (viii) negative feelings, (ix) simu- lator sickness, (x) perceived degree of interaction, (xi) perceived use- fulness/knowledge gains, (xii) relevance to personal interests, (xiii) perceived quality of the virtual environment's graphics, (xiv) perceived cognitive load, and (xv) perceived feedback and content quality.

The purpose of this stage was not to pilot the scale, but rather the examination of the difficulties the responders might face. Thirty uni- versity students were recruited. It has to be noted that the participants in this stage were not included in the next one. During a meeting, the scale's application was explained and they were asked to assist in the process of refining it by commenting on how easy is to understand its items.

There are no exact demographics regarding who uses the Metaverse (given the multiple definitions of the term), but data suggested that there are around 400 million active monthly users, more than half of them being registered users of a social/gaming platform (230 million). In fact, most users are gamers, out of which 51% are under the age of thirteen (Nikolovska, 2022). Then again, the study focused on the educational uses of the Metaverse. In an educational context, again no data are available, but an educated guess is that systematic users are more likely to be educators and individuals aged sixteen to late twenties (Tlili et al., 2022). Moreover, most studies in this field focused on higher education (Atsikpasi & Fokides, 2022; Tlili et al., 2022).

the study's procedures (in addition to the permission that was already granted by the Department's Ethical Committee). This number of par- ticipants satisfied Kline's (2016) suggestion for at least 200 cases, was within Bentler and Chou's (1987) suggestion of five to ten observations per estimated parameter, and above Hair's, Black's et al.'s (2019) sug- gestion of five responders per item.

next step was to fill out the MLES online (using a Google form). The whole procedure lasted around 75 min. In case there was an incident of severe simulator sickness, users were instructed to remove the VR headset and rest, but were asked to fill out the MLES, given that simulator sickness is an important side effect of the use of VR headsets. In case of mild simulator sickness or discomfort, the decision to continue or stop the experiment was left to their discretion.

Since the scale was based on selected items from multiple sources that were adapted and translated into Greek, it was essential to conduct an EFA, for uncovering its underlying structure and for establishing the relationship between the variables and the latent constructs. PAF was selected as the extraction method, as the covariation between variables is taken into account (Kline, 2015). Direct Oblimin was selected as the rotation method, given that oblique (nonorthogonal) rotations produce more accurate results when the research involves human behaviors (Costello & Osborne, 2005) and offers a more realistic representation and easier interpretation of the data (Fabrigar & Wegener, 2012).

conceptual relevance to a factor, and (v) conceptual inconsistency with the items in the same factor (Costello & Osborne, 2005; Hair, Black, Babin, & Anderson, 2019; Tabachnick & Fidell, 2007). Every time an item was removed, the analysis was re-run, to ensure that there were no major effects on the scale's structure. This process resulted in the elimi- nation of twelve items, while forty-five items were retained belonging to ten factors.

For conducting the CFA, AMOS 28 was employed using the remaining half of the data. Prior to conducting the analysis, the internal consistency was re-checked. No substantial variations from the initial assessment were noted. Maximum Likelihood was the estimation method of choice,

0.50 level (Hair, Black, et al., 2019). For assessing the scale's discriminant validity, the heterotrait-monotrait ratio of correlations (HTMT) tech- nique was used, as the sensitivity of shared variance in capturing discriminant validity issues between constructs has been questioned (Henseler, Ringle, & Sarstedt, 2015). The discriminant validity was established as all the HTMT values were below the strict threshold of

presence either remained under the umbrella of the unified factor (immersion/presence) or were dropped as they loaded very low in other factors. On the other hand, it is suggested that, although not identical, the two concepts are very closely related; immersion reflects the technical qualities of the system that aid or lead to the feeling/experience of presence (Witmer, Jerome, & Singer, 2005). In this respect, it can be argued that having a single factor in MLES to examine both concepts, reflects this close relationship. Moreover, because of this close relation- ship, it can be argued that the same factors influence both, while both influence the same factors.

there was just a handful of responses with values ranging from two to five; almost all were ones. While this result was not good for statistical procedures, it can serve as an indicator that participants' negative feel- ings (e.g., stress, nervousness, and irritation) were almost nonexistent. Nevertheless, the items in this factor are presented in Appendix II, so that future studies might consider them.

As for the number of factors, it is an issue of balance between complexity and stability. It is true that more factors could have been included. Collaboration (in the case of multi-user applications) and self- efficacy (commonly included in other questionnaires/scales) are good examples. Readers might come up with even better examples. Then again, during the EFA, factors were merged, items theorized to belong in a factor ended up in different ones, and several items were removed. Thus, it is probable that, in more complex factorial structures, such issues will become even more pronounced, resulting in conceptually obscure ones. As this was not the case in MLES and on the basis of its good at- tributes, as these emerged during the EFA and the CFA, it can be sup- ported that the scale is quite robust and able to accurately measure a sufficient number of factors that come into play in shaping one's learning experience when using Metaverse applications.

consistency, validity, and reliability), are indicators of its robustness. Moreover, because the scale is fairly short, individuals can complete it in around ten to 15 min, without being overwhelmed. Thus, it can be argued that the scale's contribution to research is that it provides a condensed tool able to simultaneously measure multiple aspects of one's learning experience. Hopefully, this can lead to the much-desired com- mon methodology for assessing the Metaverse's educational impact.

A logical assumption is that the scale has a modular structure. The strong items' factor loadings and the factors' reasonable cross- correlations imply that factors can be excluded without altering the scale's validity. Indeed, to test this assumption, several EFAs were run, in which up to four randomly selected factors (and their items) were removed (e.g., perceived cognitive load, perceived feedback and content quality perceived degree of interaction, and positive feelings). In all cases, the factorial structure remained unchanged, while no items were removed. In this respect, researchers can use the scale for assessing different affordances, depending on their interests and needs. For example, if the researchers are not interested in interactions, they can remove the corresponding factor.

The scale can be administered to diverse groups of learners, for example, those belonging to different levels of education, having varying degrees of academic performance, and different levels of experiences in the Metaverse. Thus, application developers can either sum the items' scores and have a composite index of their learning experience or focus on certain components. By comparing the results, they can determine what needs to be changed. The same can be done for different versions of the same application. Researchers and educators can also benefit in a similar fashion. By administering different systems, they can evaluate the differences in students' learning experiences.

established as a valid tool. Different target populations, a greater variety of applications, and xR technologies will provide evidence of how well the scale functions and what revisions have to be made. The addition of other factors that shape one's learning experience can be considered (e.g., self-efficacy, collaboration, negative feelings, and relevance to personal interests), though one has to be cautious not to disturb the factors' deli- cate balance. Finally, a research path of great interest is to use the MLES together with tests that measure the learning outcomes produced by a Metaverse educational application. This will offer insights into how the scale's factors interact and what impact they have on learning.

The Metaverse is just around the corner and its applications have the potential to become valuable tools in the hands of educators. Yet, re- searchers and education stakeholders have to first understand this po- tential. To this end, instruments are needed, able to outline what learners feel and think when using Metaverse applications. This was the study's primary objective. Through the previous sections, the various steps that led to the development and psychometric validation of the MLES were elaborated. In conclusion, it can be argued the study's contribution is the development of a scale that can be used to evaluate a variety of educa- tional applications in the Metaverse context. By being consistent, valid, and reliable, the scale provides a robust tool to measure a substantial number of factors shaping one's learning experience. Furthermore, the scale's brevity makes it accessible to individuals who can complete it in a short amount of time. Given the above, the tool has the potential to provide researchers, educators, and developers with valuable insights into the effectiveness of educational applications in the Metaverse. As such, it is hoped that its use will assist the scientific community in reaching a better understanding of the impact of Metaverse.

