the security. The trilinear system is built from logistic and cubic maps and generates six completely ran- dom bijections T1(x); T2(x); T2(y); T3(x); T3(y); and T3(z). The map T1(x) randomly shuffles the image pix- els, the two maps T2(x) and T2(y) scramble the position of the pixels, and the other three maps change the pixel values. The correlations among the three components of RGB components are reduced, and the

A variety picture consists of many lines and segments of pixels; these pixels have specific values that address the level of the vari- ety in the picture. As a result, the color image is represented as a three numerical matrix for each small area to define the color. Image security is a crucial issue because sensitive images can invite attacks from different places. The transformation of a plain image into a different cipher image is the goal of image encryption. Due to its sensitivity to initial parameters, high security and totally ran- dom performance, chaos theory is used in image encryption. Mat- thews created the first chaotic system in 1989 [1]. Numerous scientific algorithms have defined image encryption with a few secret parameters based on one- or two-dimensional chaotic sys- tems. This work conquers the past works by offering a totally irreg- ular multi-layered framework with different mystery boundaries. The presented chaotic system simultaneously encrypts RGB image and their components. The proposed chaos system consists of six

UACIR, G, B greater than 33.44%. The previous work demonstrate that our method is extremely sensitive to minute changes in the input image; even if the two input images differ by just one bit, the out- put images still differ somewhat.

Ahmed H. Abu El-Atta received the BS and MS degrees in computer science from Benha University, Egypt in 2005 and 2011, respectively, and the PhD degree from Benha University, Egypt, in 2018. He works as a lecturer and researcher at Benha University, Egypt. His current research interests include graph theory, pattern recog- nition, NLP, and steganography.

