The paper is organized as follows. A brief review of related works is presented in Section 2. The methods and materials including dataset collection, the development of combined networks, and performance evaluation metrics are described in Section 3. Extensive result anal- ysis with relative discussions is illustrated in Section 4. Finally, the conclusion of the paper is drawn in Section 5.

InceptionV3: InceptionV3 [50] is used to improve computing resources by increasing the depth and width of the network. It has 48 layers with skipped connections to use a building block and is trained on million images including 1000 categories. The inception module is repeated with max-pooling to reduce dimensionality.

The performance of the developed system is measured in terms of AUC, accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score. The evaluation metric parameters are represented mathematically in the following. Here, correctly classified COVID-19 cases are denoted by True Positive (TP), correctly classified pneumonia or normal cases are represented by True Negative (TN), wrongly classified as COVID-19 cases are denoted by False Positive (FP), and wrongly classified as pneumonia or normal cases are depicted by False Negative (FN).

0.02 and 0.09 at epoch 100. On the contrary, the lowest training and validation accuracy is obtained 98.03% and 94.91% and loss is 0.05 and 0.26 at epoch 100 for the InceptionV3-RNN network. Analyzing the loss curve, it is seen that the loss values of VGG19-RNN decrease faster and tends to zero than other networks.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, the use of deep learning techniques for the diagnosis of COVID-19 has become a crucial issue to overcome the limitation of medical resources. In this work, we used CNN with deep transfer learning and RNN to classify the X-ray samples into three categories: pneumonia, COVID-19, and normal. The four popular CNN networks were used to extract features, which were then applied by the RNN network to identify different classes. The VGG19-RNN is considered the best network with 99.9% accuracy, 99.9% AUC, 99.8% recall, and 99.8% F1-score to detect COVID-19 cases. Hopefully, it would reduce the workload for the doctor to test COVID-19 cases.

