What is still lacking in all these approaches is an analysis of dialogue games in multi-agent systems that can cope with epistemic modalities. We consider locutions to be inconsistent when the information content is inconsistent or when the information content is contradictory with the content of other lo- cutions. Information is biased when an agent has more evidence to believe a statement than to disbelieve it, or vice versa. Such an information state may be inconsistent but biased in the true or false directions. Agents performing belief revision [7] prevent their belief state from becoming inconsistent; the agents we are to present have by definition no aversion to inconsistencies. To make this possible, we introduce a multi-valued logic in which we can focus on the semantics of inconsistent and biased information exchange in conversation. Our objective is to show that in dialogue games inconsistent and biased information can be dealt with consistently. To do this, we introduce truth- values from bilattice structures [8,6] in all aspects of the dialogue game. As a result, the cognitive state of the agent can be formulated as a set of multi- valued (logical) theories based on the bilattice structure. The update and dialogue rules are defined to cope with biased and inconsistent information. In this approach, agents can deal with monotonic information additions leading to possibly inconsistent information states without being forced into belief

A fictitious dialogue from Sesame Street serves as a running example. In this example Elmo wants to know (which is not shown in the dialogue) whether he can go play outside. He states this in a question 2 directed to Oscar (line 1); the answer is distributed between Tv, Grover and Oscar, and, after a number of other questions and answers, Oscar gives two answers (line 5 and 7). Note that the uttered information becomes inconsistent, but, as will become clear, no belief revision occurs.

The remainder of this article is structured as follows. Inconsistent and biased information is formalised using bilattice structures and a multi-valued logic based on these structures is described in section 2. In section 3 our dialogue game based on a multi-valued logic is presented. In addition, the example dialogue is translated into a formal one. A proof of the validity of the example dialogue is given in section 4; we conclude with section 5.

In the Sesame Street example dialogue, a classical truth-value is used when Oscar asks Tv whether it is true that it rains outside (line 2). This informa- tion state is represented with truth-value true. The answer conveys a biased information state, because, when Tv says that it rains outside and also that he is not sure (line 4), Tv states that his epistemic state is biased to true that it rains outside. An inconsistent information state occurs (in line 7) when Oscar says that Elmo cannot play outside and also that maybe he can. The information content of this utterance is biased to false, because Oscar says that it is false and partially true that Elmo can go play outside. Obviously, this information is not very helpful to Elmo. Nevertheless, Elmo needs to have a method to handle incoming inconsistent information, if he is to decide later what to do with it.

In Lebbink et al. [13] an analogous situation is described in which agents are motivated to offer information to others. If an agent x desires that another agent y is to believe a proposition and x is not aware that y already believes the proposition, then x is allowed to offer y the proposition.

Depending on the cognitive state of the agents, belief statements can have different roles in a dialogue. That is, a belief statement can be a partial, over- informative or minimal answer to a question. A belief statement from agent x to agent y is applicable as a partial answer when x considers y interested in a sentence, but this sentence does not (necessarily) balance the belief and desire state of y.

If an agent states a sentence that is part of the upper bound of a manifested desire state, then this statement is less informative that an over-informative answer. Nevertheless, it balances the desire and belief state without stating more information than asked for. This belief statement has the role of a minimal answer.

