The answer is affirmative: in this paper we introduce directed bigraphs, which subsume and generalize both previous theories. A directed bigraph is composed by a place graph and a directed link graph, which is a natural generalization of input- linear link graphs and output-linear link graphs. In this model, we give a construc- tion of RPOs (and IPOs), generalizing and unifying the known constructions in the previous models (Actually, the IPO construction for input-linear bigraphs obtained in this way is the first one, up to our knowledge). Moreover, since the (pre)category of directed link graphs turns out to be self-dual, the RPO construction can be used

Directed link graphs can be alternatively defined as the composition of an input linear link graph and an output linear link graph defined on the same support (as suggested by R. Milner). Notice that to this end, control ports must be partitioned in two subsets: those used in the input linear link graph and those used in the outer linear link graph. This corresponds to assign a precise direction (either upward or downward) to the connections. Notice in this way, the constraint that two names of the same interface cannot be linked together, is automatically ensured.

Finally, one may wonder whether this construction can be used for calculating locally universal hexagons (luxes). Actually 'DLG does not have all luxes, although it has RPOs and RPBs. In fact, it is easy to construct an hexagon such that its RPO and RPB do not commute; the result follows from [5, Theorem 1].

Actually, an RPO construction in 'ILG can be recovered by noticing that input- linear link graphs correspond to input-linear cospans over a certain adhesive cate- gory LGraph of hypergraphs, as observed in [12]. Thus we can apply the general (G)RPO construction presented in loc. cit. (and fully detailed in [14]). In this pa- per, for a more direct comparison with the constructions in 'DLG and 'OLG (and in order to avoid to introduce 2-categorical machinery), we present a version of this construction tailored to the specific precategory 'ILG.

Future work We plan to use directed bigraphs for representing some calculi of inter- est, in particular calculi with resources, locations, etc., which can be represented by edges. It will be interesting to see which kind of wide transition system we would obtain from our theory, in these cases.

