Q.E should be read as: the agent with name A (Alice) runs the program E with qubits and in- and outputs as specified. An agents thus is a piece of code running on a particular processor. In this context, it only makes sense

From now on, we denote I =  iIi for the set of input qubits and O =  iQ' for the set of output qubits, and call D(HI) and D(HO) the quantum input and output space respectively. The semantics of a network with respect to a schedule is thus that it relates quantum states in D(HI) plus classical input to quantum states in D(HO) and classical output with particular probabilities. Note that the type of the transition system is a mapping from initial to final sorts; this component is identical in the denotational semantics we develop in Sec. 2.2.

we throw away all distributed information, that is, sorts and communication events, we just have an ordinary pattern, i.e. a quantum operation. There is one caveat: since computation occurs asynchronously, there is usually some choice in the order in which different agents execute events in their program,

i.e. there are different possible schedules. However, since at each instance of the computation local events operate on disjoint sets of qubits, it does not ac- tually matter in which order these operations are applied, or, in fact, whether they are executed at the same time. This statement is proved formally in Sec. 2.4; we postpone the full proof until then since it has bearing on other situations that are covered below. Therefore, any schedule of the computa- tion leads to the same quantum operation. So to determine the operation elements of L, we choose a particular schedule, and then compose patterns in

Suppose now that the network contains classical outputs o = ioi. We need to make a distinction between signal outputs, which are measurement outcomes, and external outputs, which are values that were originally input by some agent and sent around the network. By definition, the external out- puts oe =  ioi,e depend only on the classical input i; these constant values are sent around the network via classical channels. It is precisely the signal outputs os = ioi,s that depend on the quantum operation and vice versa. Indeed, when there are signal outputs particular measurement outcomes are

in the denotational semantics these are contained within the quantum op- erations. It is this abstraction, together with schedule-independence which makes the denotational framework advantageous. Indeed, classical inputs are the same for all schedules, and classical outputs, depending on classical inputs and measurement values, thus occur with the same probabilities for all sched- ules, since L is schedule-independent. Putting all of this together, we arrive

where os = o1,s  o2,s, and the quantum operations operate on the same I and O as above. So we only need to check that first composing the quan- tum operations and then restricting them is the same as first restricting and then composing. However, this follows from the analogous result for ordinary patterns [2].

The proof, while easy, is not trivial, and has several important conse- quences. First of all, it shows that our statement in Sec. 2.2 on the fact that networks are schedule-independent is true. Indeed, agents transform parts of a shared entangled state via local operations, and the above results shows that any order results in the same multilocal quantum operation. Next, while we

