The relevance of modal logic in philosophy and mathematics is well established. Moreover, its importance in computer science has come of age (see [14] for a brief introduction to modal logic from the computer science point of view). For in- stance, the monadic and computational interpretations of modal logic [6,4] for various type theories are deeply related to concurrent and distributed computa- tions [21,32]. These applications entail the need for a verification process which nowadays cannot be thought of without the help of a proof assistant.

Let us observe that the necessitation rule concedes us to introduce a 2 operator only if the formula to be boxed is a theorem. This restriction solves the controversy around the validity of the deduction theorem. Moreover, the (MP) rule (MP) is stated in a multiplicative (independent contexts) style. The reason is that this is the natural way for the establishment of a correspondence of HS4 with usual axiomatic systems, that is, those that do not handle hypotheses. This choice departs from the treatment in Kavvos [17] and also poses some challenges for the formal verification, as discussed in our previous work [12]. Let us also note that, since axiom 3T is present, there is no need for an inference rule involving the 3 operator (though see Lemma 3.6 below).

Since contexts are lists, the deduction theorem allows us to discharge only the last assumption in the context. To be able to discharge any hypothesis we must either use structural rules implicitly or prove a generalization. We choose the second option and spell out the proof which, though quite simple, serves to show the, to the best of our knowledge, novel method of proving the admissibility of an inference rule by induction on the context. Of course, what is new here is to use a routinary induction on lists (contexts) to prove the admissibility of a rule.

authors mention, their system has an explicit propositional reasoning and only an implicit judgment reasoning, saying that the derivability relation is subject to the inclusion of A true in A poss. The more convenient way to implement this feature is by an explicit rule called here (TP), which converts a True judgment into a Possibility judgment. Here, the derivability relation is mechanized by an inductive definition, given by the inference rules below, which corresponds to a shallow embedding of derivability. Therefore the explicit statement and use of rule (TP) is mandatory. This rule, which can be considered as an introduction of possibility, is mentioned in [24] as an alternative formulation, less efficient than the current system, including only the definitions for modal operators and the rule (TP) as the introduction of the A poss judgment.

We have two starting rules corresponding to both types of hypotheses, they are stated in the most general way granting us to infer any formula that belongs to a context, not only the first or the last one. The rule for introduction of necessity (2 I) exactly captures the definition of validity through a categorical judgment, whilst the rule of necessity elimination (2 E) behaves as a substitution or cut rule where the formula 2A is used as lemma A in the valid hypotheses in order to prove a conclusion judgment about C. The judgment A poss is explained with a combination of valid and true judgments by the rules (2E-Poss), (TP), (3 I) and (3 E). The second elimination rule for the 2 operator is given in order to conclude a local truth as

In this section we present some useful admissible rules which, though quite natural are, to the best of our knowledge and with the exception of Lemma 4.10, an original contribution gained again from the full interaction with the Coq proof assistant. The next statements are an abridge presentation of the ones included in our formal- ization. In there, the different rules are similar statements formulated separately for valid and true contexts combined with true and possible conclusions.

We discuss next a result not present in [24], namely a transfer process between contexts. This is an inference principle that captures the fact that valid formulas are necessary truths, meaning that a formula A belonging to a valid context can be considered as a necessary truth. This is achieved by deleting A from the context of valid assumptions, while adding 2A to the context of true hypothesis.

as pure (non-modal) propositions and vice versa. This feature considerably simpli- fies the actual construction of proofs and sometimes allows us to replace a modal reasoning by a simpler propositional one. Like in the example below, where there is no need of using the modal reasoning provided by the rule (2E).

In this section we prove the translation of natural deduction proofs to axiomatic derivations. The idea is to follow Proposition 4.13, or rather Corollary 4.14 to empty the validity context, thus getting only a context of true assumptions which can be directly managed in HS4. The translation proof will be achieved by induction on NS4-derivations.

