A large body of literature has focused on the connection between trading volume and return in the stock market (Chen and Song, 2000; Truong et al., 2022; Wang and Wu, 2002; Zhao and Xue, 2005) and identified correlational and causal relationships (Chen and Song, 2000; Wang and Wu, 2002; Zada, 2021). However, some studies have shown that their correlation is weak (Karpoff, 1987) and that trading volume does not act as the underlying cause of return (Alhussayen, 2022; Lee and Rui, 2002). According to the mixed distribution theory proposed by Clark (1973) and Tauchen and

Other studies have addressed whether trading volume can predict volatility by exploring their dynamic relationship. Brooks (1998) investigated whether lagged trading volume could improve volatility forecasting based on the GARCH family models and found that the addition of lagged trading volume only slightly improved the prediction of volatility. Liu (2007) and Yang (2005) also obtained similar conclusions: insufficient effective and robust evidence is available to explain the connection between trading volume and market fluctuations. Sun et al. (2019) focused on predicting stock volatility by trading volume information in both the stock and foreign exchange markets. They found that information related to trading volume is useful for forecasting stock volatility. However, this trading volume information only has an indirect influence on price in the foreign exchange market. Thus, despite being influenced by factors such as market maturity, trading volume holds considerable explanatory significance for market fluctuations (Bessembinder and Seguin, 1993; Ni et al., 2008; Wen et al., 2013; Zhang and Ma, 2007).

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly introduces econometric models, including the linear VAR and MS-VAR models. Section 3 presents the empirical analysis of the Chinese stock market using the MS-VAR model. Section 4 provides a robustness analysis, and Section 5 concludes this paper with possible policy implications.

The vector autoregression (VAR) model proposed by Sims (1980) is useful for handling multiple endogenous time series variables. It incorporates endogenous variables and lagged values into its model structure. The ordinary VAR model, which assumes linear relationships between variables, is also known as the linear VAR model.

In practice, relationships between the two variables can vary across different periods due to changes in policies, environmental factors, economic situations, or external shocks. To extend the traditional VAR model, Hamilton (1989) introduced the Markov switching regime change model, namely the MS-VAR model. Such a nonlinear MS-VAR model is adept at uncovering hidden stock market states. It further facilitates the examination of the dynamic interplay among stock market characteristics across various regional systems.

1. In regime 3, the intercept of return is not significant, while those of volatility and trading volume are significantly higher than those in regimes 1 and 2. Based on the standard deviation of the variables in each regime, regime 3 exhibits significantly higher volatility than regimes 1 and 2, indicating a higher overall volatility of the Chinese stock market in regime 3.

investors constantly chase after them, resulting in an increase in trading volume and market volatility. During the initial phase of the bear market, stock market return rapidly and sharply declines, and investors quickly sell their stock assets, resulting in high trading volume and market volatility. As stock market information is complex and chaotic, the market return during this period is zero.

Second, although the influence of trading volume on return and volatility is not substantial, the effects of return and volatility on trading volume are significant. This reveals the asymmetric dynamic relationships between trading volume, volatility, and return in the Chinese stock market. Therefore, it is challenging to predict changes in volatility or return in the Chinese stock market based on fluctuations in trading volume. According to Gebka and Wohar (2013), these asymmetric dynamic relationships may be due to private information and uninformed trading motivations. This ultimately leads to an insignificant impact of trading volume on volatility and return.

This work was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.: 72171192), the MOE Layout Foundation of Humanities and Social Sciences (Grant No.: 22YJA790007), the Science and Technology Innovation Program of Hunan Province (Grant No.: 2021RC3057), the Youth Innovation Team of Shanxi University, and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.

