behaviour of the system depends on its sub-units in a non-trivial way. So, there may be a change of paradigms in an attempt to understand our world, because laws governing the whole cannot be reduced simply by the mere observation of the details of its components [35]. Besides, social sciences literature usually adopts a linear approach to these complex systems. This is the reason why many regression models in service quality literature present limited variance explanation.

Agent-based models (ABMs) provide a useful tool for modeling such complex systems. An ABM constitute a set of computational agents that operate in paral- lel, according to their internal states and rules of behaviour, specifications of the environment, and use of a communication language between agents and their envi- ronment. So, we specify a network of connectivity and then activate agents in order to observe the emergent macro-behaviours [16]. ABMs allow the creation of arti- ficial societies, systems where basic social structures and group behaviours emerge from the interaction between individual agents, in artificial environments, based on limited information and computational ability ([16], [24], [25]).

The communication between the constituent cells is limited by local interac- tion. Each cell has a discrete state that varies according to the states of its local neighbourhood. Each cell communicates with a finite number of others in its neigh- bourhood. This communication is local, uniform, deterministic and synchronous, setting the overall development of the system over time in discrete steps [20]. The evolution is determined by the previous state of the cell, its neighbourhood and the associated local transition function, i.e., its rule ([17], [32]).

elements that interact with each other. Examples of these elements are clients and service providers, that interact during the service delivery. The social structure generated by their interaction can be simplified with a model, in order to understand the factors and behaviours that affect the service cycle.

This article presents a simulation model using cellular automata. The result of an initial quantitative survey on service quality in aesthetics clinics provided the initial condition for the simulation. From this initial condition, we applied the cellular automaton simulation in order to get to the second quantitative survey data, case by case. Furthermore, the rationale for this social network was analised, thus leading to an understanding of the dynamics of information exchange in the network of clients and providers, which may allow managers to adjust the conduct of its employees and manage the expectations of their customers so that there is a positive perception of service quality.

Communication and effective transmission of information play an important role in perceptions of technical and functional quality [30]. Therefore, the correct and effective transmission of information is important to establish the patterns that lead to a positive evaluation of service quality. Through the interactions, i.e., the exchange of information, customers can develop a positive or negative feeling, which can lead to success or failure in the sale [7].

[15] states that SERVPERF measures the performance, explaining better the variance of perceived service quality (i.e., their perception by the final consumer), without considering the expectations of consumers. Regarding the variance ex- plained by the two scales, [11] obtained maximum R2 (variance explanation) of

Organisations can be seen as theaters [8] and role theory is a theatrical metaphor, where the participants of the service encounter act as agents, i.e., a group of so- cial insinuations that guide and direct the behaviour of the individual in a given situation [31]. A role can be defined as a set of social responsibilities that guide and direct the behaviour of an individual in a given environmental setting, usually associated with socially defined positions. A role can also be defined as an internally consistent series of conditioned responses by a member of a social situation which represents the pattern of stimulation to similar and internally consistent series of conditioned responses of others in that situation [36].

Despite its great utility, role theory is subject to criticism. [26] criticise its use- fulness, arguing that it does not provide sufficient understanding to evaluate the quality of communication, since this theory sees the communicative behaviour and the performance as standardised sets of behaviours. This critique of the simplicity of the approach contradicts complexity theory, because today it is clear that a complex phenomenon is not always related to the complexity of its components. Often the simplicity of the components of a system can generate complex phenomena through interactions and nonlinear effects.

According to [6] role theory has a weakness that can be attributed to the lack of consensus on the scope or attitude in the study of a particular role. It is un- clear whether the theory of roles focuses on the person as a representative of a social position or as an individual separate from his position. The idea of being a representative of a social position sees the role as patterns of behaviour associ- ated to a particular social position. From this perspective, roles are seen as fixed and static. Both the economic and the sociological perspective share the common premise that the actors play a unique role in their decisions, according to a fixed pattern [21]. However, in our view, the standardisation and consensus seem to be outcomes, and not assumptions of the systems, given that the result of interactions is the emergence of consensus.

Starting with the rule number of the majority rule, the search was carried out in blocks of 1500 rules, and picking the next rule with uniformly distributed random steps in the range from 110 and 1084. The closer the search would get to a pre- specified minimum, target accuracy rate, the search intervals were reduced, in order to get a closer inspection of the rules. Two constraints guided the search: the rule should simulate the evolution of the initial condition with an accuracy rate greater than 70% (that is, the final outcome of the model should be identical to the data of quantitative research in 70% of the cells of the lattice), and the rule should not present a cyclic atractor.

display the highest variance. Customers and providers were then allocated to each CA lattice position according to their affinity in that indicator, thus creating an artificial situation where service providers and customers could interact. The allo- cation was based on the seventh indicator criterion because higher variance reflects less consensus and higher diversity of opinions, a situation that might trigger richer dynamics if customers and providers could be closer.

between the two models. This last argument seem to be more valid, as long as we have linear relations, nonlinear relations, and the intersection between linear and nonlinear relations, that may represent the interaction among individuals. This finding offers a new perspective in the study of causal relations in management research.

the largest discrepancy is the adaptation of the provider. This was exactly the in- dicator chosen for the classification, as it presented greater variance. Therefore, the variance of the data appears to affect the outcome of the simulation through the change of initial conditions.

In the fourth indicator, honesty, there is an outbreak of dissatisfaction that spreads to a greater area of the network, at the left-hand side, starting with cus- tomers and suppliers, spreading over 20 time steps, and not reaching stability. The contaminated area is wider than those for the previous indicators, meaning a greater spread in space between individuals. This may be due to the fact that honesty is a critical factor in building confidence between client and provider. When the in- tegrity of a client or provider is left in doubt, the effects spread to a larger area of the social network, when compared to something less critical, like the attention given by the provider.

It is worth noticing that the rule displays a cyclic behaviour of period 9 that starts at time step 3. At time step 5, the first completely dissatisfied individual appears, followed by two others at iteration 6. At time steps 7 and 8 there is only one completely dissatisfied individual. At the 10th there are two dissatisfied

individuals, and at the 11th, three of them. It is worth noticing that there are never three dissatisfied individuals side by side. The maximum number of individuals dissatisfied with honesty that keep in touch with each other is two. This finding may mean that when there are two individuals that interact with each other, and honesty is put in doubt, they change their internal states, maybe from cooperation to defeat, depending on the situation, in order to maximise their utility, in tune with what is stated in game theory [28].

From this fact one could conclude that extremely problematic customers should not be in contact with each other, otherwise they would spread the dissatisfaction to everyone they have contact with, customers or providers. The same goes for employees. Dissatisfied employees should be isolated in order to avoid an insur- gency, such as a strike. Besides, problematic or dissatisfied customers should not be attended by dissatisfied providers, because this can potentialise the dissatisfaction of both, contaminating the network. Perhaps this lack of adaptation to customer needs is due to focus on the outcome and volume of work, which prevents a greater personalisation of it. The simulation model investigated not only the dynamics of opinions, but also and more importantly, which individuals create dissatisfaction in a social network. This can enable managers to identify problematic customers and employees who are not fulfilling their role properly or sowing dissatisfaction in the social network. With this result, the manager can adapt the service cycle, in order to isolate dissatisfied individuals, so that their opinion become minority, losing strength and eventually dissipating.

4. Data evolution also showed an increase in kurtosis, showing a more extreme behaviour, characteristic of environments with high service involvement [3]. The skewness also increased its negative value in the real data and in the simulation. Values regarding perception decreased to 0.10, when comparing the final data of

This oscillatory movement may be due to several aspects. First, inconsistencies in mood of customers and providers, who may perceive the quality of the relation- ship differently, according to their emotional state. Second, inconsistencies in the delivery of service by the provider, who may not always offer the same service qual- ity. Third, there may be a process of mutual adaptation over the interactions, and the provider cannot always meet the expectations of customers and vice versa.

pects of quality and this is probably due to an affective component, involvement. It is known that the involvement determines the rationality in the interaction, the relative importance of each one of the attributes of the service and the intention to repurchasing the service by the customer [39]. Although the variables have lin- ear relationships and correlations in a cross-sectional study, we found no significant correlation between the first and the second quantitative surveys.

stability. One limitation of the model is that competition was not considered. If that had been done, maybe the model would not have achieved stability, as it did at time step 30, because customers would have the option to change their service providers.

In this particular case the best rationale would be that the neighbour on the right assumes value 3. This can be interpreted as that, sometimes, the best performance cannot generate the best service quality perception, because, if that would happen (through the right-hand neighbour taking on value 5), the centre cell would rise its value only from 1 to 2. But if the right-hand neighbour on the right takes on value 3, the following state of the centre cell would be 4. In other words, if the individual

at the centre cell is dissatisfied (value 1) with the attention given by a provider, this individual would be better off if the other provider would not become excessively attentive, but only moderately attentive. Acting this way, this individual would have the maximum increase in its quality perception. This finding is unusual in linear researches, but easily explained when adopting a nonlinear approach in the study of attitudes, as allowed by the present model.

The validation of an empirical agent-based model involves understanding the extent to which the model is a good representation of the processes that generated the observed data ([27], [37]). The qualitative phase of the research allowed us to deeply understand the processes involved in aesthetic services delivery as well as the most relevant issues of service quality perception. The quality of quantitative phase data was confirmed by the results of statistical analysis performed.

information spreads in a particular social network. The statistical analysis made in the simulation model showed that it is consistent with real data. The simulation identified dissatisfied individuals and their influence on the network. Once identified, these individuals can be managed so as not to be in contact with other members of the social network, so that the adverse impact does not contaminate the system and harm the business.

