The solution with dynamic clustering sensors tries to form dif- ferent clusters at different times according to the movement of the target, so a node can be a member of different clusters at different time. Unless static clustering, dynamically it forms the cluster with sensors. Only one cluster is active at each time in accordance to target moving manner. Thus it reduces the energy consumption of sensors in the cluster. It is more reliable than static clustering method. Also the sensor nodes sensing and forwarding redundant information has been reduced. In [12], the authors have mentioned that Dynamic cluster-based approaches provide better bandwidth utilization and higher scalability than other approaches in target tracking.

Hybrid solutions combine several approaches. As an example, a predictive mechanism (markov chain) implemented on a clustered network is proposed in [3*]. By analyzing the intrinsic relationship between tracking performance and energy consumption, the con- tribution cast the scheduling problem of WSN as the optimal policy problem of partially observable Markov decision process, and pro- poses a dynamic cluster members scheduling (DCMS) algorithm to solve the tradeoff between tracking performance and energy con- sumption. The authors of [13,14] propose a dynamic clustering algorithm coupled with the Kalman filter to predict the position of the single moving target. It is described using a state evolution

Virtual force algorithms (VFA) are popular approaches for solv- ing the problem of coverage and deployment of nodes. In this type of algorithm, the nodes are considered points subjected to a force of repulsion and attraction exerted between them and which can move as a function of the calculated force. In [15], the authors pro- posed a virtual force-directed co-evolutionary particle swarm opti- mization (VFCPSO) algorithm to maximize sensing coverage while minimizing the energy consumption in a hybrid wireless sensor network that consists of static and mobile sensors.

The authors in [20] present a genetic algorithm that seeks a solution to the problem of coverage holes in the network. The pro- posed algorithm determines the minimum number and the best locations of the mobile nodes that must be added after the initial deployment of the fixed nodes. The performance of the proposed genetic algorithm was evaluated by using several indicators; the simulation results show that this algorithm optimizes network coverage in terms of the overall coverage ratio and the number of additional mobile nodes.

The percolation theory was developed to mathematically deal with the disordered media, in which the disorder is defined by a random variation in the degree of connectivity [24]. The main con- cept of percolation theory is the existence of a percolation thresh- old, defined in the following way. Suppose p is a parameter that defines the average degree of connectivity between various sub- units of some arbitrary system. When p = 0, all sub-units are totally isolated from every other sub-unit. When p = 1, all sub-units are connected to some maximum number of neighboring sub- units. At this point, the system is connected from one side to the other, since there are paths that go completely across the system, linking one sub-unit to the next along the spanning cluster. In the follow-

The main difference between the rate of the percolation of the target and the tracking accuracy is that percolation expresses prob- ability value in relation to time, whereas the tracking accuracy is related to the tracking space. Most of the tracking algorithms try to best express this metric, whereas the percolation metric is implemented for the first time in our algorithm. We are comparing our algorithm DC-AIPT with two dynamic clustering schemes for the target tracking cited in Section 2: CHEW [18] is using, as the prediction method, the overhearing messages from the active clus- ters, the second solution DKF DC [20] is using Kalman filters to pre- vent the trajectory of the target.

We vary the density of the network at the same time as the speed of the target. We change the number of nodes from 100 to 1000 in steps of 100. For each network size, we change the target speed from 10 m/s to 900 m/s in steps of 100. We obtain the curve

set to 200 s. The results presented in this section are corresponding to the mean value of the results obtained by simulation of several scenarios selected in a random manner. The proposed clustering algorithm has been designed with the aim of providing a solution which makes it possible to obtain a better rate of percolation inde- pendently of the distribution of the sensor nodes while having a better energy efficiency.

In this article, we have proposed a clustering algorithm for tar- get tracking. Our algorithm has built dynamic clusters on demand and for the first time it has included the concept of target percola- tion as a major criterion of performance. The main objective of our solution is to handle the trade-off between the percolation of the target, tracking precision and energy consumption.

As future work is concerned, we are planning to design a variant of the ATHVC algorithm to adapt to an environment with multiple targets. This type of monitoring is complex and involves additional steps, including identification to help differentiate and count tar- gets. In addition, our new evaluation metric for target tracking algorithms called percolation should be, through further study, evaluate the recently proposed monitoring algorithms in consulta- tion with the authors of these articles.

rently he is working as a professor at OFPPT (Morocco) . He joined the laboratory RITM - ESTC/CED- ENSEM, University Hassan II in 2013. In the years past, he supervised a number of students PFE, participated in several research projects, acted as program committee member, organizer of numerous scientific conferences. His research interests cover the field of communication networks, especially autonomic, self-organized and wireless mobile ad hoc networks. His core research area deals with service provisioning in mobile ad hoc net- works.

Abderrahim Maizate received his Engineering Diploma in Computer Science from the Hassania School of Public Works since 2004 and DESA degree from ENSIAS in 2007. He received with honors the Ph.D. degree in Computer Networks and Telecommunications from Chouaib Doukalli university in El jadida in 2014. Since October 2014 he has been working as a Professor at the Computer Engineering Department at the Higher School of Technology of Casablanca (ESTC-UH2C). He is cur- rently the Deputy Director of the Network, Computer, Telecommunications and Multimedia Laboratory at the same School and member of the research center TIC-

Mohammed Ouzzif joined the Higher School of Tech- nology in 1996 as assistant professor. He supported his Ph.D. degree in 1999 at the Faculty of Science of Rabat. The research presented during this defense concerns the specification and the formal description of videocon- ferencing systems using the SDL and Mondel language. In 2005, he presented his research for the National Doctorate at the National School of Computer Science and Systems Analysis. He has made contributions in the dynamic management of resource sharing in a collabo- rative system. This has been elaborated by distributed algorithms allowing the extension of static distributed

