Mesembryanthemum crystallinum belongs to Aizoaceae, and it is an extremely stress-tolerant halophyte. Not only salinity and drought, but also high temperature, initiate a complex network of hormonal and transcriptional responses leading to induction and/or repression of gene expression, including transition from C3 photosynthesis to the Crassulacean acid metabolism [3]. It shows five distinct growth phases during its life cycle namely: germinating seedlings, juvenile, adult, flowering fruiting and seed formation [4].

relative humidity is lower in summer than in winter (65% and 81%) and evaporation is higher in summer than in winter (7.8 and 2.8 mm Piche/day) [13]. The main habitats of the study area are salt marsh, sand formation, reed swamp and fertile non-cultivated land. The salt marshes extend along the whole coast. They are connected with the three natural lakes Idku, Burullus and Manzala. The sand formation includes sand dunes and sand flats. The swamps were found in depressions where water accumulated through seepage from the nearby lakes and cultivated land. The fertile non-cultivated land is found in the southern part of the area; it has slightly higher soil salinity than the cultivated land [14].

A composite soil sample was collected from each stand (trip- licates) as a profile from three holes of 0e50 cm depth, air- dried and passed through a 2 mm sieve to separate gravel and debris [18]. Soil texture, water holding capacity (WHC), soil porosity, organic carbon and sulphate were determined according to Piper [19]. Calcium carbonate content was determined by titration against 1 N NaOH and expressed as a percentage [18,20]. The soil solution (1:5) was prepared for each soil sample. The electrical conductivity, pH and chloride were determined by the method adopted by Jackson [20]. Carbonate and bicarbonate were determined by titration

The different growth parameters including root, shoot and total fresh weight, plant diameter, leaf area, number of flowers and number of fruits of M. crystallinum were measured in three permanent stands for the three habitats (sand dune, sand flat and salt marsh) distributed along the study area. The data were recorded in regular visits at a two-week interval. The leaf area was determined by weight method according to [24].

Vegetation classification and ordination techniques were employed. The stand-species data matrix was classified into groups using the importance values (IV) of species by means of the Two Way Indicator Species Analysis (TWINSPAN) com- puter program according to Hill and Smilauer [27]. Canonical Correspondence Analysis (CCA) that was used to examine the relationships of the floristic composition and the measured environmental variables according to Ter Braak [28]. Data of soil analyses were subjected to analysis of variance (ANOVA) and the mean values were separated based on Least Signifi- cant Difference (LSD) at 0.05 probability level using COSTAT

(IV = 30.98). The other important species in this group are Chenopodium murale (IV = 18.06), M. nodiflorum (IV = 17.93), Senecio glaucus (IV = 15.46) and Cynodon dactylon (IV = 13.98). Group C is the largest group and represents salt marsh habitat

habitats. Group C attained the highest value of sodium (31.34 mg/100 g dry soil). The other variables (soil porosity, pH, WHC), calcium carbonate, organic carbon, chloride, sulphate, carbonate, bicarbonate, potassium, calcium, magnesium and PAR are comparable to each other between the four vegetation clusters.

Calcium carbonate and pH are correlated with each other, while chloride, EC, sodium and WHC showed close relation. The distribution of M. crystallinum (dominant species of group A, B and C and important species with relatively IV of group D) was influenced by calcium carbonate, pH, EC and calcium. The cluster group A was affected mainly by calcium, potassium, pH and calcium carbonate, while the cluster group B and C

Sodium ion concentration, EC, SAR and sand fraction are the most controlling factors in the differentiation and distri- bution of the different vegetation groups. These results reflect the coastal-marshy habitat in the studied area and it has been reported in other studies [14,34]. The distribution of M. crys- tallinum was influenced by calcium carbonate, pH, EC and calcium [35,36].

The fresh weights of M. crystallinum increased gradually during the early period of growth (juvenile period), but after 6 weeks, it increased sharply until 14 weeks, where it showed significant decrease as the plant entered the flowering stage. Highest root growth was recorded in the sand flat habitats, where the root can reach deeply toward the watercourses and the superficial root spread vigorously to absorb the water vapor [37,38]. On the other hand, root growth retarded under salinity (salt marsh habitat), indicating that water uptake by the root system is not essential for plant survival at the late developmental stages under high salinity, because they already switch to CAM [39]. The measured growth parameters in the present study decreased progressively from juvenile, adult, flowering and seed production. During the later stage, older portions of the ice plant progressively senesce dry out, die and the plants change from C3 to CAM [4,40].

growth, flowering and fruiting of M. crystallinum, due to low concentration of salts [29]. In addition, the plant probably flourished in salt marsh habitat by synthesis of osmolytes and antioxidant molecules such as betacyanins, mesembryanthin and other flavonoids [41e44]. The flowering and seed forming stages starts rapidly in salt marsh habitat after 8 weeks in response to salt stress [4]. The habitats of M. crystallinum are under threat by human and other biotic interferences espe- cially the establishing of new villages. It is recommended to establish a protectorate along the Deltaic Mediterranean coast of Egypt, extended from Ashtum El Gamil protectorate to Burullus protectorate in the north of Egypt.

