phologically, aberrant crypts can be observed as a single altered crypt or as a cluster of altered crypts that form a focus termed; aber- rant crypt foci (ACF). Histologically, ACF are heterogeneous group of intraepithelial lesions that exhibit variable features, ranging from almost normal or mild atypia to severe dysplasia. Indeed, ACF rep- resent preneoplastic lesions that indicate early stages of colorectal carcinogenesis in both rodents and humans [7,8]. ACF are charac- terized by greater size, increased pericryptic zone and thicker epithelial lining [9]. Hence, examining the development of ACF is valuable in rodent chemoprevention studies

posis coli and the COX-2 genes showed lower number and reduced intestinal polyp size [14]. Furthermore, COX-2 is reported to be over-expressed in a variety of solid tumors such as prostate, colon, lung and liver cancer. Therefore, drugs that inhibit COX-2 enzyme can be promising chemo preventive agents.

The present study aimed to examine the chemopreventive effect of cisplatin and celecoxib combination in 1,2-dimethylhydrazine (DMH)-induced colon ACF in mice. We evaluated the expression of intratumoral caspase-3, Bcl2 and BAX to investigate the intrinsic apoptotic pathway. Furthermore, we used the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) immunostaining to examine the impact of the combination therapy on cell proliferation.

Cisplatin (Unistin vials, 10 mg/10 ml solution) was obtained from Eimc United Pharmaceuticals (Cairo, Egypt) and was diluted with sterile saline. Celecoxib was a gift from Amoun Pharmaceuti- cal Company (El-Obour City, Egypt). Celecoxib was suspended in 2% sodium carboxy methyl cellulose (Na-CMC; ADWIC, Cairo, Egypt) solution.

Mice were housed in groups of six in well-ventilated clean plastic cages and all possible efforts were done to limit suffering of the mice. Cage substrate was replaced each day with food and tap water ad libitum. Experimental procedures were approved by the institutional research ethics committee at Faculty of Pharmacy, Suez Canal University. Date of approval: June 2014.

(DMH control group): Mice injected with DMH (20 mg/kg; sc) weekly for a total of 15 injections [20]. Group 3 (DMH + cisplatin): mice received weekly injections of DMH and given cisplatin (4 mg/ kg/week, i.p.) during the last 5 weeks of the experiment. Group 4 (DMH + celecoxib group): mice received weekly injections of DMH and administered celecoxib (10 mg/kg/day) by gavage during the last 5 weeks of the experiment. Group 5 (DMH + cisplatin

+ celecoxib group): mice received weekly injections of DMH and received cisplatin (4 mg/kg/week, i.p.) plus celecoxib (10 mg/kg/- day) [drugs were given from week 11 to week 15]. Mice were mon- itored in a daily manner to detect any type of discomfort and to register the number of surviving mice.

At the end of week 15, mice were anesthetized with ether and sacrificed by cervical dislocation. Then, mice were autopsied and the colon was excised, opened along the horizontal axis and flushed using ice-cold saline. Next, colon sections were flattened and fixed in 10% phosphate buffered formalin for 1 day. Tissue samples were processed, embedded in paraffin wax, cut into sec-

observing increasing size and number of cells, mucosal inflamma- tion was considered when inflammatory cell infiltration, focal inflammatory cell aggregation, lymphoid proliferation, congested blood vessels and fibrosis were detected. Score 0 was assigned for normal sections that appear free from any signs of dysplasia, hyper- plasia or inflammation. Score 1 was assigned when no dysplasia but mild inflammatory reaction was observed. Score 2 was assigned for moderate inflammatory reaction with or without dysplasia. Score 3 was assigned for dysplasia/or hyperplasia with severe inflamma- tion. Score 4 was assigned in cases of severe inflammatory reaction with dysplastic or hyperplastic activity and fibrosis [22].

Immunohistochemical staining was performed employing a 3- step indirect technique based on the labelled avidin-biotin perox- idase complex (ABC) method. Colon sections were deparaffinized, rehydrated and boiled with 0.01 M citrate buffer, pH = 6.0, for 15 min for antigen retrieval. Next, tissue specimens were main- tained at room temperature and covered for 1 h in 1% bovine serum albumin. This was followed by an overnight incubation (at

In cancer treatment, the use of combination therapies is pre- ferred over monotherapy owing to the fact that combination ther- apies offer a reduction in dose and toxicity and decrease the like hood of developing acquired drug resistance [23]. In the current in vivo study, the chemopreventive effect of celecoxib either alone or in combination with cisplatin against DMH-induced ACF in mice was investigated. The administration of DMH caused DNA methy- lation resulting in ACF formation in mice colons [8,22,24]. Simi-

ACF were identified in mucosal layer of patients at high risk of developing colorectal carcinoma [25] and rodents receiving car- cinogenic agents [9]. Therefore, ACF is commonly used in assessing the protective role of natural or pharmacological agents in the development of colon carcinogenesis [26]. Histological features of ACF were detected in milder forms as mild atypia and severe forms as severe dysplasia. Dysplasia is considered as a predisposing factor for an organ to carcinogenesis [27]. Therefore, ACF are considered as useful markers for screening drugs or new compounds for their chemopreventive activities [26,28]. The administration of either cisplatin or celecoxib alone decreased the ACF formation and enhanced the histological score of the colonic mucosa compared to the DMH control group. The combination treatment celecoxib (10 mg/kg) plus cisplatin proved to be the most successful. ACF were significantly smaller and their histological grading was signif- icantly better than the corresponding monotherapy without signif- icantly affecting the mortality percentage.

mice showed that celecoxib resulted in upregulated caspase-3 [30,37]. However, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that examines the effect of celecoxib on Bcl2, BAX and caspase-3 mediated apoptotic pathways in DMH-induced colon carcinogenesis in mice. On the other hand, cisplatin treatment slightly suppressed Bcl2 without affecting BAX expression. The combination treatment produced the maximal pro-apoptotic effect as it showed the highest caspase-3 expression and the lowest Bcl2/ BAX ratio.

Balance between apoptosis and cell proliferation regulate col- orectal carcinogenesis [38,39]. In our study, immunohistochemi- cal analysis revealed that PCNA was overexpressed in the untreated DMH control group. Treatment with either cisplatin or celecoxib showed around 20% reduction in PCNA immunore- activity, whereas, PCNA immunoreactivity was reduced by around 50% in the combination treatment group. Therefore, indi- cating the synergistic effect of celecoxib and cisplatin combina- tion in cancer treatment.

This study indicated that celecoxib inhibits tumor growth and augments the antitumor effect of cisplatin in DMH-induced ACF in mice. This effect is at least in part mediated by induction of apoptosis and suppression of cell proliferation. Hence, celecoxib is a promising add-on drug with cisplatin for colon cancer treatment.

The Authors thank Dr. Mohamed Kamal, Department of Pathol- ogy at School of Medicine in Suez Canal University, for providing help in capturing some of photographs. Authors are grateful to Dr. Abdel-Salam G. Abdel-Salam, department of statistics, Faculty of Economics and Political Sciences, Cairo University for his advice in statistical analysis. Thanks for Amoun Pharmaceutical Company (Cairo, Egypt) for kindly providing celecoxib.

Freedman LS, Edwards BK, Ries LAG, Young JL, editors. National Cancer Institute (US), Middle East Cancer Consortium. Cancer Incidence in Four Member Countries (Cyprus, Egypt, Israel, and Jordan) of the Middle East Cancer Consortium (MECC) Compared with US SEER. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute, 2006.

