Abstract  With the tremendous growth of the usage of computers over network and development in application running on various platform captures the attention toward network security. This paradigm exploits security vulnerabilities on all computer systems that are technically difficult and expensive to solve. Hence intrusion is used as a key to compromise the integrity, availability and confidentiality of a computer resource. The Intrusion Detection System (IDS) plays a vital role in detecting anomalies and attacks in the network. In this work, data mining concept is integrated with an IDS to identify the relevant, hidden data of interest for the user effectively and with less execution time. Four issues such as Classification of Data, High Level of Human Interaction, Lack of Labeled Data, and Effectiveness of Distributed Denial of Service Attack are being solved using the proposed algorithms like EDADT algorithm, Hybrid IDS model, Semi-Supervised Approach and Varying HOPERAA Algorithm respectively. Our proposed algorithm has been tested using KDD Cup dataset. All the proposed algorithm shows better accuracy and reduced false alarm rate when compared with existing algorithms.

In this modern world intrusion occurs in a fraction of seconds. Intruders cleverly use the modified version of command and thereby erasing their footprints in audit and log files. Success- ful IDS intellectually differentiate both intrusive and nonin- trusive records. IDS was first introduced by James Anderson in the year 1980 [1]. Most of the existing systems have security breaches that make them easily vulnerable and could not be solved. Moreover substantial research has been going on intru- sion detection technology which is still considered as immature and not a perfect tool against intrusion. It has also become a most priority and challenging tasks for network administrators

Unsupervised method [10] uses a huge set of data as pre-la- beled training data and produces less accuracy. To overcome this issue, a semi-supervised algorithm is used. Fuzzy Connect- edness based Clustering [11] approach is evaluated using both Euclidean distance and statistical properties of clusters. It facilitates the discovery of any shape and detects not only known but also its variants. Ching-Hao et al. [12] proposed a co-training framework to leverage unlabeled data to improve intrusion detection. This framework provides lower error rate than single view method and thereby incorporating an active learning method to enhance the performance. In [13] the semi supervised learning mechanism is used to build an alter filter to reduce the false alarm ratio and provides high detection rate. Where the features of both supervised and semi supervised learning are same in nature.

A Tri-Training SVM algorithm is used to improve the accu- racy rate and speed [14]. Monowar H. Bhuyan [15] present a tree based clustering technique to find clusters among intrusion detection data set without using any labeled data. The data set can be labeled using cluster labeling technique based on a Tree CLUS algorithm. It works faster for the numeric and a mixed category of network data.

degrading the performance of legitimate traffic gradually. Denial of capability attack is one of the major causes for the existence of DDoS attacks. DDoS attacks can be prevented by denial of the capability approach by Sink tree model [18] representing quota assigned to each domain on the network.

Distributed Denial of Service Attacks are not only suited for the specified target machine but also compromises the whole network. Based on this perspective proactive algorithm has proposed by Zhang et al. [19]. The network is divided into a set of clusters. Packets need permission to enter, exit or pass through other clusters. High speed traffic [20] is monitored by IP prefix based aggregation method to detect DDoS related anomalies facilitated in a streaming fashion. In [21] the author presents the synchronous communication based on acknowl- edgment based and in the presence of fixed clock drift. The cli- ent clock relates to that of the server. But any acknowledgment loss and faster or slower clock drift of client enables the adver- sary to cause a direct attack on it.

Preprocessing of network data [22] consumes time and hard for network administrator to solve. Even though the prepro- cessing is made successfully, Classification of Data and label- ing of unlabeled data seems to be a challenging task. Based on this, four issues such as Classification of Data, High Level of Preprocessing, Semi-Supervised Approach and Mitigating Distributed Denial of Service Attack has been solved using proposed approaches that help IDS to efficiently identify the attacks accurately with reduced false alarm rate.

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 includes the motivation of the work. Section 3 describes the problem state- ment. Section 4 explains the methodology of the proposed work. Section 5 describes the data set used and its features in detail. Section 6 includes the details of performance evalua- tion based on the experimental study. Section 7 refers to con- clusion and future enhancement.

Data mining approaches have been implemented by many authors to solve the detection problem. This implies that we are close to the solution. Since pattern signature approach is currently utilized only by network administrators. The fact is that the existing works deal with the subset of problem that are needed for achieving intrusion detection and not others.

To mitigate the Effectiveness of Distributed Denial of Service Attack Varying HOPERAA Algorithm is proposed. Based on the previous work done by Zhang Fu, et al. [22], in our ap- proach, a variable clock drift method is proposed to avoid the client waiting time for server and at the same time message loss is avoided greatly. It includes three aspects,

drift. The client waits for the acknowledgment from the server for a specific period of time say 2l + L. After that, it chooses another interval and starts sending messages. It may take any a number of trials to get access to the server. In our proposed algorithm, the number of trails made by the client in contact initiation part has been minimized so as to improve the reli- ability of the application.

Since many data mining algorithms are available this is an innovative and efficient work toward IDS to detect the ongoing attacks over a large network. However, this algorithm reduces the space occupied by the dataset. So it would be useful for the network administrator/experts to avoid the delay between the arrival and the detection time of the attacks respectively. It also produces a less false alarm rate and computation time in real time. Performance of various existing algorithms is compared with the proposed EDADT algorithm for Intrusion Detection

The misuse based and anomaly based approach has been taken for the study. Hybrid IDS is developed to overcome the human interaction toward pre-processing. Most of the evaluation of intrusion detection is based on proprietary data and results are not reproducible. To solve this problem, KDD Cup 99 (2009) has been used. Public data availability is one of the ma- jor issues during evaluation of Intrusion Detection System. Mixed data set (real time + simulated) has been used for this study. Out of 500 data instances, 320 instances involved in the training phase and remaining 180 instances are taken for test- ing phase. Each data include the source IP address, destination IP address, state of the packet and so on. Data can be analyzed with the help of the snort rules that are predefined within it and anomaly score for each packet. Under anomaly based ap- proach, we have four types of statistical methods like Packet Header Anomaly Detection (PHAD), Network Traffic Anom- aly Detector (NETAD), Application Layer Anomaly Detector (ALAD), Learning Rules for Anomaly Detection (LERAD) respectively. Analysis is done based on the scenarios given below:

during multiparty communication. To overcome this issue, the Varying HOPERAA Algorithm has been proposed to ad- just the deviation in terms of hopping between client and ser- ver with varying clock drift. The message overhead between client and server & its average value is observed to evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithm.

