Student exchanges have been demonstrated to increase students' Cultural Intelligence (CQ). However, global problems in recent years, such as the Coronavirus pandemic, have highlighted the need for digital alternatives to traditional in-person visits. One such alternative could be intercultural seminars using telepresence robots, which allow students to experience particularly realistic intercultural interactions in their real environments. In this research, we evaluated the effects of two semi-virtual intercultural seminars on diversity and intercultural competence that integrated telepresence robots to enable interactions between students located in Germany and

possible to conduct intercultural group discussions, where participants could talk to each other in a real environment instead of using a purely virtual platform (e.g. Zoom). Moreover, the telepresence robots allowed the students to move autonomously around the grounds of the partner university and to explore it virtually with their fellow students.

In 2003, Earley and Ang introduced the construct of CQ to explain why some individuals adapt to a new culture more easily, quickly, and thoroughly than others. Defined as the ability to function effectively in intercultural contexts, essentially CQ can be understood as a synonym for what is widely termed intercultural competence (e.g., Lin & Shen, 2020). However, while there is still no consensus on how intercultural compe- tence is defined, as numerous intercultural competence definitions exist side by side (e.g., Gelfand et al., 2008; Leung et al., 2014), CQ has the

medium to enable homebound students to participate interactively in class and maintain social relationships with their classmates and teach- ers. For example, Newhart et al. (2016) pointed out the high potential of telepresence robots in terms of socio-emotional benefits, including social acceptance and overcoming isolation. Similarly, Weibel et al. (2020) found that telepresence robots were perceived to be facilitative of social interaction processes between classmates and inclusion in learning

Although these initial findings on the use of telepresence robots in higher education are promising, overall there is little research on this topic. This is especially true with respect to longitudinal studies, which are necessary to examine the development of students' attitudes towards telepresence robots and to understand the mechanisms that influence their attitudes towards these devices in higher education (Leoste et al., 2022). Furthermore, there is a lack of studies examining the application of telepresence robots in various educational contexts. In particular, we are not aware of any study in which telepresence robots have been used in an intercultural seminar to enhance students' CQ. As noted above, there are a few studies in which telepresence robots have been applied in a school context to enable students to communicate with other students

To investigate these questions, we evaluated the effects of two newly developed intercultural seminars that integrated telepresence robots, apparently for the first time, to help students increase their CQ. Each seminar was conducted simultaneously in Germany and Kenya, and was similar in terms of contents and methods. Specifically, we examined three groups of students: (1) students from Germany and Kenya who actively participated in one of the seminars (seminar group), (2) students from Germany who did not take part in any seminar (German control group), and (3) students from Kenya who participated purely digitally and passively (i.e., without being present in the seminar room or connected via robot) in one of the seminars (Kenyan control group). In our main analyses, we combined the data of the students from Germany and Kenya and distinguished between one seminar group and one control group. However, we also conducted additional analyses that included only students from one country.

Most students were majoring in psychology (Germany: 93.8%; Kenya: 100%). However, in Germany, the intercultural seminars were offered as part of the elective subject Diversity Management. In this subject, the students could choose whether to attend one of the intercultural seminars or an alternative seminar dealing with heterogeneity and its conse- quences. In contrast, in Kenya the seminars were offered within the psychology curriculum. At the University of Nairobi, one of the lecturers decided which students were to be the active and passive participants of the seminar.

Participation in evaluation of the seminars was voluntary for all students. Nevertheless, all seminar participants took part in the evalua- tion. Moreover, most students who filled out the pre-questionnaire also filled out the post-questionnaire (Germany: 87.5% in the seminar group, 79.7% in the control group; Kenya: 88.9% in the seminar group, 50.0% in the control group). The relatively lower number of students from the Kenyan control group who filled out both questionnaires can be explained by the fact that some students from the Kenyan control group were not present for the entire time during the second formal session, as this session took place during a Kenyan public holiday (see section 4.2).

from Kenya) as well as two lecturers from each of the two universities involved. These individuals were all located at their home institutions during the seminars. Moreover, three interns supported the lecturers: two students from the University of Koblenz, one student from the Kenyan university involved in the respective seminar. Of these, one German intern was located at her home institution, whereas the other two interns were located at the corresponding partner university during the semi- nars. A guest lecturer from another German university also participated

The informal activities, which took place between the formal sessions, were another key element of the seminars. During these activities, two students from Germany and two students from Kenya met to show each other their campuses (in some cases, the groups were somewhat larger). The students from the university abroad took part via robot. To provide a framework for the informal activities, the students had to solve several tasks on each campus. For example, they had to find out what kind of food was offered in the cafeteria on that particular day, or to take a group photo in front of a certain building. The informal activities were designed to give the students the opportunity to get to know each other in a more casual atmosphere, and to have more private conversations, away from the formal sessions of the seminar. Furthermore, the students should be given the opportunity to gain a relatively rich intercultural experience by being able to autonomously move around the campus of the other uni- versity using the robots. At the end of the first formal session, the small groups for the informal activities were formed, and individual time slots were coordinated with the interns, who handed out the robots to the students to perform these activities. At the beginning of the second formal session, the students were asked to report their experiences of the informal activities.

positive effect of the group variable on the change score would indicate a stronger increase in the respective variable in the seminar group compared to the control group. Third, we considered only the students of the seminar group and regressed the initial values at T1 and changes between T1 and T2 on self-location as well as age, gender, citizenship, and years lived abroad. Accordingly, these analyses allowed us to test whether students showed a stronger increase in the CQ facets and acceptance of telepresence robots in intercultural seminars, the stronger their perceived self-location in the seminar room abroad while using the robots.

Because of the nature of the computer-based data collection proced- ure, there could be no missing values in the completed questionnaires (except for the open questions). However, some students had only filled out questionnaires at T1. We also included the data of these students in our analyses and used the full information maximum likelihood pro- cedure to deal with the missing values. Compared to traditional missing data treatment methods, such as listwise deletion, this approach is considered superior, as no observations are deleted and a higher power can be achieved (Enders, 2010). Nevertheless, our main findings were also replicated in additional analyses that only included those students who had provided data at both measurement points.

Note. Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The effect size d for the mean differences was calculated according to Morris and DeShon (2002). Asterisks indicate whether values are significantly different from zero *p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001.

The technical problems with the robots became even more apparent when the students were asked directly if they had experienced any problems during the seminar. In this context, 94.4% of the students noted technical problems with the robots. Accordingly, when asked how the robots could be improved for use in future intercultural seminars, 83.3% of the students indicated that technical improvements were necessary, especially with regard to Internet connectivity, sound transmission, and motion characteristics (better control over movement, more stability on uneven terrain, higher navigating speed, possibility of control via a touch pad dedicated to that purpose).

In this study, we evaluated the effects of two semi-virtual intercul- tural seminars that combined classroom-based training and intercultural experience through telepresence robots. Overall, these seminars proved to be very successful: Although the participants attended the seminars from their home university and thus had no physical contact with the participants from the other university, our study revealed significant increases in different CQ facets among the participants from both coun- tries. Furthermore, it provides important information on the integration of telepresence robots in intercultural seminars.

achieved significant increases in three CQ facets during the seminars: metacognitive CQ, cognitive CQ, and behavioral CQ (see section 5.2.1). This finding was predicted in Hypotheses 1.1, 1.2, and 1.4. Nevertheless, the increases in the various CQ facets are particularly remarkable, at least for three reasons: First, the increases in CQ are not only of statistical significance, but also of practical relevance. This is especially true for the strong increase in cognitive CQ, which was found in the entire sample as

In contrast to Hypothesis 1.3, we found no change in motivational CQ among the participants of our seminars. However, this finding can be explained by ceiling effects. At the beginning of the seminars, the stu- dents in both the German and Kenyan seminar groups were already

Although our findings concerning change in the various CQ facets were largely generalized across the German and Kenyan subsamples, it is noteworthy that the change in cognitive CQ did not differ significantly between the Kenyan seminar and control groups (see section 5.2.2). Still, this finding is explicable when it is considered that the students in the Kenyan control group (unlike those in the German control group) participated passively in the seminar, and had the opportunity to make gains in cognitive CQ by receiving information conveyed during the seminar. Thus, it did not seem necessary to be in the seminar room, give a presentation, participate in the small-group discussions, or attend the informal activities to make gains in cognitive CQ during the seminar. In contrast, these differences between the students in the Kenyan seminar and control groups might have been crucial for the increases in meta- cognitive and behavioral CQ among the students in the seminar group.

Second, and related to the problem of self-selection, we found some differences between the seminar group and control group students at the beginning of the study. Although both groups did not differ significantly in their demographics, the (German) students in the seminar group had higher initial values in metacognitive CQ, motivational CQ, and accep- tance of the robots. Regarding metacognitive CQ, we considered these differences to be less problematic. Rather, we found it somewhat remarkable that the students in the seminar group achieved a stronger increase in metacognitive CQ, compared to the students in the control group, despite their higher initial values. However, it should be noted that the effect of seminar participation on change in metacognitive CQ may have been underestimated, due to the different initial values in the seminar and control groups.

In contrast to metacognitive CQ, our main analyses revealed no effect of seminar participation on change in motivational CQ and acceptance of the robots. Importantly, this finding may partly be due to the higher initial values in these characteristics in the seminar group. Regarding students' change in acceptance of the robots, this assumption is sub- stantiated when considering the results of the additional analyses con- ducted with the Kenyan students only. These analyses revealed neither statistically significant nor practically relevant differences between stu- dents in the seminar and control groups with respect to their acceptance

With regard to change in motivational CQ, the additional analyses showed no differences between the seminar and control groups. As dis- cussed in section 6.1, it is possible that this finding is due to ceiling ef- fects. Nevertheless, to draw strong conclusions about the effects of intercultural seminars using telepresence on change in motivational CQ (as well as metacognitive CQ and acceptance of the robots), it would be desirable for future research to have seminar and control groups that do not differ in terms of initial values in these characteristics. To this end, it could be useful to work with a waiting group design where students provide data at two measurement points prior to participating in the seminar. This design may be preferred to the design used in the present research because students who choose to participate in an intercultural seminar with telepresence robots are likely to have higher motivational CQ and show higher acceptance of using telepresence robots in inter- cultural seminars than students who do not choose to participate.

Third, it can be seen as a limitation of our study that the German lecturers conducted the evaluation of the seminars themselves. For this reason, it is possible that the findings of our study were affected by investigator effects. In fact, the seminar participants were aware that they were taking part in a DAAD-funded project that had the central goal of supporting students in developing their intercultural competence. How- ever, to counteract possible investigator effects, the lecturers explicitly emphasized during the evaluation that the students should fill out the questionnaire honestly and conscientiously. Moreover, the fact that in- creases in CQ were also found in the Kenyan seminar group, although the Kenyan lecturers were not involved in the evaluation, makes it less likely that our findings were biased by investigator effects.

Finally, a shortcoming of our study is that we were not able to investigate whether the increases in CQ that occurred during our semi- nars, persist in the long run. Since the present study was the first inves- tigation of intercultural seminars using telepresence robots, this question goes beyond its scope. Given that studies have found increases in CQ following interventions to persist months after the intervention (e.g., Erez et al., 2013; Reichard et al., 2014), we consider it plausible that the gains in CQ found in our study would also persist long after the seminars have finished. Nevertheless, future research should examine this ques- tion empirically.

In times of rapid developments in digital networking on the one hand and global problems such as pandemics, wars, and climate threat on the other, digital student exchanges have become an important alternative to the classic forms of exchange in person. The present study illustrates the high potential of digital student exchanges for intercultural learning. In our seminars, which were apparently the first intercultural seminars using telepresence robots, we found significant increases in meta- cognitive, cognitive, and behavioral CQ after only one week. Moreover, we found that students from Germany and Kenya showed high accep- tance and benefited from the use of the telepresence robots in our sem- inars. However, many questions about the effects of telepresence robots

