Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is the most common type of diabetes, accounting for 90% of diabetic cases. It is characterized by chronic hyperglycemia which is caused by a combination of deficiency in insulin action and secretion. Adipose tissue regulates insulin sensitivity via the circulating adipocytoki- nes, leptin, resistin and adiponectin. Hypoadiponectinemia contributes to the development of obesity and related disorders such as diabetes, hyperlipidemia and cardiovascular diseases. The present study aimed to evaluate the beneficial effect of flavonoid 2-hydroxychalcone in T2DM through its effect on per-

Wistar rats using high fat diet and low dose of streptozotocin (STZ, 35 mg/kg, i.p.). The flavonoid 2- hydroxychalcone was administered by oral tubes. Levels of PPAR-c in sub abdominal adipose tissue, serum adiponectin, serum tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and serum insulin levels were detected by

and lifestyle modification should be considered. Thus, glycemic control is the basis for the treatment of type-2 diabetes. Existing antidiabetic agents are often associated with side effects including obesity, osteoporosis, sodium retention, hypoglycemia, and lactic acidosis [4,5]. To avoid such adverse side effects, there is a crucial need for new therapies for management and treatment of T2DM [6,7].

Adiponectin is an adipocytokine exclusively secreted by adipose tissue into the blood stream [8,9]. Plasma adiponectin level is neg- atively correlated with development of insulin resistance, T2DM and metabolic syndrome that are linked to obesity [10,11]. Indeed, plasma adiponectin levels were decreased in obesity. This reduc- tion may play a causal role in the development of insulin resistance [12].

Chalcones (originally isolated from natural plant sources) are considered as precursors of flavonoids. Chalcones are abundant in edible plants [16]. In addition, they can also be synthesized in laboratory [17]. Hydroxychalcones have been involved in various biological activities including antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti- cancer, anti hepatotoxic and antimalarial activities [18]. Interest- ingly, hydroxychalcone has been reported to mimic the effect of insulin by enhancing glucose uptake and phosphorylation of insu- lin receptor in adipocytes [19]. In addition, various synthetic chal- cone derivatives have shown inhibitory activity against diabetic complications. Moreover, 2-hydroxy chalcone was reported as a

group. The rats (except the normal control group) were fed high fat diet (HFD) for 15 days to induce T2DM. HFD is composed of 58% fat, 25% protein and 17% carbohydrate, as a percentage of total kcal and libitum, respectively [21].

This study used rat model of HFD feeding followed by low dose STZ as model for T2DM. Many researchers used the HFD-STZ model showed the significant loss in body weight after STZ injection. The body weight reduction in the STZ-treated rats can be explained by many reasons, including dehydration and excessive fats and pro- teins catabolism [25], which ultimately lead to muscle wasting [26]. On the other hand, treatment of diabetic rats with hydroxy- chalcone improved body weight, which could be explained by con- trol of blood glucose levels by hydroxychalcone.

Many previous studies have been documented the relationship between diabetes mellitus and abnormalities in lipid metabolism [27,28]. Dyslipidemia in type 2 diabetic rats is associated with a significant decrease in HDL-C and a significant increase in LDL-C, total cholesterol, triglycerides and, VLDL-C [29,30]. Similarly, the results of our investigation revealed a significant dyslipidemia in diabetic rats when compared to control group. On the contrast, treatment with hydroxychalcone resulted in significant improve- ment of lipid profile when compared to diabetic untreated group, suggesting beneficial effect of 2-hydroxychalcone on T2DM- induced dyslipidemia.

Several studies have documented association between elevated MDA levels and the damage of b-cells in T2DM [39]. Convincing evidence has established a link between oxidative stress and insu- lin resistance. Increased free radical levels have deleterious effects on b cells, including decreased insulin secretion in response to glu- cose, impaired gene expression and cell death, leading ultimately to hyperglycemia and diabetes [40]. MDA is a reactive aldehyde and the major reactive electrophilic species known to elicit stress of toxic nature in cells and known to form covalent protein adducts which are referred to as advanced lipoxidation end products that are found to be analogous to advanced glycation end products [41]. It is often used to determine the oxidant/antioxidant balance in diabetic patients [42]. In this study, hydroxychalcone showed significant reduction of the elevated MDA level in diabetic rats.

GSH content were significantly decreased in T2DM diabetic rats when compared to non-diabetic rats [43]. In this study, the rats which treated with hydroxychalcone showed significant increase in GSH concentration when compared to untreated diabetic rats. Taken together, these results suggested which beneficial anti- oxidant properties of hydroxychalcone in T2DM. In addition to oxidative  stress,  inflammation  is  considered  an  important

Oxidative stress plays a critical role in obesity which associated with many conditions such as diabetes [52]. Some previous studies have shown an association between adiponectin and antioxidant markers [53,54]. There is a positive correlation between adiponec- tin and glutathione [55,56] and our results agreed with this. On the contrast, in our data, MDA showed a negative correlation with adi- ponectin level, which agreed with a pervious study [57]. These results could be explained by antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and anti-atherogenic properties of adiponectin [58].

