Split plot design with three replicates was adopted in this respect. The main plots were represented by one- and two-spray applications for each treatment. The first spray application was applied soon after the appearance of disease symptoms and the second spray application was carried out 15 days after the 1st spray application. Sub-plots were represented by the tested plant extracts.

Biological control of wheat rusts by using plant extracts is a modern, advanced and risk-free alternative method of rust man- agement [45]. Several plant extracts are known to play an impor- tant role in the management of plant diseases [7,9,12,14,15]. They act directly or indirectly against plant pathogens, either to inhibit fungal growth and multiplication or by inducing resistance in crop plants. In this study, in vitro-tested plant extracts (neem, clove, antha mandhaari, black cumin, white cedar, Brazilian pep- per, garlic and garden quinine) inhibited spore germination of wheat leaf rust P. triticina by 93% or more. Neem extract caused 98.99% inhibition to spore germination, which was not signifi- cantly different from the fungicide Sumi-8 treatment (100% inhibition).

Seed soaking or foliar spray treatments of wheat seedlings with the plant extracts reduced the number of pustules/leaf, with foliar spraying being more effective. In this regard, neem extract was the most effective treatment. It gave 100% control of the disease when applied one or four days after inoculation. After 22 days from inoc- ulation, pustules started to appear on plants treated with the fungicide (Sumi-8), while no pustules developed on plants treated with neem, white cedar, garden quinine, or clove extracts. Apply- ing a foliar spray at the mature plant stage showed high efficacy in reducing the leaf rust infection (ACI) and neem extract was the most effective treatment. Two-spray application seemed to be more effective than one spray.

active against pathogens. These groups of compounds show antimicrobial effect and serve as plant defense mechanisms against pathogenic microorganisms [23]. Plants of Meliaceae family, espe- cially neem, contain at least 35 biologically active principles of which nimbin and azadirachtin [46] are the most active insectici- dal ingredients and are present predominantly in the seeds, leaves and other parts of the neem tree. The active ingredients of neem constitute mostly of triterpenoides, e.g. nimbin, nimbicidine, aza- dirachtin etc. [47]. The inhibitory effect of the plant extracts might be attributed to the presence of antifungal components, i.e., Aza- dirchin in Azadirachta indica, Artemesium in Artemisia annua, Caratenes in Ocimum sanctum, Emodin in Rheum emodi and Euca- lyptolin in Eucalyptus globulus [9].

Finally, it could be concluded that the used plant extracts hav- ing resistance mechanisms may be useful to control leaf rust dis- ease of wheat. On the basis of the results obtained during the experiment and reports of success of plant extracts in controlling plant pathogenic fungi, the tested plant extracts hold promise for the organic and ecofriendly management of foliar diseases of wheat. The findings of these studies may become the foundation for the use of biocontrol agents as a safe and cost-effective control method against leaf rust of wheat.

