We investigate an embedding of CK natural deduction proofs into IK natural deduction proofs. CK and IK can both be regarded as intuitionistic analogs of the basic classical modal logic K. Since, in general, the proof theory of these logics is given by means of quite different techniques the embedding can be considered as an attempt to reconcile these two approaches. Further, we show that the embedding naturally extends to the case of CS4 and IS4, and propose a framework that allows one to obtain a modular approach for all the intermediate systems.

Finding a good proof theory for modal logic, whether classical or intuitionistic, has turned out to be a rather delicate issue. One of the reasons is that modal logic comes in various guises, thus making it difficult to develop a modular and uniform framework that provides means to take into account the varieties of modal logic. Nonetheless, there exist quite a few recent proposals that can be regarded as satisfactory solutions to the problem: see, for instance, [15,6,18,11] and the references provided there.

This note is organized as follows: in section 2 we introduce the natural deduction systems NCK and NIK and discuss their main properties; in section 3 we show that the modal rules of NCK can be seen as derived rules in NIK, i.e. that NCK proofs can be embedded into NIK proofs; in section 4 we extend this result to CS4 and IS4; in section 5 we consider a modular approach for all the systems in between CK and IS4.

Remark 2.4 Let us consider the four rules for the modal operators in more detail. With respect to the  operator we have that, according to the standard possible world semantics, the formula  A holds at world w if and only if the formula A holds at all worlds v that are accessible from w (i.e. at all worlds v such that wRv). Now, the rationale behind the (  I) rule is that if A holds at any arbitrary world v that is accessible from w then A holds at w. The ( E) rule can be best explained by observing that if  A holds at w then, if the world v is accessible from w, A holds at v. Regarding the  operator, we have that the formula  A holds at world w if and only if the formula A holds at some world v that is accessible from w. The (  I) rule can thus be best explained by observing that if A holds at v and v is

Remark 2.7 Since the (  I) and (  E) rules have the side condition that v must not occur in the conclusion of the rule, we need a so called substitution lemma for the proof of the previous result. We follow [15] and define substitution as follows.

We show now that CK is a fragment of IK, i.e. that every theorem of CK is also a theorem of IK. Although this fact follows immediately from the axiomatizations given above, we establish it by showing that the modal rules of NCK can be seen as derived rules of NIK, thus giving rise to a hitherto unnoticed map from CK proofs into IK proofs.

Example 4.1 To illustrate how these additional rules work let us consider the derivations of the ( 4) axiom scheme both in NCS4 and NIS4. Note that, as already pointed out in example 3.5 above, the NIS4 derivation of the ( 4) axiom scheme given below may be obtained by applying the proposed embedding to the corresponding NCS4 derivation. Similar remarks also apply to the ( 4,  T,  T)

In this fairly technical note we have put together some rather straightforward obser- vations concerning two classes of natural deduction systems for intuitionistic modal logics. Let us call them the C- and I-systems. A typical aspect of a C-system such as NCS4 considered in section 4 is that it tries to accommodate as many features as possible in a single modal rule such as ( K4) or ( K4), thus making it difficult to get a modular approach. However, by adapting a different approach it is possible to obtain a perfectly modular class of C-systems. Although the introduction of an extra rule for each modal axiom scheme seems to be a heavy burden, the proposed embedding into the class of I-systems provides a neat theoretical underpinning, giving a sort of sanity check.

As we pointed out in remark 3.6, it would seem that, despite the fact that I-systems provide means to obtain a fine grained analysis of C-systems, they are in a way less flexible. Although the proposed embedding strongly suggests that one could try to restrict the set of relational assumptions to either the empty set or a singleton, it is not clear how one could avoid the derivation of certain axiom schemes such as, for instance, ( D0,  D2). One option that we plan to address in future research is to look for an indirect criterion via a transformation of I-system derivations into C-system derivations.

