Abstract In Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs), the energy consumption due to the sensed data transmission is more than processing data locally within the sensor node. The data aggregation is one of the techniques to conserve energy by eliminating the redundant data transmission in dense WSNs. In this paper, we propose an energy efficient structure-free data aggregation and delivery (ESDAD) protocol, which aggregates the redundant data in the intermediate nodes. In the pro- posed protocol, waiting time for packets at each intermediate node is calculated very sensibly so that data can be aggregated efficiently in the routing path. The sensed data packets are transmitted judicially to the aggregation point for data aggregation. The ESDAD protocol computes a cost function for structure-free, next-hop node selection and performs near source data aggregation. The buffer of each node is partitioned to maintain different types of flows for fair and efficient data delivery. The transmission rates of the sources and intermediate nodes are adjusted during conges- tion. The performance of the proposed protocol is evaluated through extensive simulations. The simulation results reveal that it outperforms the existing structure-free protocols in terms of energy efficiency, reliability and on-time delivery ratio.

operatively transmit the sensed data to base station (BS) [1,2]. These sensor nodes are randomly deployed in a remote hostile environment to measure the temperature, light inten- sity, humidity, noise level or any other physical conditions in its locality. These sensor nodes collect information from their surroundings and transmit them to one or more BS. The data may either be accessed from a remote location through Inter- net or the actuators directly perform actions in response to the event. WSNs are being widely deployed for different applica- tions such as battlefield surveillance [3], healthcare applica- tions [4], environment and habitat monitoring [5], homeland security [6], biomedical research [7], human imaging [8] and

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 pre- sents the related work on data aggregation techniques. The proposed structure-free data aggregation, data forwarding, the loss recovery and congestion control mechanism are pre- sented in Section 3. The simulation results of the proposed protocol are presented in Section 4. Finally, the paper is con- cluded in Section 5.

[21] selects the CHs randomly on the basis of remaining energy to distribute energy load uniformly among sensor nodes in a network. The cluster members send their data directly to the CH for data fusion and the fused data are forwarded to the BS. The Centralized LEACH (LEACH-C) [24], a variant of LEACH, uses simulated annealing method to select the CHs for specific time slots so that the average transmission power between sensors and their CHs is minimized. This is a central- ized approach that cannot be scaled to very large numbers of sensors.

[26] is a hybridization of tree and cluster based approach. The TCDGP forms cluster on the basis of location and energy information about sensor nodes. This builds a path in the minimum spanning tree using the Prim algorithm. The sink computes the distance between the CHs to form tree instead of CHs that decrease computational overhead of the CHs. These structure based data aggregation protocols consume a significant amount of energy during the construction of net- work structure.

Lastly, we studied structure-free and energy-balanced data aggregation protocol (SFEB) [29] that operates in a multi-hop network. It assumes that the packet with same event identifica- tion (EID) can be aggregated. The protocol works in two phases. In phase one, primary aggregators (PA) and secondary aggregators (SA) are selected by partitioning the network into virtual parallelograms. The virtual parallelograms are con- structed by using the communication range of sensor nodes. The aggregator pair collects data and finds a node to forward its data toward the sink. In phase two, the aggregator as well as orphan nodes sends their collected information to the sink. The data aggregation effect is improved by selecting a waiting time as a summation of the aggregator selection time, data col- lection time and ACK transmission time.

i.e. interference, maximum number of possible routes, use of maximum power to communicate to distant nodes directly. The topology control preserves connectivity with the use of minimal power. A sensor node must know about its own posi- tion, the position of the neighboring nodes and base station during logical topology construction phase.

sor node that senses it. The dsense is the sensing radius of the sensor node. The node closes to the event, producing more accurate value than the nodes far away from it [31,32]. For example, the heat and smoke produced due to the fire broke out in the forest spread gradually. Thus, the sensor node near to the event detects more accurate value as compared to far away node. On the other hand the far away nodes play a vital role in finding radius of the affected region.

becomes zero, it sends the control packet to its neighbor selected as described in Section 3.3. The other nodes freeze their timer and listen to the control packets of that sender. The control packet contains the source id, next-hop id, packet type and waiting period. The control packet is overheard by the sensor nodes that are in the low power listening (LPL) area of that node. The neighbor nodes set their transmission sched- ule and data forwarding to the next-hop node. The selected next-hop node aggregates the received and forwards the data to the next-hop in the direction of BS.

The Time-To-Deadline (TTD) is computed as remaining time to meet the deadline. The spro delay is computed as dn BS/ps where dnagg BS is the distance between aggregator node (nagg) and BS. ps is the wave propagation speed. The stran delay is computed as k/rt where k bits of data are transmitted at the data rate of rt. For the simplicity of computation, we assume that, per hop buffering delay and channel access delay do not vary. The b is the random slack time margin that provides safety for a timely data delivery of aggregated data packet to

pair for data transmission. A new path is established when the energy of the next hop node is exhausted or route fails due to network faults. Therefore, the route maintenance cost is high and proper load balancing is also a challenging task. On the other hand, the structure-free routing protocol dynamically selects the next hop nodes for data forwarding. Thus, in each round of communication a different routing path may be selected dynamically. This structure-free routing can provide load balancing and fault tolerance and reduce the chance of congestion.

We assume that the WSN consists of sensor nodes that are initially deployed randomly, but uniform in space and the BS is located at a specific point in the network topology. Each sen- sor node has a unique identity (NID). The number of source nodes varies since an event is possible to be random and be captured by more than one sensor nodes. The base station is connected to a data collection center via an external network. We also consider that each node knows its position and the position of the BS. The BS has no resource limitation and the sensors are battery-operated with limited energy and have the same physical capabilities. The sensor works no more if its

The fairness of data transmission is achieved by transmit- ting the data packet according to their remaining earliest dead- line. Furthermore, the transmission of the data packets is scheduled in a ratio of 2:1 for aggregated buffer flow and orphan flow. In case of unavailability of data packets in one flow, the other flow takes the chance of data forwarding.

consumption during data transmission and helps to predict the life span of the entire sensor network. The miss ratio is com- puted as the percentage of packets that are not delivered to the BS on time and discarded in delay sensitive application. We set Time-To-Deadline (TTD) as in RAG [2] for each gen- erated packet to compute the miss ratio. The miss ratio plays a vital role in the performance evaluation during reliable event reporting in the congested real-time sensor network applica- tion. The end-to-end delay is the time from the packet gener- ated by the source till it is delivered to the destination. The end-to-end delay plays a vital role during the performance evaluation in a time bound data communication system.

increases the traffic load and buffer overflow at the intermedi- ate sensors. The buffer overflow leads to packet drop at the intermediate sensor nodes. The packet drop rate increases with the increase in traffic load. The traffic load of a sensing region increases, if the node density of that region is more. Thus, we can say that packet drop rate is directly proportional to the node density of that region. The packet drop rate due to increased traffic load can be minimized by decreasing the traf- fic load. The traffic load decreases, if the data aggregation is performed as early as possible. The data aggregation near

