tem comprising huge number of tiny wireless sensor nodes and base station (BS). Each wireless sensor node consists of sensor, processor, memory, RF transceiver (radio), peripherals, and power supply unit (battery) [1]. These wireless sensor nodes are deployed over a geographical area in an ad hoc fashion for event detection and observe data for various ambient con- ditions. The WSN could collect this real time data to design the

Low Energy Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy (LEACH) pro- posed in [12] is one of the most popular hierarchical routing protocols designed to aggregate and disseminate data to the base station. LEACH obtains energy efficiency by partitioning the nodes into clusters. The LEACH operates on rounds where each round comprised of setup phase and steady state phase. During setup phase the sensor nodes will select a random num- ber between 0 and 1. If this random number is below the threshold value T(n), then the corresponding sensor node will act as a cluster head during the given period, called a round. LEACH distributes the role of cluster head among the member nodes in the cluster based on threshold value, which is calcu- lated by the following formula:

CH is to carry out the following three tasks. The first task is to gather sensed data from the cluster nodes periodically and aggregates the data in an effort to remove redundancy among correlated values [9]. The second task of the cluster head is to generate a Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) schedule through which sensor nodes receive a time slot for data trans- mission. The third task is to transmit the aggregated data to nearby CH or directly to the base station. Hence the lifetime of CH would be a very short span of time if the fixed node per- forms all the three tasks and it becomes essential to shift the cluster head periodically in a well-structured manner. In this work a new CH selection mechanism was proposed for the two tiered WSN architecture based on residual energy and communication distance between the sensor nodes.

Most of the existing papers [10] distance was estimated by the standard mathematical coordinate system. The proposed work performs real time experimental setup to carryout the estimation of distance among the sensor nodes based on RSSI values. RSSI value can be estimated by measuring the received power of radio signal and most of the IEEE 802.11 and 802.15.4 radio modules support the measurement of RSSI. The relationship between the received power (PRx) and RSSI is shown in the following formula [11]:

where P is the desired % of cluster heads, r is current round, and G is the set of nodes that have not been CH in the last 1/P rounds. During steady state phase the elected CH creates a TDMA schedule and assigns a time slot for each member node for data transmission. After a particular period of time the network returns into the setup phase to select new CH. This approach selects the cluster head based on a predeter- mined probability and does not follow any energy efficient mechanism while choosing T(n).

LEACH-Centralized (LEACH-C) uses centralized algo- rithm for the selection CH and the same steady state phase as LEACH [13]. In the setup phase, the base station collects the position and energy level of the sensor nodes and the node having greater energy than average energy of all sensor nodes would be elected as CH. Since this approach only considers the energy level of sensor nodes while selecting the CH, there may be a greater probability of elected CH is far away from BS which consume more energy when the communication between BS and CH.

Younis [14] presents a protocol, HEED (Hybrid Energy- Efficient Distributed clustering), that periodically selects clus- ter heads according to their residual energy. The authors do not make any assumptions about the presence of infrastructure or about node capabilities, other than the availability of multi- ple power levels in sensor nodes. However the proposed algo- rithms support only for building a two-level hierarchy, and lack for multilevel hierarchies.

This experimental report is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses about related work. Section 3 explains the network model and proposed DCHS mechanism in detail. Section 4 contains experimental setup and results. Eventually Section 5 concludes with future enhancement of this work.

Jung et al. [16] propose a cluster based energy-efficient for- warding scheme which ensures that while multiple nodes in a cluster receive a packet, only one node among them is elected to send the acknowledgment back. The binary exponential backoff algorithm was used to elect the node. Akhtar et al.

[17] present RSSI based energy aware intracluster routing tech- niques and are not focused on intercluster routing. The algo- rithm has got increased energy efficiency up to 17%. Also, the algorithm was tested with TOSSIM simulator and did not involve any real time hardware to measure the signal strength.

The probabilistic clustering algorithms described above are considering the two important parameters such as distance among the nodes and residual energy of the nodes. Most of the existing clustering algorithm experimental results were pro- duced based on the simulation results and being lack of real time behavior. In this report real time experimental setup was constructed to estimate the distance among the sensor nodes and incorporated with the simulation parameters to vali- date the proposed DCHS scheme.

The BS indicates N1 belongs to primary tier and N2 belongs to secondary tier. Now the base station elects three types of nodes in T1 such as cluster head nodes which communicate with cluster nodes, gateway nodes G1 which for- ward the data between primary tier, BS and gateway nodes G2 which act as relay nodes between primary and secondary tiers. In the given sensor field the first cluster head is determined in such a way that the CH should not be far away from the BS and approximate center location from all the nodes in each cluster. To do so, the nodes which are close to the average RSSI value can be elected as CHs for the T1. The probability of becoming initial CHs (PCH(i)) was calculated by

for finding first CHs. Similarly, the BS computes the average RSSI level of all nodes and identifies the set of cluster head nodes in the secondary tier T2. Hence the proposed DCHS scheme always tries to minimize the transmission distance among the base station, primary tier, and secondary tier.

The performance of the proposed system was estimated in two phases. In the first phase, the real time experimental setup was constructed to find the communication distance between two sensor nodes based on RSSI values. In second phase the pro- posed DCHS scheme was evaluated through simulation model by incorporating the RSSI value obtained from real time empirical values (first phase results).

