Background/introduction: Concept-level sentiment analysis deals with the extraction and classification of concepts and features from user reviews expressed online about products and other entities like political leaders, government policies, and others. The prior studies on concept-level sentiment analysis have used a limited set of linguistic rules for extracting concepts and their associated features. Furthermore, the ontological relations used in the early works for performing concept-level sentiment analysis need enhancement in terms of the extended set of features concepts and ontological relations.

The SA using ontological relationships in online reviews is a challenging task due to the varying nature of ontological concepts and relations. The existing studies on concept-level SA using ontol- ogy relations [5,39,43,36] have used a limited set of concepts and features, and their ontological relations for the efficient classifica- tion sentiments in user reviews. Therefore, it is an important task to develop a concept-level SA system that overcomes the limita- tions of the aforementioned studies for efficient classification of user reviews. In this work, a concept-level SA system is proposed with an extended set of concepts and features with an enhanced set of ontology relations for efficient classification of user reviews with respect to product aspects.

Twitter enables online users to express their sentiments and opinion about anything like products, events, and organizations [36]. Some of the studies have used Twitter to investigate the task of context-aware SA. For example, in their work, Ruba and Venkate- son [36] used a Twitter post to propose a custom SA tool. The method section is comprised of three steps: (i) Creation of domain ontology,

Kontopoulos et al. [20] explored ConExp software tool for cre- ation of concept lattice and we used the same analogy for gen- erating concept lattice diagram related to phone domain. . Different number of software tools can be used for the FCA namely: Lattice Miner, FCART, Concept Explorer, Galicia, Tosca- naJ, etc. [17].

Varghese and Jayasree [43], proposed an aspect-based SA using SVM, in which, they firstly performed a sentence level subjectivity/ objectivity classification using SentiWordNet (Esuli & Sebasitiani, 2006). After the classification, the aspect expression identification is performed by applying the POS tagging (https://www.nltk.org/ api/nltk.tag.html). The Stanford Deterministic Coreference Resolu- tion System [24,34] is used to perform co-reference resolution and the scoring of opinion words related to aspects is performed using SentiWordNet. Finally, the SVM classifier is applied for the classifica- tion of the opinion words related to aspects of the product. However, in the proposed approach, we have created a set of linguistic rules for the extraction of concepts and features. After the creation of linguis- tic rules, the concept feature relationship is identified using FCA, while the ontology is constructed using the concept lattice. Finally,

In this work, we applied different kernel functions, namely lin- ear, RBF, and polynomial The linear separable dataset assists in the efficient performance of the linear function, taking less training time. Furthermore, it has a minor overfitting issue. While, in the case of the non-linear dataset, RBF is effective. The key benefit of the RBF kernel is that the training data is restrained within the pro-

We selected two Model M1 (SVM) and M2 (MNB), and their evaluation is performed on the given Dataset. Suppose N depicts a number of records. The error rate for SVM is e1 where e2 is used for MNB. Our main objective to verify that the difference between e1 and e2 is statistically significant (Tan Steinbench and Kumar, 2016). It is computed as follows:

(FCA). Finally, the SVM classifier is applied to performing SA at the concept level. The performance of the proposed system is eval- uated using different metrics and also a comparison with the state- of-the-art methods is performed. Experimental results are encour- aging with improved accuracy (87.5%), precision (88%), recall (88%) and f-score (88%).

