The power consumption models are generally solved with fixed values for their input parameters. However, since those parameters are estimated from finite num- ber of collected samples, they introduce into the model some uncertainties due to partial information. Thus, the uncertainty needs to be propagated from the inputs to the output. This kind of parametric uncertainty is called epistemic uncertainty [21].

In order to investigate how epistemic uncertainty propagation affects the power consumption of a machine, we collect several samples while performing some bench- marks, thus considering different resource utilizations. In particular, we observed an ASUS desktop computer with an Intel i7-3770 CPU@3.4GHz, with 4 cores and a Simultaneous multi-threading (SMT) level of 2 (i.e., it can concurrently run 8 par- allel threads, in spite of the 4 physical cores), a 16GB memory, a dedicated GeForce GTX 560 GPU, two hard disk drives and a solid state disk, and running an Ubuntu

The obtained theoretic results are then applied to a practical case. We consider an uninterruptible power supply that starts working after the main power source fails. In particular, we wish to study the backup battery life when it is strained by a constant load whose characteristics are affected by epistemic uncertainty. Indeed, the load of a UPS may be derived from the power consumption of the server the battery must keep on. Since such a power consumption (i.e., the output of the power model) is uncertain due to the epistemic uncertainty of the input parameters, the UPS load cannot be estimated with certainty.

Several power models have been proposed during recent years for studying and developing new techniques to decrease data-centers power consumption. In [29], Priya et al. described the main power consumption models used for data-centers. The linear model proposed by Fan et al. in [11] is the most used one in the literature [6,12,39]. In this case, power consumption is assumed to linearly grow with CPU

where Pidle and Pbusy are the power consumptions of an idle server and a fully utilized one, respectively, whereas U is the CPU utilization. This model is adopted in [39] to identify the data-center cooling energy saving potential, and in [12] to model a predictive control that is able to save a significant amount of energy. Cerotti et al. [6] used the linear model to study the power consumption of Pool depletion systems.

Buyya et al. [3] proposed a power model similar to the one introduced in [11] in order to deal with the energy-aware resource allocation in cloud environments. Since the ratio between Pidle and Pbusy is generally known (e.g., 70%), they adopted the model:

evaluate the performability of an IaaS Cloud environment and its cost. In particular, they grouped all the physical machines into three different pools (i.e., hot, warm and cold) based on their current status (i.e., running, turned on and not ready, turned off, respectively). Thus, they gave different costs to performance and dependability parameters in order to evaluate and eventually optimize the cost and capacity of the considered environment. While considering the power consumption of the physical machines and its cost, they also take into account the cooling cost. Indeed, the power consumption for cooling mechanisms is estimated to be between 30% and 50% of the data-center total power consumption [25,10].

While considering the exploitation case, we investigate the lifetime distribution of a UPS battery when the power model adopted to estimate the system power consumption is using uncertain input parameters. Several battery models have been proposed in the literature: some of them, such as the electro-chemical models [8], are very accurate and need several input parameters to work; some others, like the kinetic battery model (KiBaM) [18,16], need just a few parameters and may be easily used also by inexperienced users. In this paper, we adopt the latter model.

Although [16] has already analyzed how uncertainty on input parameters (i.e., initial capacity and load) affects the KiBaM performance in predicting the GomX- 1 4 satellite state of charge, they expressed the uncertainty on the output measure without considering the number of observations of the input parameters. In this sense, our technique lets the users consider the amount of samples to be collected in order to get a more accurate output measure.

In this Section we apply the previous considerations about uncertainty propagation in power models to a real exploitation case. We analyze a UPS battery that starts working after the power source failed. In particular, we wish to estimate the battery lifetime of a UPS that must keep on a server which is processing a constant workload. Three main UPS architectures exists [38]: i) on-line UPS, that provides electrical power from the battery whether there is a failure or not; ii) standby UPS, that provides electrical power from the battery only if power source failed; iii) line- interactive UPS, that are high-class standby UPS. For the purpose of this paper, distinction between the three architectures is irrelevant since we study the UPS unit

In this paper we apply epistemic uncertainty propagation to power consumption models. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time epistemic uncertainty propagation is used to study this kind of problem. Indeed, in previous work the input parameters have always been considered exact, independently on the number of observed samples for their estimations.

The nonlinear power model presented by Fan et al. in [11] is the one we use to analyze our machine that we model as an M/M/c/K queue. We prove the measured power consumption fit the one estimated by the chosen power model. Moreover, we also show that uncertainty of Pidle and calibration parameter r are negligible and do not deeply affect the output of the model, since the two input parameters have a

