Software-defined wireless sensor networking is an emerging networking architecture envisioned to play a critical role in the looming internet of things paradigm. Since energy is a scarce resource in wireless sensor networks, many energy-efficient routing algorithms were proposed to enhance the network life- time. However, most of these algorithms lack network stability and reliability in the presence of dead nodes. This paper presents ESRA: Energy Soaring-based Routing Algorithm for IoT Applications in Software-Defined Wireless Sensor Networks, specifically for monitoring environment to address this shortcoming. The proposed ESRA algorithm efficiently selects the network cluster heads to be considered for solving the controller placement problem, intending to achieve network reliability and stability and enhance the network lifetime. The selection of controllers among the cluster heads is formulated as an NP-hard problem, considering the residual energy of the cluster heads, their spatial distance to the sink, and their load or density. To tackle this NP-hard problem, genetic algorithm is adopted to optimize the network lifetime, throughput, latency, and network reliability in the presence of different percentages of dead nodes. Simulation results showed that ESRA outperforms other three state-of-the art algorithms in terms of network lifetime and throughput by 15%, 20%, and 25%, in terms of energy savings by 10%, 20%, and 25%, and in terms of delay by 10%, 15%, and 20%. We also applied the proposed scheme on real networks adopted from the internet topology zoo, which showed promising results compared to other existing works.

We simulated the proposed ESRA algorithm and analyzed vari- ous important network performance metrics such as network life- time, throughput, network latency, and total energy consumption under different percentages of dead nodes. For comparison pur- poses, we have chosen recent existing energy-aware algorithms found in literature such as Energy-Efficient Fault-Tolerant Cluster- ing Algorithm for Wireless Sensor Networks (EEFCA) [13], Gateway Clustering Energy-efficient Centroid (GCEEC) for Wireless Sensor Networks in Agriculture Precision [14], and Energy-Efficient Clus- tering Routing Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks Based on Yel- low Saddle Goatfish Algorithm (YSGA) [15]. Simulation results exhibit that the proposed ESRA algorithm shows significant net- work performance improvement over the above chosen state-of- the-art algorithms.

Killi and Rao [18] solved the CPP by maintaining the network reliability and load balancing among controllers. A heuristic algo- rithm (namely, simulated annealing) is used for large-scale net- works. Their proposed scheme assumes a node is dead if its response time exceeds a given threshold, which is not always the case. A node with response time above a threshold might be over- loaded and not dead.

Qureshi et al. [14] proposed a load management scheme named Gateway Clustering Energy-Efficient Centroid (GCEEC) to address the load burden issues caused by sensor nodes that relay their transmission data to those that are close to the base station. In their scheme, the CHs nodes are chosen from the mean position, and the gateway nodes transmit the load of the overwhelmed CHs to the base station. The experimental results showed that the proposed GCEEC scheme is an energy-efficient algorithm in comparison with other schemes.

Luo et al. [16] solved the CPP by maximizing the network energy saving. They modeled their problem as Binary Integer Problem (BIP) which is good for small scale networks and used GA for large scale networks. In their scheme, they assumed each active link consumes the same energy; thus, they aim is to have the least number of active links. However, the drawback lies in their assumption, as nodes have different data to send on the links. So, this false assumption cannot hold true unless the same number of nodes use each link with the same transmission flow.

Cui et al. [20] presented a load balancing scheme for solving the CPP. In their scheme, they assume a controller is dead if its response time is above a certain threshold. Accordingly, new con- troller is to be chosen from CHs instead of the dead one. However, the controller could have been overloaded and if so, the load migration strategy should be applied to redistribute the loads among the controllers. Hence, the condition of having dead con- trollers holds true whenever the residual energy falls below a cer- tain threshold.

Different metaheuristic-based clustering techniques [21] have been introduced to minimize the network energy consumption and enhance network lifetime. For instance, the Yellow Saddle Goatfish Algorithm (YSGA) [15] is a metaheuristic-based algorithm that optimally selects the CHs, manages to intensify the network lifetime by considering an unfixed number of clusters, and cluster- ing the nodes to nearest CHs. However, if the distance between the sensor node and its CH is larger than that between the sink and the node, then, the sensor node is not clustered. In this case, the node sends its data directly to the sink. This contradicts the concept of clustering on one hand, and causes degradation in network throughput if a failure path or link between the node and the sink exists on another hand.

Nitesh et al. [13] proposed a fault tolerance and energy utilization-based scheme for the large-scale network. The pro- posed scheme named Energy-Efficient Fault-Tolerant Clustering Algorithm for Wireless Sensor Networks (EEFCA) considers the node position from the base station, residual energy, and the num- ber of sensor nodes in each cluster. In their scheme, each sensor node calculates the cost of joining a relay node close to the base station whenever its associated CH is dead. Accordingly, it trans- mits the load to the relay node that sends it to the base station.

The albatross is one of the smart creatures in the animal world that uses the windshields to avoid exhausting its energy when flapping its wings, and as a result, will be able to travel long dis- tances [22]. The albatross bird has inspired researchers at the Mas- sachusetts Institute of Technology to develop a new wind and energy harvesting model by adopting the albatross dynamic soar- ing flying technique. The model focuses on designing energy- efficient-based wind-propelled drones and gliders to monitor remote regions for long-duration, long-range under various wind conditions [12]. However, MIT researchers have revealed that the birds tended to turn by an average angle of 60 degrees, far shal- lower an arc than the 180-degree half-circle that most scientists have assumed. The dynamic soaring flying technique allows the albatross bird to travel far distances in a single day, with few flaps of its wings, saving lots of effort and energy [12].

has positively impacted the overall network throughput. That explains why the proposed ESRA algorithm is superior to YSGA, GCEEC, and EEFCA algorithms. In YSGA, GCEEC, and EEFCA algo- rithms, the load distribution of dead nodes is not considered. Thus, the percentage of received packets decreases quickly as the percentage of dead nodes increases. Hence, the ESRA algorithm outperforms YSGA, GCEEC, and EEFCA algorithms by 15%, 20%, and 25%, respectively.

In this paper, we address the controller placement problem in a multi-controller SDN-based WSNs to optimize the network energy saving and enhance the network lifetime. Our proposed ESRA algo- rithm is energy-efficient that selects the CHs by adopting the flying technique of the albatross bird. Moreover, an efficient network per- formance evaluation is carried out by considering a percentage of dead nodes to be present in the network that usually exists in a real WSN. Hence, ESRA algorithm achieved the network stability

