As a result, a comprehensive performance evaluation of ad hoc routing protocols is essential. This paper compares the performance of three ad hoc routing protocols namely, AODV, DSR and LAR routing protocols using the GloMo- Sim simulator version 2.03. We evaluated all available metrics supported by GloMoSim for these protocols and then per- formed a comparative performance evaluation. Since these protocols have different characteristics, the comparison of all performance differentials is not always possible. However, the following system parameters are utilized for comparative study on the protocols:

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives briefly a review of the related work. The simulation environment is presented in Section 3. Section 4 discusses the simulation results and performance analysis. Section 5 introduces the summarized results. Finally, the conclusions are given in Sec- tion 6.

The mobility model used is the random waypoint model [25]. In this model, a node selects a random destination within the terrain range and moves toward it at a speed between the pre-defined minimum and maximum speed. Once the node ar- rives at the destination, it stays for a pause time. After being stationary for the pause time, it randomly selects another des- tination and speed and then resumes movement. The minimum and the maximum speed for the simulations are 0 and 10 m/s, respectively. Simulation runs are done on variance pause time values from 0 to 300 s. The simulations have been done on a PC Pentium IV, 2 GHz processor and 3 GB RAM.

The average end to end delay for AODV is higher than LAR because, due to its single path nature and inefficient man- ner to handle route failure. LAR, on the other hand, shows low delays in all cases. This is because, instead of buffering data packets for a new route to be found, LAR forwards the data packets through alternative routes.

simulation. The ACK packets are increased using LAR and DSR routing protocols between pause time 100 and 200 com- pared to the AODV protocol. For the large network size and at the pause time 200, the ACK packets received using the LAR protocol is increased compared to the other two proto- cols. We note the ACK packets received for the DSR protocol

is lower than the other two protocols because another optional feature is the RREP acknowledgment (RREP-ACK). When unidirectional links are suspected, the RREP-ACK can be uti- lized to ensure the next hop received the RREP. If an RREP- ACK is not received, blacklists can be utilized to indicate uni- directional links so that these links are not used in future route discoveries.

Our goal was to compare the three routing protocols to each other, not to find the optimal performance possible in our sce- narios, we observe that the mobility pattern does influence the performance of MANET routing protocols. This conclusion is consistent with the observation of previous studies. But unlike previous studies that compared different mobile ad hoc net- work routing protocols under variety of performance metrics, there is no clear winner among the protocols in our case, since different performance metrics and network size seems to give different performance rankings of the protocols.

