The sediments of the aquatic environment act as major reser- voir of metals and source of contaminants. Enrichment of heavy metals due to industrialization and urbanization was recorded in the sediment of coastal areas all over the world. Sediments are not only functioning as heavy metal scavengers, but also as one of the potential sources of heavy metals to the ecosystem [2,3].

situated on the eastern side of Rosetta branch of the River Nile. The lake receives an annual water volume of about 4.1 milliard cubic meters through a system of eight drains and a freshwater canal called Brinbal. The drainage system collects agricultural drai- nage water from about 998 thousand acres in the catchment area. Drainage water is discharged into the lake through a group of pumping stations at the end tail of the drains except Gharbia drain

Thirty seven georeferenced sediment samples were collected using a Van-Veen grab coated with polyethylene [9]. Sub- samples were taken from the central part of the grab to avoid con- tamination. These samples were kept in self-sealed acid pre-cleaned plastic bags, rinsed with metal-free water. They were deep-frozen until analysis. They were dried in the oven at 70 oC, sieved using

Cu showed a low significance correlation among the different habi- tats. The lowest concentration of Cu was 8.7 in Lake Islets, whereas the highest concentration was 38.45 mg/g in the drains. No signifi- cance correlations were observed among the different habitats

(7) and Drain (8). The CF for Pb ranged between low and moderate at Abou Amer, Bashroush, near Drain 7, West El-Burullus Drain, Brinbal Canal, Elhoks, Houis Elkashaa, Tirra Drain and El-Shakhlouba Drain. However, it had a significantly high CF at El-Kome El-Akhdr Islet. The CF for Co varied also from low to mod- erate; however it was significantly high at El-Mahgra and Brinbal Canal. The CF was moderate for Cd in most of the studied locations, whereas it was highly significant especially at Abou Amer, Elberka El-Gharbia, El-Burullus area, N/W El-Burullus, near El-Shakhlouba, Bashroush, El-Mahgra, Brinbal Canal, Elhoks, El-Shakhlouba Drain and Megataa Islet.

and Tirra Drain. For cadmium, the values of Igeo showed moderate pollution degree except sites nos. 6, 20, 21, 23 and 27. The Igeo values of zinc showed moderate degree of pollution as well at El-Bellaq, Megataa, near El-Shakhlouba, south/west El-Kome El-Akhdar and nearby El-Boughaz, whereas the Igeo values of cop- per showed moderate pollution degree only at Drain 7.

which are dominated by fine sediments. On the other hand, middle and northern parts of the lake are coarser in texture. These areas also have high contents of carbonate and low contents of organic carbon [21]. The studied heavy metals in Burullus Lake sediments are in the following order: Fe > Zn > Cr > Cu > Pb > Co > Cd.

Iron plays an important biochemical role in the life cycles of plants and animals. It is found in organic wastes and in plant debris in sediments. The maximum value of iron (662.2 mg/g) was dis- tributed at the southern and western parts of the lake. This could

be attributed to agricultural and sewage wastes in these areas. This also could be due to the nature of sediments, which are dominated by clay particles that play an important role in the distribution pat- tern of iron as reported by Masoud et al. [22]. This value (560 mg/g)

observed by Masoud et al. [22], Saeed and Shaker [24] and Chen et al [25]. The lowest values of iron in the hydrosoil of Burullus Lake were recorded in lake islets far away from drains and other wastes. In contrast, the maximum values were observed in nearby

The highest concentration of copper (74 mg/g) was found at Drain no. 7 due to agricultural drainage. This value (45.8 mg/g) was higher than that recorded by Radwan and Lotfy [27]. On the other hand, the lowest value was observed at the lake islet where soil texture is sandy with poor organic carbon and low metals con- tent. The maximum value in the lake is within the limit (140 mg/g) of the European Union [28], but higher than that recognized by EPA (25 mg/g) [26].

was estimated at Abou-Amer area (352.2 mg/g); this could be attributed to anthropogenic activities and this result is more than those (217.33, 96.5, 261.56 and 66.35 mg/g) recorded by Masoud et al. [22] and Chen et al. [25]. The minimum value of Zn was recorded at El-Kome El-Akdr Islet (11.97 mg/g); this may be attrib- uted to soil texture of Lake Islet and low content of organic matter which play an important role in various geochemical processes as

close to El-Boughaz area, whereas the highest concentrations were found next to Drain no. 7 due to the agricultural wastes. This value is lower than 4.08 and 10.35 mg/g which were recorded by Masoud et al. [22] and Radwan and Lotfy [27], but higher than that

Maksba area (4.55 mg/g), which is far away from the drains. How- ever, its concentration increased to 68.29 mg/g in the western parts of the lake, due to the drainage that flows into this part of the lake. This could be attributed to the impurities that exist in superphos- phate fertilizers that are commonly used in agricultural activities within the studied area.

It is indicated that Cd is the most enriched and abundant ele- ment from anthropogenic activities; this could be attributed to phosphatic fertilizers and untreated wastewater from industrial and agricultural drains. Thus, in addition to invasion of contami- nated lake water, the application of pesticides is another probable source for sediment Cd contamination. According to Palma et al. [37], metals in sediments are divided into two important groups: first, metals that are characteristics of sediment and related with the mineralogical structure (i.e. Al, Fe, Mn and Li) and second, met- als that are related to the anthropogenic activities (i.e. Cd, Cr, Cu, Pb and Zn) and if present in high concentrations can be dangerous for the living organisms.

