them experience the feeling of being immersed (Craig et al., 2009). VR has applications in several disciplines, including the arts and humanities (Hutson & Olsen, 2021), marketing (Anderson & Laverie, 2022), sci- ence, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) (Barbara et al.,

cation and research into its benefits are fast becoming popular. In addition, VR is being used to explore novel approaches to delivering instructional content in conjunction with conventional teaching ap- proaches (Marougkas et al., 2023). According to Zhang (2017), VR is effective for training learners in areas where access to real-world sce- narios is expensive, difficult or impossible to reach. For instance, it might be challenging to schedule learners to go underwater to see how submarines work (Raja & Lakshmi, 2022), just as it will be expensive and time-consuming to schedule routine visits of biology students to surgical rooms to view live human internal organs and how they

Certain features of VR can provide experiential elements in the learning process, and such features include its capacity to create inter- active learning environments, hands-on learning, visual learning, Head Mounted Display (HMD) devices, and the ease and flexibility of using VR make learning using the technology a memorable one (Al Amri et al., 2020). VR, therefore, becomes relevant in learning environments that can potentially cause injuries or harm to learners and also helps reduce training costs. Given these, VR in education is a tool for providing real-world education prototypes (Mandal, 2013).

probable way of determining this, according to Fishbein and Ajzen (1975), is to find out if an individual intends to perform a particular task because the intention to perform a task is assumed to be the immediate precursor to performing such a task (Bagozzi, 1983). This study con- ceptualizes BI as a measure of the likelihood of trainee teachers to use VR in education. Nursiah (2018) reported that the intention to perform a behaviour is a good predictor for determining the actual use (actual technology usage), and therefore, the BI to use technology is a behav- ioural tendency of individuals to continue to use the technology (Kar- tika, 2009; Taylor & Baker, 1994; Usman et al., 2020).

Education, when handled by competent teachers, is a vital tool for fostering literacy as it empowers the people, and enable them to contribute to the progress and development of their nations (Odufuwa et al., 2022). We decided to examine the BI to use VR in education among pre-service teachers because they are still in the process of forming their teaching portfolios and would turn out to be relevant stakeholders in education when they become in-service teachers. Also, the acceptance and use of emerging technologies in education are to

Nigeria. This is especially important in an era in which smart technol- ogies continue to penetrate every sphere of human living, creating a world in which it seems that humans can no longer do without tech- nologies in their daily lives (Ishola et al., 2022). Hence, pre-service teachers needed to align with emerging technologies to prepare for their in-service profession (Akinyemi et al., 2022; Adelana & Ishola, 2020). It is therefore believed that our findings may be useful to stakeholders and policymakers in education for designing and imple- menting modern curricula for teacher education programmes, as well as providing VR-supporting teaching and learning environments in

sore eyes), according to Shibata et al. (2011). The CAVE (cave automatic virtual environment), which is a projection-based VR system, isolates users from their immediate surroundings and centres their entire audio-visual awareness in the virtual environment (Sherman & Craig, 2002). In the CAVE, VRE that may be shared by multiple users at once is created via this projection or holographic display, which projects ho- lograms onto surfaces.

[problem-solvers] who can provide solutions to the foreseen challenges of the emerging future. In addition, VR-based education provides learners with the opportunity to experience virtual problems during their use of the technology for learning (Kim & Im, 2022). It is possible to develop instructions for students of varying ages and levels which they can use for private study during the temporary absence of the teacher (Adelana et al., 2021).

theoretical models, various researchers have undertaken systematic literature reviews on them and suggested comprehensive analysis and evaluation of their applications, effectiveness and limitations (e.g., Venkatesh et al., 2016; Venkatesh & Davis, 2000). In this paper, the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) underpins our study. The TAM

real-world prototype of a learning environment in areas that can potentially cause injuries or harm to learners, and also reduce costs of training, make the use of VR in education vital due to these capabilities (Alhalabi, 2019; Mandal, 2013). While more studies are needed on VR for social good and factors that influence its adoption among teachers (Alfalah, 2018), previous studies have reported factors such as behav- ioural beliefs, normative beliefs and control beliefs as likely to have either positive or negative influence on intention to either adopt or use VR in education (Mazman, 2019; Kennedy-Clark, 2011). According to Fishbein and Ajzen (2011), chances are high that people will use tech- nology if the use of technology promotes social good. Concerning this, we proposed that:

(2020), individuals have diverse behavioural beliefs which invariably contribute to linking behaviour with the expected outcome. These be- liefs, according to Zhang et al. (2013), have a direct influence on the process of technology adoption within individuals. Islam et al. (2013) confirmed and supported the existence of this positive relationship. Also, there is a growing body of studies suggesting that there is a strong

The study participants comprised 231 undergraduate pre-service teachers who major in Educational Technology at a public university of education in Nigeria. This sample is made up of trainee teachers in their second, third and fourth years of the teacher education pro- gramme, and have received not less than two years of several training in technology integration in education. The pre-service teachers comprised 124 (53.7%) 400-level undergraduates (year 4), 54 (23.4%) 300-level

for other constructs in the second section - perceived usefulness (PU), technology anxiety (TA), technology for social good (TSG), technology readiness (TR), attitude towards technology (ATT), and behavioural intention (BI) were adapted from Ayanwale et al. (2022). The items were conscientiously adapted to suit the context of this study. Perceived usefulness (PU) (r = 0.85), technology anxiety (TA) (r = 0.70), tech- nology for social good (TSG) (r = 0.75), and attitude towards technology (ATT) (r = 0.89) have 4 items each, while technology readiness (TR) (r

participated in the study. Also, the trainee teachers were made to un- derstand that the study seeks their voluntary participation by giving their consent before participating, the absence of which would not lead to any form of punishment for non-participation. They were also assured of confidentiality and protection of their data before the link to access the form was finally shared with them by their departmental represen- tative. Hence, their consent was sought and obtained before filling out the survey. Only those who consented to take part in the study went ahead to respond to the items in the survey during the three weeks that it was left open for data collection. After the expiration of the three weeks, access to the link was removed.

Note: TP - technology perception, PU - perceived usefulness, TA - technology anxiety, TSG - technology for social good, TR-technology readiness, ATT - atti- tude towards technology, BI - behavioral intention to use VR technology, item loading >0.60, AVE >5.0, CR > 0.70, CA > 0.70, VIF <3.3.

technology, whereas, in the R-squared value of 0.703, the exogenous variables account for 70.3% of the variance in Behavioral Intention to use VR Technology. In addition, the R-squared value of 0.533 for Technology Readiness and the exogenous variables account for 53.3% of the variance. As a result of these R-squared values, the exogenous var- iables moderately to strongly correlate with the endogenous constructs. In the case of Behavioral Intention to Use VR Technology, the high R-

Note: TP - technology perception, PU - perceived usefulness, TA - technology anxiety, TSG - technology for social good, TR-technology readiness, ATT - attitude towards technology, BI - behavioral intention to use VR technology, T = t > 1.645 (one-tail test), p < 0.05.

Summarily, from the responses of the participants, and from the critical analysis conducted on the responses that we collected to examine the perception of VR, we infer that a majority of the respondents have some level of understanding of VR. Their responses were different from each other in terms of the way it was stated, however, they are related and share similar semantic features. Therefore, it can be concluded that many of the participants have a good grasp of what VR is. We concluded

responses generated led to the conclusion that the participants have a good grasp of VR. However, these responses are most likely to be based on an abstract but not a practical experience of VR. The responses generated concerning how VR could be accessed were few, most of which were speculative in nature and not really from a concrete idea of how VR can be assessed.

tional tool that can enhance their competence and instructional delivery as they become certified teachers, they are very likely to be interested in its use. This line of thought is deeply rooted in and can be justified using the Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA) (Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975) and the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) which underpins this study (Abdullah & Ward, 2016; Mailizar et al., 2021). Previous studies on

finding aligns with those of previous studies (Ajzen, 2020; Dwivedi et al., 2021; Islam et al., 2013; Rana et al., 2017) that have explored this factor. It affirms that a strong predictive relationship exists between attitudes towards VR and the behavioural intention of future teachers to

the importance of technology perception in determining behavioural intention. Several factors might have contributed to this result. One possible explanation is the novelty and unfamiliarity of VR technology. The participants in this study may not have had sufficient exposure or training in VR, leading to difficulties in accurately perceiving the tech-

which is not readily available in most schools) and cost associated with VR implementation in educational settings could have also influ- enced their perception. There is a possibility that the perceived complexity and cost might be seen as not commensurate with the po- tential benefits, resulting in a lack of positive perception among the participants, despite the acknowledged advantages of VR technology. These results have important implications for teacher training programs and curriculum development. While technology perception may not

useful, easy to use, and compatible with teaching practices, may have both practical and methodological implications leading to more positive attitudes among future teachers towards employing VR in the classroom. Similar to the findings of other studies (Ajzen, 2020; Dwivedi et al., 2021; Rana et al., 2017), we found that there is a strong predictive

