A high incidence of viral persistence and progression to chronic hepatitis are characteristic features of HCV infection. The aim of this case control study was to investigate the expression of the apoptosis related proteins Fas (CD95) and Bcl-2 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from patients with chronic HCV and schistosomiasis, and to evaluate their contribution in the development and maintenance of the different clinical forms of these diseases. The level of Fas and Bcl-2 expression in PBMCs was detected using flow cytometry in 85 cases in this study, including chronic HCV (40 patients) and schis- tosomiasis (25 patients) in addition to 20 healthy controls. Results showed that the increased apoptotic level correlated with increased Fas expression on the surface of PBMCs

apoptotic factor Bcl-2 (p = 0.19). Apoptotic PBMCs in intestinal schistosomiasis patients showed increased expression of Fas (p = 0.001) but again did not exhibit a difference in Bcl- 2 expression (p = 0.61) when compared to either hepatoplenic schistosomiasis or control patients. The Fas expression was highly significant in HCV > schistosomiasis > control (p < 0.002) while non-significant difference was found between the 3 groups as regards to Bcl-2 expression (p > 0.12). It was concluded that the detection of apoptosis of PBMCs in patients with chronic HCV was associated with increased expression of apoptotic markers

dormant proteases, the caspases, which cleave several hundred cellular substrates [2]. Two principal pathways to caspase activation have been recognized [3]. One is the death receptor pathway (extrinsic pathway), which is triggered by binding of FAS ligand (FASLG) to FAS (CD95) [4]. The second apoptosis pathway (intrinsic pathway) is induced by mito- chondria in response to DNA damage, oxidative stress, and viral proteins [5]. Mitochondrion-dependent apoptosis is mediated by pro-apoptotic genes (BAX, BAD, BAK, and others), whereas proteins like BCL-2 and BCL-XL are anti- apoptotic [6].

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a major worldwide causative pathogen of chronic hepatitis (CHC), liver cirrhosis, and he- patocellular carcinoma [5]. The fact that HCV exists as an evolving quasispecies plays an important role in the selection of escape mutants. Furthermore, several viral proteins inter- fere with cellular functions, in particular, those involved in the immune response of the host. Several HCV proteins also modulate cells through interaction with different effectors involved in cell proliferation and apoptosis, or in the interferon-signaling pathway [7]. An accumulating body of evidence suggests that apoptosis of hepatocytes and periph- eral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) are significantly involved [8].

Micro-enzyme immunosorbent assay (Axsym; Abbott Diagnostics-Abbott Max-Planck-Ring2, Wiesbaden, Germany) was used and confirmed by the detection of circulating HCV RNA by RT-PCR (PerkineElmer Thermal cycler). Confirmation of S. mansoni infection was carried out through detection of S. mansoni ova in stool as determined by formol-ether- concentration technique or rectal snip [16] and indirect hemagglutination assay (Fumouze Diagnostics-Levallois- Perret, France). The research protocol was reviewed and approved by Medical Mansoura University Ethics Committee for Human Subject Research. The study protocol respected the most recent declaration of Helsinki, and all patients gave informed consent before sharing in the study [17].

pellets were washed with 0.34 M sucrose to remove platelets. A few remaining erythrocytes were disrupted by hypotonic lysis with 10% ammonium chloride (cold 0.2% NaCl for 30 s). Isolation was restored by 1.6% NaCl. Lymphocytes were finally washed and suspended in PBS.

One drop of cell suspension was added to one drop of AO so- lution, mixed gently on a slide, and immediately examined with Olympus microscope with fluorescence attachment. Green fluorescence was detected between 500 and 250 nm. Cells exhibiting bright fluorescent intact or fragmented nuclei were interpreted as apoptotic cells, whereas viable cells were interpreted as cells that exhibited a green and diffusely stained nucleus [20].

isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated goat anti-mouse immuno- globulin with heavy chain specificity (Diaclone, UKAS, Cat. no. 853.001.010). All incubations were performed at room tem- perature, and 2% pooled human AB serum was added to the buffer throughout all the steps to avoid non-specific binging of MoAbs to Fc receptors.

the supernatant was decanted and the cell pellet resuspended in PBS and analyzed on the flow cytometer (FAC Scan, Becton Dickinson). Negative controls were included in the form of replacement of the AB by an isotopic antibody (IgG2a) or omitting the use of the AB. The cutoff point of positivity was considered when more than 20% of the cells stained with a particular antibody in excess of the background fluorescence in the negative controls [23].

Statistical analysis was performed using the Statistical Pack- age for Social Science (SPSS) package program. Quantitative data were presented as mean and standard deviation. Least significant difference (LSD) was used to compare quantitative data between each of two groups. Student t test was used to compare quantitative data between the two groups, while one way Anova (F test) was used to compare quantitative data between more than two groups.

chronic hepatitis are characteristic features of HCV infection [8]. Lymphocytes infiltrating the liver recognize viral antigens on hepatocytes, become activated and over-express Fas ligand (FasL) on their surface [9]. Possible mechanisms by which HCV increases the sensitivity of T cells to undergo apoptosis include enhancement of T-cell apoptosis as well as increasing Fas sensitivity to FasL binding on T cells, ultimately acting to tip the balance in favor of the virus [10]. This study demon- strated increased apoptosis of peripheral blood T cells which was associated with increased surface expression of Fas in patients with chronic hepatitis C, a finding similar to that

reported by another study which showed that the surface expression of Fas was significantly high in T cells derived from patients with chronic hepatitis C [26]. It was found that a close relationship exists between hepatitis C virus infection of PBMCs and cell surface Fas expression in patients with hep- atitis C [27]. The expression of Fas on PBMCs was found to be significantly increased in these patients, causing apoptotic cell death. The preferential detection of HCV RNA from Fas- positive cells, but not from Fas-negative cells, suggests that HCV infection of PBMCs might induce Fas expression, thus inducing apoptosis in these Fas-presenting cells, which may explain the decrease in number of PBMCs observed in patients with chronic hepatitis C. A progressive increase in its expression with the severity of liver disease from chronic hepatitis to cirrhosis was observed in several studies [28]. Significantly increased expression of Fas receptor in PBMCs were demonstrated in hepatitis C patients with fibrosis and absent necroinflammation [29], suggesting that Fas receptor expression may represent a self-limiting mechanism of the immune response [30], while in hepatitis C patients with cirrhosis and intense necroinflammation, a decrease in Fas expression in PBMC's was observed [29].

expressed on activated T cells of HCV patients compared with that of healthy individuals [26]. HCV core proteins have been shown to suppress the immune response of peripheral T lymphocytes to HCV infection, which has been shown to be due to increased Fas-mediated apoptosis of cells, contributing to HCV persistence [31]. It has been demonstrated that the core protein binds to the cytoplasmic tail of Fas, which may enhance the downstream signaling event of Fas-mediated apoptosis. On the other hand, core proteins did not alter the cell surface expression of Fas, indicating that the increased sensitivity of core-expressing cells to Fas ligand was not due to up-regulation of Fas.

the apoptosis of immune cells during HCV infection via the Fas signaling pathway, thus facilitating HCV persistence [32]. Increased T cell apoptosis observed primarily in the in- testinal group of schistosomiasis patients was associated with enhanced Fas expression compared with the controls. In- crease in apoptosis of lymphocytes isolated from S. mansoni- infected patients in another study supports the hypothesis that activation-induced cell death (AICD) is potentially a contributing factor in T helper (Th) cell regulation during chronic stages of schistosomiasis, which represents a criti- cally determinant factor in the hosteparasite interaction and might influence the destiny of parasitic infections either to- wards establishment of chronic infection or towards host

However, another study demonstrated that the increased susceptibility of PBMCs in patients with chronic hepatitis C to apoptosis was associated with diminished intracellular expression of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 [36]. This down- regulation of Bcl-2 expression may contribute to viral persis- tence and progression of liver disease in chronic hepatitis C. It was also shown that signal transducer and activator of Bcl-2 was significantly stimulated in HCV-infected patients [37,38].

Apoptosis of PBMCs in patients with chronic HCV showed increased expression of apoptotic markers when compared with schistosomiasis patients, which may be an indicator of disease progression and severity. This was due to an increase in surface receptor expression of pro-apoptotic Fas, associated with lack of expression of the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2, suggesting that this factor does not afford protection against apoptosis. Modulation of apoptotic processes, especially the activation of the Fas surface receptor, may thus offer valuable methods of therapy for chronic HCV patients.

