Modal and mixed transition systems are formalisms that allow mixing of over- and under-approximation in a single specification. We show EXPTIME-completeness of three fundamental decision problems for such specifications: whether a set of modal or mixed specifications has a common implementation, whether a sole mixed specification has an implementation, and whether all implementations of one mixed specification are implementations of another mixed or modal one. These results are obtained by a chain of reductions starting with the acceptance problem for linearly bounded alternating Turing machines.

A related concept is the consistency of a single behavioral model. If models serve as specifications, their inconsistency suggests that the specification cannot be imple- mented. Conversely, a consistent model boosts our confidence in implementability and may even allow code-generation of such an implementation.

We proceed by introducing the necessary background on alternating Turing ma- chines, specifications, and their decision problems in Section 2. In Section 3 state-of- the-art bounds for these problems are reported. The new EXPTIME-completeness results are given in Section 4. Section 5 reflects on a remaining open complexity gap for a special kind of mixed specifications, modal ones. We conclude in Section 6.

We refer to our recent overview [2] for a full account of related work. The present paper primarily improves on the results of [3], which are discussed in detail in Section 3. The relation of this work to generalized model checking [4] is detailed in Section 5.

In [13] a superpolynomial algorithm is given, which establishes common imple- mentation for k > 1 modal specifications. The algorithm is exponential in k, but polynomial if k is fixed. It computes a common implementation if one exists. These upper bounds follow also from the polynomial algorithm for consistency checking of a conjunction of disjunctive modal transition systems, as studied in [24].

Specifications Mi, Mhead, Mctrl, and Mexist model tape cell i, the current head position, the finite control of T , and acceptance (respectively). Common implemen- tations of these specifications model action synchronization to agree on what symbol is read from the tape, what is the head position, what is the symbol written to the tape, in what direction the head moves, and what are the transitions taken by the finite control, and whether a computation is accepting. The achieved effect is that a common refinement of these specifications corresponds to an accepting computation of T on input w. More precisely, any common implementations will correspond to different unfoldings of the structure of the finite control into a computation tree based on the content of the tape cells and the tape head position.

Theorem 4.1 states EXPTIME-hardness of CI for modal specifications. To- gether with the upperbound given in [3] we conclude that this bound is tight: CI is EXPTIME-complete. Moreover, by applying the reduction of CI for modal specifi- cations to C for mixed specifications [3] we conclude that C for mixed specifications is EXPTIME-complete. Furthermore by appealing to the reduction of C for mixed specifications to TR for mixed specifications [3], we obtain that TR for mixed spec- ifications is EXPTIME-complete as well.

