As an intermediary step we first choose a very large kind of completion, the space of all nonempty closed subsets with the weak topology, and we extend the algebraic operations to this space. We then restrict these algebraic operations to the sobrification of the original space; the sobrification can indeed be viewed as a subspace of the space of all nonempty closed subsets by restricting to the irreducible ones. We finally restrict to the D-completion, a subspace of the sobrification.

We recall some basic notions concerning the Scott topology, as they may be found, for example, in [1] or [9]. By definition the closed sets in the Scott topology of a poset are precisely those that are lower sets and are closed with respect to taking any existing directed sups. A function between partially ordered sets is Scott-continuous if it is continuous with respect to the Scott topologies. The following lemma is standard, although not usually stated in this generality (see [9, Proposition II-2.1]).

With respect to the specialization order every semitopological algebra is a par- tially ordered algebra; indeed, continuous functions preserve the specialization or- der, the specialization order on a product of spaces is the product of the specializa- tion orderings on the factors, and a function defined on a direct product of partially ordered sets is monotone if and only if it is separately monotone. Conversely, every partially ordered algebra A can be viewed as a topological algebra: just endow A with the Alexandroff or A-discrete topology, the open sets of which are all upper sets. The specialization order is just the original order.

Recall that a topological space is conditionally up-complete if every directed subset that is bounded above has a supremum to which it converges. In Section 8 of [11] it is shown that every topological space has a conditional D-completion, a strongly dense embedding that is universal among continuous maps into condition- ally up-complete spaces. Indeed for a space X this conditional D-completion may be obtained as the lower set of the image of X in Xd, where Xd is the D-completion. It follows directly from the fact that the basic operations of a semitopological algebra A and their extensions to Ad are order-preserving that this lower set is a subalgebra of Ad.

A Scott-continuous map between dcpos is the same as a cover preserving map for these canonical covers. In this way we get a full forgetful functor from the category DCPO of dcpos and Scott-continuous maps to the category PRES of dcpo presentations. In [10, Theorem 2.7] it is shown:

A particular case of a C-space is a continuous poset in the sense of [9] with the Scott topology. We say that A is a continuous partially ordered algebra if A is an algebra and a continuous poset such that all basic operations of the algebra are Scott-continuous. If in addition A is a dcpo, that is, a continuous domain, then we say that A is a continuous dcpo-algebra. For the Scott topology, a continuous partially ordered algebra is a topological algebra. From the previous proposition we infer:

One of the principal motivations of the authors for the study of D-completions has been an interest in their application to the study of cones, particularly T0-cones, which arise as power domains in probabilistic semantics and in certain approaches to potential theory in mathematics. In Corollary 6.7 we have seen that the cone operations extend to the D-completion. We intend to do a more focused study of cones and the D-completion in future work.

