The cardiovascular diseases (CVD) have grown significantly over the last two decades. The prevalence of CVD in India is known to be very high. However, not many data are available related cardiovascular disease in Indian adolescents, although consistent evidences are found from epidemiological studies on cardiovascular risk factors among adolescent in worldwide study [1e5]. The increasing prevalence of adolescent obesity is one of the major causes to be hypertensive in adulthood. It has also been suggested that the recessive gene or genes could be held responsible for higher BP in children [6]. Several studies

have found a strong linear relationship of body mass index (BMI), waist circumference (WC) and skinfold thickness with hypertension, dyslipidemia, and ischemic heart disease in In- dian population [7e12]. Ethnic differences in the different risk factors for hypertension have been well documented in different studies in adults and childhood populations [1,13,14]. Body mass index (BMI) and waist circumference (WC) were widely used to predict the risk of cardiovascular diseases. Some have also advocated waist to hip ratio (WHR), waist to height ratio and skinfold thickness indices for adverse cardio- metabolic risk profile in adolescents [15e21]. However, various statistical methods have been applied to examine the performance of anthropometric indices for the identification of

adverse cardiovascular risk profile [22e24]. Therefore, to quantify the magnitude of cardiovascular risk in the present study, multivariate data reduction techniques such as principal component factor analysis (PCFA) have been used to extract uncorrelated factors from various inter-correlated variables [24,25]. In the view of above consideration, the present work was undertaken to determine the significant traditional risk factors through principal component factor analysis (PCFA) among population based Punjabi adolescents aged 10e18 years. Punjab is one of the most prosperous states in India.

(HC) (cm) and three skinfolds (biceps, triceps and sub scap- ular). All anthropometric measurements were taken on each individual using standard anthropometric technique [26,27]. The height was measured using anthropometric rod with the standing erect position with the head in eareeye plane. The reading was then, recorded to the nearest 0.1 cm. The weight of the subject was measured in kilograms by making them stand on a weighing machine with minimal clothing. Weight was recorded with an allowance deducted for clothing to the nearest 0.5 kg. Waist circumference was measured using a steel tape. The measurement was taken mid-way between the

The study population included a total of 3060 (1530 boys, 1530 girls) adolescent subjects were recruited for the present study to identify effective traditional cardiovascular risk factors using principal component factor analysis (PCFA). The data were collected from educational institutes from various dis- tricts of Punjab. This study was approved by appropriate ethical research committee of Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar in year of 2010. This study population included ad- olescents from 10 to 18 years of age, of both sexes, enrolled in private higher secondary schools. This cross sectional study was carried out through classroom selection process divided into two stages. In the first stage, 25 Government and private schools were selected. The schools were randomly selected with respect to the proportional probability of school in the stratum. In the second stage, classrooms with respect to age group were selected by simple random sampling. The number was proportional to the population of students in each age group (10e18 years). All the selected students from the groups were considered eligible to participate in the present study after their parents had given written consent beyond student's

significantly higher values for height, weight, waist circum- ference, waist to hip ratio, systolic blood pressure and pulse pressure as compared to girls. Girls had significantly (P < 0.05) higher mean values of hip circumference, biceps, triceps and sub scapular skinfolds than boys. It is also revealed that BMI, diastolic blood pressure and pulse rate among boys were slightly higher but statistically not significant.

atherosclerosis in adolescents. Factor 2 is predominantly loaded with blood pressures and related traits (SBP, DBP, MBP and pulse rate) which reflect the risk of essential hypertension in adolescent girls and combined subjects, whereas, factor 2 loaded with obesity related traits among boys (weight and hip circumferences). Comparably, factor 3 is loaded with blood pressures among boys and with height and WHR among girls, while factor 4 contains high loadings of pulse pressure among boys, girls and combined group of adolescents.

The current study is focussed to determine the significant traditional factors through Principal Component Factor Analysis (PCFA) among adolescents aged 10e18 years in urban areas of Punjab. The systematic studies of cardiovascular risk factors and prevalence of abdominal adiposity among ado- lescents in Punjab are very scanty. In the epidemiological studies, anthropometry has been well established method for tracking cardiovascular diseases among adolescents [30e34]. Punjab is one of the economically advanced and prosperous

examine the association between risk factors and cardio- vascular diseases. Principal component factor analysis (PCFA) is one of the most sophisticated statistical methods to identify these associations. Very little work has been so far undertaken in India among adolescent age groups. Hence the present work may be helpful for further studies. The present findings support the hypothesis that clustering of cardio- vascular risk factors is more important than to identify any single trait due to its underlying heterogeneous nature of cardiovascular related phenotypes. The present study has some limitations beyond its strength such as (i) some inconsistent loading pattern for different variables has been observed (ii) the study is cross-sectional in nature (iii) it has been observed that certain risk traits have low eigenvalues which were eliminated from the analysis but act as impor- tant predictors.

Steinberger J, Daniels SR. Obesity, insulin resistance, diabetes, and cardiovascular risk in children: an American Heart Association scientific statement from the Atherosclerosis, Hypertension, and Obesity in the Young Committee (Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young) and the Diabetes Committee (Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism). Circulation 2003;107:1448e53.

Mokha JS, Srinivasan SR, Dasmahapatra P, Fernadez C, Chen W, Xu J, et al. Utility of waist-to-height ratio in assessing the status of central obesity and related cardiometabolic risk profile among normal weight and overweight/obese children: the Bogalusa Heart study. BMC Pediatr 2010;10:73.

