Overall, Thermophilic bacteria are the least explored due to diffi- culties in isolation and maintenance of pure culture. Biotechnologi- cal potentials of thermophiles and extremophiles were justified by their pools of amylases, proteases, lipases, xylanases and DNA poly- merases. Theses enzymes tolerate not only high temperature but also extreme pH and salinity [3]. Additionally, extremophiles were

Amongst the many thermal vents localized in Egypt, Hammam Pharaon, that lies in South Sinai at latitude 29, 197112 and longi- tude 32, 956179 has gained popularity due to the tourist attraction. In the present study, an endeavor was made to explore the bacte- rial community of Hammam Pharaon. The bacterial isolates were characterized at the morphological and molecular and fatty acid levels. Moreover, the biotechnological potentials of the isolates were explored, especially their amylolytic, cellulolytic, lipolytic and proteolytic activities.

collected in 500 ml sterile thermal glass containers and immedi- ately transferred to the laboratory. The mineral composition of the water samples was determined according to the standard pro- tocols [7]. Native bacteria were isolated from one gram of wet soil deposits as described by [8]. Then a 1 ml of the sample was trans- ferred into 100 ml of Zobell broth marine medium containing g/L:

Bacterial isolates were further characterized by scanning elec- tron microscopy (JSM 6501LV, Joel Japan) [11] In short, bacteria were primarily fixed in a mixture of formaldehyde and glutaralde- hyde (1:1) for 24 h, followed by three washes (10 min each) with potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.2). A post-fixation by 1% osmium tetraoxide was carried for two hours; samples washed with potassium phosphate buffer and dehydrated with different concentration of ethanol (50, 70, 80, 90, 95 and 100%) for 15 min each, in an Autosamdry-815 (USA) model. Finally, samples were coated with gold using SPI module sputter coater before being examined by SEM.

The Central Composite Design (CCD) was used to determine the main effects and interaction between pH and temperature on bacterial growth in order to obtain the optimum condition for each isolate. All strains were grown in 50 ml of Zobell med- ium [14] at the optimum temperature and pH values for each isolate for 7 days. Final biomasses were collected by centrifuging at 4000 rpm for 15 min. The cell pellets were transferred into a

of strain HM101 was creamy white in color, colony of strain HM102 was greasy orange and colony of strain HM103 was greasy and yellow. The strain HM101was found to be Gram-positive and strains HM102, and HM103 were Gram-negative. The strain HM102 was found to belong bacilli and HM101& HM103 were none flagellated and rod-shaped.

Most of the fatty acids were saturated but three unsaturated fatty acids were also identified. In HM101, the saturated fatty acids Decanoic acid (10:0), Undecanoic acid (11:0), and Dodecanoic acid (12:0) were the most dominant fatty acids with 47.85% from the total fatty acids. In HM102, the dominance was for Undecanoic acid (11:0), Dodecanoic acid (12:0), and Heptadecanoic acid (17:0) with 43.88%. In HM103, Decanoic acid (10:0), Undecanoic acid (11:0), Dodecanoic acid (12:0), and Heptadecanoic acid (17:0) were found to be the highest constituents with 55.67% of the fatty acid profile.

The uniqueness of the local isolates resides in their fatty acid contents. These contents and their ratios showed slight divergence from the studies of Tindall [6], and that of Shen [5] about the length and degree of saturation of mesophiles (prefers C15.5 fatty acids) or thermophiles (prefers C16 or higher).

Exhaustive literature survey led us to admit that every living creature (species) establishes its own niche with its own living habitat. In which, a relationship is specifically invented between an organism and its living surrounding conditions including not only the different members of all populations living within the same niche but also temperature, pH and nutrients. Hence, adapt- ability of the cellular component of native species is expected for survival under these conditions. Accordingly, cell structure and specially the cell membrane lipids are the determinants of the sur- vival and flourish of the organisms. Temperature selectively affects the type of lipids, unsaturation status and the degree of membrane fluidity. This vital role played by temperature also dictates that cells cannot grow at temperatures lower than that of their lipids solidification point [21,22]. This is consistent with the first order

proposal of Brock and Ingraham [23,31] about the thermal death of the organism. The peculiarity of fatty acid unsaturation, chain length, branching and cyclization all contribute significantly to the adaptability of the thermophiles to their environments. How- ever, the type of fatty acids did change between moderate and extreme Thermophilic bacteria, except no hydroxy, cyclopropane, or unsaturated fatty acids were found [20].

