Byun et al. [1] first proposed a C2C-PAKE protocol in the cross-realm setting by using the key distribution centers(KDCs) in the different realms as the go-between. They have heuristically proved that the schemes were secure against all consid- ered attacks. Such protocols are more popularly known as cross-realm C2C-PAKE protocols. For simplicity, we will call these C2C-PAKEs for the rest of this paper.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe our generic con- struction for the cross-realm C2C-PAKE protocols. To prove its security, in Section 3, we recall the ROR model, necessary basic assumptions and the definition of secu- rity. In Section 4, we focus on the security of the new scheme and provides details of the security proof. Finally, concluding remarks are given in Section 5.

The first security model about key exchange protocol was proposed by Bellare and Rogaway in [11]. After that, Bellare et al. extended their model to password-based key exchange protocol [12] in 2000. Recently, Abdalla et al. provided a new and stronger security model [9] by modifying the previous one [12] slightly and called it Real-or-Random (ROR) model. They suggested to use the ROR model for proving the security of their password-based schemes. In this section, we utilize this formal model to prove the security of our generic construction for our cross-realm client- to-client password-based key exchange.

Semantic Security in the ROR model: During the executing, the adversary A is allowed to send multiple queries to the Execute, SendClient, SendServer, and Test oracles as it wants, while it is no longer allowed to ask Reveal queries which is allowed in the model of Abdalla et al. [9]. Notice that, when b=0, the same random key value should be returned for Test queries that are asked to two instances which are partnered.

Proof. We follow the proof of Wang-Hu, which in turn is of Abdalla et al.[9]. Without loss of generality, we assume the set of honest users contains only users A and B. It can be easily extended to the more general case. Let A be an adversary against the semantic security of C2C-GPAKE in the Real-or-Random model with time-complexity at most t, and asking at most qexe queries to its Execute oracle,

Game G4. This game is modified as follows. If the adversary asks a SendClient or SendServer query for AKE between A and S1 involving a new pair of message tag not previously generated by an oracle, then we consider the MAC tag invalid and abort the game. So we have the following arguments:

Proof. The proof is similar to the games G6 and G7 in the proof of semantic security of C2C-GPAKE. Let Akp be an adversary against the key privacy of C2C-GPAKE whose time-complexity is at most t. Moreover, Akp asks at most qexe queries to

to design a generic construction of C2C-PAKE in the cross-realm setting by using 2-party PAKE and key distribution protocols, but they were not able to provide a scheme. In this paper, we present a general construction for the client-to-client PAKE protocols based on the generic construction for 3-party scenario. Moreover, we are able to prove its security by using the existing efficient protocols based on standard assumption instead of the random oracle models.

