Our case study here is concerned with modelling and analysing the public trans- port system in the city of Edinburgh, with a specific focus on the bus network. Buses in Edinburgh are thoroughly instrumented with GPS positioning instrumen- tation, and report their latitude and longitude every thirty seconds back to a central server which uses a predictive model to estimate arrival times at bus stops. These predictions are relayed back to passengers of the bus service using on-street signage, made accessible via a web site, and delivered by smartphone apps.

After the fitting procedure and writing the model we can attempt to determine if the real data from MyBusTracker and the results of our model differ significantly or not. To this end we can deploy the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (KS-test), which is used to quantify either a distance between the empirical distribution function of a sample and the cumulative distribution function of a reference distribution (one-sample KS test), or to compare two distributions (two-sample KS test). For our case we present the results of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, calculated using Matlab, where h is the hypothesis test result, with 0 indicating the acceptance of the null hypothesis, and 1 the rejection of it, at a significance level of 0.05. p indicates the p-value, returned as a scalar in the range [0, 1]. p is the probability of observing a test statistic as extreme as, or more extreme than, the observed value under the null hypothesis. Small values of p discredit the validity of the null hypothesis. ksstat represents the test statistic and cv the critical values.

Traviando [5] is a post-mortem simulation trace analyser which reads a simulation trace in state/event format. Bio-PEPA models can generate traces in Traviando format, allowing these traces to be analysed. Traces are single and discrete, giving one execution of the model up to a finite time horizon.

The overall goal of a bus punctuality improvement partnership is to improve bus punctuality. Specifically, in formal terms, this can include having a stricter definition of the window of tolerance around departure events. A narrower window corresponds to a better service, with buses departing less early, and less late.

The logic CSL provides a very convenient way to allow us to explore this question through a simple model-checking problem. We evaluate the CSL bounded Until formula Pr=?[(stage < N ) U[l,u] (stage = N )] for different values of the lower bound l and the upper bound u on the time of departure. The formula asks what is the probability that the transition to the N th stage of the journey occurs in the interval [l, u].

We have modelled the journey as three independent stages (NB . CT . LR . BT). This decision might seem to be overly simple, because the stages of the journey are surely not independent. After all, we are tracking the same bus across the three

