thus reducing the applicability and efficacy of these tools. The verification of health assessment tools is an important step for standardization but it is still a manual and ad-hoc process in the medical community. This work proposes the use of a formal approach for the verification of health assessment tools. We apply and evaluate a methodology originally proposed for the verification of Use Cases to a specific medical stan- dardization guideline. Preliminary results show that formal verification of these medical artifacts can be a cost-effective mechanism to validate and qualify health approaches.

This work proposes the use of formal methods to verify health assessment tools described in natural language. We apply the verification methodology based on Graph Transformations (GT) proposed in [6] to a new standardization guideline proposed for the treatment of Cutaneous Leishmaniasis (CL). Our preliminary re- sults show that formal verification of this artefact can early pinpoint a number of issues that would otherwise remain unknown and might compromise the applica- bility of this health tool. In this paper we i) detail the verification methodology, explaining the type of error detected at each step; ii) detail the application of the methodology to the CL treatment guideline by discussing the problems raised dur- ing the verification process and explaining the evolution of the artefact throghout the analysis.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the case study. Section 3 gives an overview of the GT-based verification methodology. Section 4 presents more details on the verification methodology while describing its application to the health standardization guideline as well as the issues raised during this process. Section 5 discusses the results of the proposed approach.

Cutaneous Leishmaniasis (CL) is a disease caused by parasites and characterized by skin ulcers. Treatment evidence for this type of Leishmaniasis is still poor and object of active research [1]. The treatment of CL is still a challenge not only be- cause of the scarcity of effective drugs and the high toxicity of the drug of first choice - antimonial derivatives - but also because of the lack of cost-effectiveness studies comparing traditional and new treatments. Such an analysis is crucial for this disease specifically because of its prevalence on poor countries and neglected populations. An important part of cost-effectiveness analysis is based on experimen- tal data that can be collected as part of a research protocol. This means data must be collected following strict standardized procedures that allow further comparison and analysis over different locations and scenarios.

We have proposed in [6] a verification methodology for software specification doc- uments described as Use Cases (UC). The methodology consists of constructing a Graph Transformation (GT) model using the entities and actions described in the contents of a UC, and performing some analysis over this graph to detect issues such as inconsistencies and ambiguity in the text. Considering the similarities we identified between a software specification artefact and a health assessment tool we propose to use our GT-based verification approach to formally verify the CL treat- ment guideline proposed by FIOCRUZ-MG. In this section we review the main concepts of the verification methodology, before applying it to the problem in hand.

The formalism of Graph Transformations (GT) [7,4] is based on defining states of a system as graphs and state changes as rules that transform these graphs. Due to space limitations, in this section, we only provide an informal overview of the notions used in this paper. For formal definitions, see e.g. [7]. Examples of graphs, rules and their analysis are presented in the following sections.

A Graph Rule describes a relationship between two graphs. It consists of: a left-hand side (LHS), which describes items that must be present for this rule to be applied; a right-hand side (RHS), describing items that will be present after the application of the rule; and a mapping from LHS to RHS, which describes items that will be preserved by the application of the rule. This mapping must be compatible with the structure of the graphs (i.e., a morphism between typed graphs) and may be partial. Items that are in the LHS and are not mapped to the RHS are deleted, whereas items that are in the RHS and are not in the image of the mapping from the LHS are created. We also assume that rules do not merge items, that is, they are injective.

A GT System consists of a type graph, specifying the (graphical) types of the system, and a set of rules over this type graph that define the system behavior. The application of a rule r toa graph G is possible if an image of the LHS of r is found in G (that is, there is a total typed-graph morphism from the LHS of r to G ). The result of a rule application deletes from G all items that are not mapped in r and adds the ones created by r.

The CL treatment guideline proposed by FIOCRUZ-MG consists of a series of instructions that must be followed by a physician. Since the target user of the guideline is a human being, its text is much more dense and follows no pre-defined notation or format. Indeed, several actions are included in a single step of the original guideline. Thus, we first translated the original document to a typical UC notation where one can clearly identify a set of pre and post conditions, and each step contains a single (or a small set of) action(s). In this first translation, the same words and actions present in the original document were kept, but split into more focused steps.

Having the graph representations of all elements of the guideline, we build a type graph that is a graph containing all types of elements that may appear in the UC. First we add all entities identified in Step 1: these will be the vertices of the type graph; and then we add the relationships created in Step 3: these are the arrows of the type graph. In addition to the entities and relationships, the type graph also represents the multiplicities, i. e. how many instances of one entity/relationship can exist in some state.

guideline preconditions. If they really must be present in the rule, this means the guideline preconditions are not strong enough and important elements are missing. Some possibilities are: the MD has an ampoule which contains Glucantime and MD has Lidocaine 2%.

In this paper, we presented the application of a methodology based on GT for- malism for the verification of a medical standardization guideline. A UC generated from the medical guideline was first modeled as a graph transformation system and submitted to a series of analysis and then updated according to the results. The results were considered promising, since it was possible to identify a considerable number of problems that could otherwise remain unknown and might compromise the applicability of the guideline. The formal verification lead to an updated UC that is less ambiguous than the original one, increasing its reliability. Thus, this work shows that the methodology has great versatility and may be used in other fields outside software engineering.

This work has also enhanced the reliability of the methodology as all the Open Issues found were accepted as problems by Fiocruz and corrected to improve the guideline. An interesting future work is to develop a software tool to automate the steps of the methodology. This will help the designer of the UC (or any other UC- like document) to build a formal model. Such tool would increase the scope of use

