In the realm of system biology, the study of regulatory networks leads biologists to the development of increasingly large, detailed and complex models. These complex models, replicating the dynamics of cell processes, are then analyzed using different approaches to obtain predictions. Genetic oscillations play a main role in the activity of signal transduction by maintaining the cascade of internal biochemical reactions with the extracellular environment. Molecular alterations in the performance of such behavioral rhythms can lead to severe pathological problems, e.g. cancer. Different formal approaches have been proposed to analyze Biological Regulatory Networks (BRNs) Such approaches mainly involve the use of non-functional

Cells are dynamic systems of complex interacting networks in which proteins, genes and small regulatory molecules play together in a programmed manner to perform multiple tasks in an organism. Genes are the informative subunits of DNA and they decode instructions in form of proteins. When a gene is switched on, information flows from genetic to proteomic level as a complex processes of transcription and translation. Some proteins have the function of regulating the expression of genes

by turning them on or off. This process of interaction, between genes and protein regulatory elements, establishes a Biological Regulatory Network (BRNs). BRNs often contain feedback loops in order to impose a controled mechanism intended to maintain an optimal concentration of proteins in a cell [20]. This make it difficult to predict the dynamics (behaviors) of BRNs. The study of cellular dynamics is very critical for the understanding of intrinsically evolving morphological characters involved in progression towards a disease state. As in case of the p53-mdm2 feedback loop, oscillatory behavior is considered as the major cause of cancer initiation and progression.

BRNs are often represented symbolically by biologists as directed graphs or logical feedback circuits [6,18]. The behavior of these interactive graphs and circuits is then analyzed in order to infer the dynamics of the system [19]. A limitation of this modeling approach is that it does not facilitate the understanding of network dynamics as the number of intertwined biological entities increases.

Recently, BRNs have been described as concurrent systems, which paves the way for the application of formal verification techniques in the field of systems biology [7,17]. Bernot et al. [5] have applied formal methods to the field of system biology. Their contributions includes the formal representation of BRNs as asynchronous system of interacting biological entities in the BDD based functional model checker SMV and specification of biological properties in Computational Tree Logic (CTL). Finally they applied their approach to a case study: th analysis of mucus production in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

