We describe some aspects of the relationship between the chemical organisations of a reaction network and the chemical organisations of the fragments of this network. The conjecture is that fragments embeddable in a (feasible) organisation of molecules is a (feasible) organisation of fragments. We show this for a certain type of reaction network. However the fragmentation can always be altered such that the result becomes valid for all networks. Of course, this comes at a cost, namely a less coarse-grained fragment system. For the case that we do not change the fragmentation, we give examples for which the statement is true and counterexamples for which it is not. Furthermore we present some interesting examples illustrating our findings and further questions.

since it allows to not write down all the molecular species and reactions, but only to give patterns [1]. However the theory of chemical organisations is formulated for reaction-based models, whereas the notion of fragments is defined for rule-based models. We will switch between the models freely when they describe the same reaction network.

soundness of fragments implies that the fragments that appear in an organisation found in a fixpoint form an organisation of (F, R). Thus we conjecture that this does not only hold for organisations found in fixpoints, but for all organisations. This conjecture is proven here for a certain class of reaction networks. We also give a counterexample to the conjecture and an example showing that our result could be extended.

Sections 2 and 3 shortly outline the parts of the theory of organisations and fragments we need. Section 4 contains a more formal version of our conjecture and its proof in the special case. In Section 5 we give some examples. Finally we state some benefits of our results and mention open questions.

For the special case considered here we showed that the set of fragments embeddable in a (feasible) organisation of molecules is a (feasible) organisation of fragments. The case described is presumably the only situation where it is possible to find a sensible notion of organisations on the fragments. Additionally, we can always modify the aCM so that our results hold. This comes, of course, at a cost since it increases the amount of fragments.

