Contextual Grammars (CGs) were introduced in [9] and many variants have already been investigated (see [5] for a recent survey). CGs are pure grammars since they do not use any auxiliary symbol: starting from some basic sentences called axioms, this formalism de nes new sentences by inserting pair of words called contexts around substrings belonging to some languages called selectors. In this derivation process, each sentential form is in fact a sentence which contains all previously introduced terminal symbols and some new ones: the symbols of a context. CGs were mainly studied from a mathematical point of view. However, in [8], it is shown that some variants could be used in natural language processing (NLP) but the authors also indicate that one of the main

Each nonterminal A 2 N has a xed arity whose value is arity(A). By de nition arity(S) = 1. The arity k of a grammar (resulting in a k-PRCG), is the maximum arity of its nonterminals. The size of a clause c = A0 ( ~0) !

The language de ned by a PRCG is based on the notion of range. For a given string w = a1 ::: an 2 T , a pair of integers (i; j) s.t. 0  i  j  n is called a range, and is denoted hi::jiw. In the range hi::jiw, i is its lower bound,

In any PRCG, terminals, variables and arguments of a clause denote ranges. The empty argument denotes an empty range. A terminal t denotes the range hj  1::jiw i w = a1 ::: an and t = aj. More generally, a string of the form XY denotes a range i both X and Y denote ranges that can be concatenated: the concatenation on strings matches the concatenation on ranges.

In a NRCG, a negative predicate call de nes the complement language (w.r.t. T ) of its positive counterpart: an instantiated negative predicate suc- ceeds (i.e., the derive relation ) is extended to allow A( ~) ) ") i its pos-

x = x1 x2 x3, y = x1 ux2vx3 for (u; v) 2 Ci, x2 2 Si, for some i, 1   i   n. If  is a derive relation mode (i.e.,  2 fex; ing), the language de ned by K

30 can only be instantiated i X X X , the argument of the rightmost predi- cate call, denotes a range, that is i the three ranges bounded respectively to X1, X2 and X3 can be concatenated. This is possible i X1uX2vX3 = X1X2X3 (i.e., uv = ").

Of course, this extension of the RCG formalism is not harmless on parse time complexities, even if we restrict ourselves to bounded DRCGs. 6 If we assume that the length of any intermediate input string is bounded by l, which is the case of CGs, the number of these strings is O((jT j + 1)l). Thus, even in that case, the parse time of 1-bounded DRCLs increases from polynomial to exponential. 7

