Fungal keratitis is a leading cause of serious ocular morbid- ity and blindness. It is worldwide in distribution, but is more common in the tropics and subtropical regions [1]. It was re- ported that the incidence of fungal keratitis in Egypt is increasing, correlating with the climatic changes (rises in minimum temperature and the maximum atmospheric hu- midity) in the region [2].

[1]. In developing countries, microscopic evaluation is the most valuable and rapid diagnostic tool for detection of fungal el- ements in corneal scrapings. Thus, there is a need to identify a staining method for fungal keratitis diagnosis that is rapid, easy to perform and has a high sensitivity in the clinical setting.

Methylene blue (MB) is widely used in clinics as a dye and a biological staining agent. MB detects gonococci, early cancer cells, metastasized cancer cells in lymph nodes in early- stage breast cancer, and is also used to diagnose pre-cancerous pathological changes and early gastric cancer [9,10]. The effi- cacy of MB has been investigated for the diagnosis of fungal keratitis in one study, and has been found to be a fast and ef- fective method for the early diagnosis of fungal keratitis [11]. Therefore we aimed in the current study to confirm the ef- ficacy of MB staining for the rapid detection of fungal keratitis and to compare the positive rates, sensitivity and specificity with those of a 10% KOH-based smear and calcofluor white (CW)

Antifungal topical therapy with amphotericin B in concentra- tions of 5 mg/ml was started for all cases immediately on receiving a positive report of fungal filaments by microscopic examination of the corneal scraping. The product was pre- pared from the intravenous formulation (Fungizone, Bristol- Myers Squibb, New York, NY) diluted in distilled water. One hourly topical drops was applied for a week, then each two hours for three weeks and then continued on a tapering basis depending on the activity of keratitis till resolution of the ulcers. Additional surgical procedures were undertaken for patients not responding to medical therapy and these procedures in- cluded therapeutic penetrating keratoplasty (PK), anterior chamber wash with amphotericin B or evisceration if needed.

Fungal keratitis has become one of the leading causes of visual loss especially in many developing countries, where the large numbers of the population are farmers. Fungal keratitis remains a diagnostic and therapeutic challenge to ophthalmologist. The difficult matters lie in establishing a clinical diagnosis, isolat- ing the etiologic fungal organisms in the laboratory, and treating the keratitis effectively with topical antifungal agents [13,14]. The fungal etiology was proven in 39 keratitis cases with a rate of 81.25% based on the culture results. The population in the present study included patients clinically diagnosed with fungal keratitis, i.e., belonging to a high-risk population, and, there- fore, the positive rate of fungal culture of corneal samples was relatively high. In the current study, the largest proportion of the patients were in the middle decades, which was the same in many developing countries such as south India, north China

