XPath allows to specify the name of nodes (i.e., tags) and attributes to be present in the XML tree together with boolean conditions about the content of nodes and attributes. XPath querying mechanism is based on a boolean logic: the nodes retrieved from an XPath expression are those matching the path of the XML tree. Therefore, the user should know the XML schema in order to specify queries. However, even when the XML schema exists, it may not be available for users. Moreover, XML documents with the same XML schema can be very different in structure. Let us suppose the case of XML documents containing the curriculum vitae of a certain group of persons. Although they can share the same schema, each one can decide to include studies, jobs, training, etc. organized in several ways: by year, by relevance, and with different nesting degree.

The need for providing flexibility to XPath has recently motivated the investigation of extensions of the XPath language. The most relevant ones are [8,9] in which authors introduce in XPath flexible matching by means of fuzzy constraints called close and similar for node content, together with below and near for path structure. In addition, they have studied deep-similar notion for tree matching.  In order to provide ranked answers they adopt

a Fuzzy set theory-based approach in which each answer has an associated numeric value (the membership degree). The numeric value represents the Retrieval Status Value (RSV) of the associated item. In the work of [11], they propose a satisfaction degree for XPath expressions based on associating a degree of importance to XPath nodes, and they study how to compute the best k answers. In both cases, authors allow the user to specify in the query the degree to which the answers will be penalized.

The structure of the paper is as follows. Whereas in Section 2 we present our fuzzy extension of XPath, Section 3 is devoted to MALP and the FLOPER environment, together a description of the integration of fuzzy XPath and MALP. Next, Section 4 discusses the implementation issues and finally, Section 5 concludes planning future work.

In this paper we have described the implementation of a fuzzy extension of XPath. We have recently proposed such XPath extension [5]. Here we have fo- cused on the implementation of the proposal, by using the FLOPER tool and MALP rules. As a result of the implementation, a prototype is publicly avail- able from http://dectau.uclm.es/fuzzyXPath/. The material presented here represents the first real-world application developed with the fuzzy logic language MALP (using too our FLOPER tool), by showing its capabilities for easily modeling scenarios where concepts somehow based on fuzzy logic play a crucial role. In particular, we have shown the ability of the MALP lan- guage for easily coding the new constructs (both structural -deep and down-

