Abstract Data in many real life engineering and economical problems suffer from inexactness. Herein we assume that we are given some intervals in which the data can simultaneously and indepen- dently perturb. We consider the generalized production planning problem with interval data. The interval data are in both of the objective function and constraints. The existing results concerning the qualitative and quantitative analysis of basic notions in parametric production planning problem. These notions are the set of feasible parameters, the solvability set and the stability set of the first kind.

A production planning problem exists because there are limited production resources that cannot be stored from period to per- iod. Choices must be made as to which resources to include and how to model their capacity and behavior, and their costs. Also, there may be uncertainty associated with the production function and the constraints. The production planning problem starts with a specification of customer demand that is to be met by the production plan. One might only include the most critical or limiting resource in the planning problem, e.g. a bottleneck. Alternatively, when there is not a dominant resource, then one must model the resources that could limit production.

and Jamalnia and Soukhakian [5]. Hax and Meal [6] introduced the notion of hierarchical production planning and provide a specific framework for this problem, where there is an optimization model with each level of the hierarchy. Each optimization model imposes a constraint on the model at the next level of the hierarchy.

Any planning problem starts with a specification of a cus- tomer demand but In most contexts, future demand is partially known. So one relies on a forecast for the future demand but the forecast is inaccurate. This leads to that demand that can- not be met in a period is lost, thus reducing revenue. In our work, we develop a new planning problem to minimize the lost demands and thus maximize revenues. First, we construct the production planning problem with interval numbers as uncer- tainty in both of the objective function and constraints. After that we will treat the uncertain of objective function and con- straints. In Section 4, parametric study for the treatment prob- lem is introduced. Finally, a numerical example is provided to clarify the proposed approach.

