Studying the characteristics of thousands of genes simultaneously offered a deep insight into cancer classification problem. It introduced an abundant amount of data ready to be explored. It has also been applied in a wide range of applications such as drug discovery, cancer prediction and diagnosis which is a very important issue for cancer treatment. Besides, it helps in understanding the function of genes and the interaction between genes in normal and abnormal conditions. That is done by monitoring the behav- ior of genes -gene expression data- under different conditions.

In this paper, an effective ensemble approach is proposed. Ensemble classifiers increase not only the performance of the classification, but also the confidence of the results. The motivations beyond using ensemble classifiers are that the results are less dependent on peculiarities of a single training set and because the ensemble system outperforms the performance of the best base classifier in the ensemble.

Gene expression level represents the amount of RNA produced in a cell under different biological states. So during cell division process, if the cells suffer from diseases -i.e. cancer or malignant tumors- that cause alteration or mutations in genes, the uncontrol- lable behavior of the gene will be transmitted to daughter cells.

The expression levels of thousands of genes can be simultane- ously measured under particular experimental environments and conditions due to the significant advancement of DNA microarray technology. This technology made it possible to understand life on the molecular level, and enables to generate large-scale gene expression data. Besides, it has led to many analytical insights because it produced large amount of gene data ready to be ana- lyzed rapidly and precisely by managing them using several statis- tical and machine learning processes.

The standard technique is to transcribe mRNA from two cells and reverse transcribe both of them into cRNA, label them using fluorescent dyes (red if cancerous and green if benign). Both sam- ples are distributed over the whole microarray in order to hybri- dize with their corresponding cDNA (labeled cDNA try to bind to their complementary cDNA on the microarray in order to form a double stranded molecule in the process called hybridization). Hybridization thus acts like a detector of the presence of a certain gene. The slide is then scanned to obtained numerical intensities of each dye. Then, the substrate can be scanned as an image that can be manipulated by image processing techniques; the intensity of the colors corresponds to the number of mRNA transcribed for each gene. By comparing the intensity of the colors for a gene under two different experimental conditions, gene expression levels can be monitored. For all genes on a single chip, gene expres-

tor is based on the theory that, more confidence should be attrib- uted to points far from the decision boundary than points near it. Bolstered resubstitution error estimators are low variance and gen- erally low bias as well. It is very competitive in comparison with cross validation and bootstrap error estimators especially for small sample problems [6].

Preprocessing Module: According to the dataset defined in the gene expression dataset module, preprocessing module pre- pares the dataset to be manipulated. Preparation includes filter- ing, thresholding, logarithmic transformation and data normalization. Those procedures are essential to be done before actual classification take place.

reducing the variance of the error estimation and sometimes the bias too [1]. Unlike cross validation, BRE make use of the whole available data by generating M artificial test samples based on the available ones on the training set. It has been proven that BRE is more accurate and faster than traditional error estimation techniques such as LOO and the 0.632 boot- strap [5]. Bolstered resubstitution error can be defined as:

training data (i.e., memorized it) and hence its performance is unexpected while predicting the class membership of new sam- ples. Feature selection can be categorized into three main cate- gories based on the way of combing the selected feature subset with the classification model: Wrappers, Filters, and Embedded methods. The proposed system utilizes three different feature selection algorithms:

Majority Voting Module: The last step in ensemble classifica- tion process is to combine the predictions made by ensemble member classifiers. It varies from very simple forms of vote count or majority voting which assign a sample to the class that takes largest number of votes predicted by ensemble members (ties are broken arbitrary), weighted votes which take into con- sideration the weight or the accuracy of the ensemble member in order to determine to what extends an ensemble member participates in the final decision. The proposed system applies simple majority voting as a combining technique.

Typically, gene expression datasets suffers from high dimen- sionality. Thus, gene selection mechanism must be taken into con- sideration. It involves finding the most informative genes in among the massive number of available genes. The proposed system uses three different feature selection methods for selecting the best gene subsets and passes it over for classification. The first three members of the ensemble apply BAHSIC gene selection algorithm with different predefined number of genes to select, the forth apply EVD algorithm and the fifth apply SVD algorithm.

In this section, results obtained by the proposed system are examined. Results of the proposed system are compared with related work results. For performance testing, total ensemble error rate, base classifiers error, AUC and BCI are calculated. Experiments are performed against three benchmark cancer datasets; namely, Leukemia, Colon and Breast cancer datasets:

Leukemia Dataset: The acute leukemia data was first published in [3]. Dettling [4] preprocessed this data via logarithmic trans- formation to base 10 and feature selection. As a result, there were actually 3571 genes after data preprocessing. Gene expression matrix for 3571 gene expression values on 72 indi- viduals (3571 by 72) along with a vector of class index (72 by 1) is presented. The Leukemia dataset can be found at http:// www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC151171.

The first three base classifiers in the ensemble utilize BAHSIC feature selection algorithm [2] with user defined number of selected genes to return for classification while classification is done by 3- or 5- nearest neighbor classifiers. Values of 50, 5, and 25 were given as an input to the BAHSIC algorithm denoting the number of genes to select from genes pool. The bolstered error rate was 15.0%, 23% and 16.1%; the Bayesian credible interval was [12.5, 18.1], [20.6, 27.3] and [13.5,

The fourth ensemble member utilizes EVD gene selection along with a 3-nearest neighbor classifier. The number of Monte-Carlo samples is 10. Number of genes selected by EVD gene selection algorithm is 49 genes. EVD gene selection is superior over BAH- SIC algorithm with approximately the same number of selected genes. The bolstered error rate was 9.5%; the Bayesian credible interval was [7.4, 12.0] and the AUC was 0.97.

The fifth ensemble member utilizes SVDEntropy feature selec- tion with simple ranking as a criterion for picking genes along with 3-nearest neighbor classifier. The number of Monte-Carlo samples remained 10. The bolstered error rate was 8.1%; the Bayesian credible interval was [6.3, 10.6]; the AUC was 0.97;

