We present a general method - the Machine - to analyse and characterise in finitary terms natural transfor- mations between well-known functors in the category Pol of Polish spaces. The method relies on a detailed analysis of the structure of Pol and a small set of categorical conditions on the domain and codomain functors. We apply the Machine to transformations from the Giry and positive measures functors to com- binations of the Vietoris, multiset, Giry and positive measures functors. The multiset functor is shown to be defined in Pol and its properties established. We also show that for some combinations of these func- tors, there cannot exist more than one natural transformation between the functors, in particular the Giry monad has no natural transformations to itself apart from the identity. Finally we show how the Dirichlet and Poisson processes can be constructed with the Machine.

Classical tools of probability theory are not geared towards compositionality, and especially not compositional approximation (Kozen, [13]). This has not prevented authors from developing powerful techniques (Chaput et al. [5], Kozen et al. [14]) based on structural approaches to probability theory (Giry, [9]). Here, we adopt a slightly different standpoint: we propose to tackle this tooling problem globally, by combining structural insights of Pol together with some classical tools of proba- bility theory and topology put in functorial form. The outcome is the Machine, an axiomatic reconstruction in category-theoretic terms of developments carried out in [7]. Thus, we get a simpler and more conceptual proof of our previous results. We also obtain a much more comprehensive picture and prove that natural transforma- tions between Giry-like functors are entirely characterised by their components on

Note that this compactification is not universal, in the sense that Polcz is not a reflective subcategory of Polz (see [15], IV.3 for a definition of reflective subcat- egory). However, we will show that Polcz is a reflective subcategory of Polb . In the following, recall that Clo(X) is the boolean algebra of clopen sets of a compact zero-dimensional space X.

From Polcz to Polb . As seen in Prop. 3.6, the Wallman compactification makes Polcz into a reflective subcategory of Polb . The extension of a natural transforma- tion from Polcz to Polb can be framed componentwise as a restriction of the natural transformation to a space embedded into its compactification, that we construct us- ing intersections.

Rigidity is an unexpected mathematical outcome of our structural decomposition of Pol. Where the Machine allows to prove existence of natural transformations, rigidity allows to prove unicity and is somewhat dual to the former. We expect that the notion of isotropic element will find applications beyond the scope of these developments.

To check that u sends these open sets to open sets we need to describe the topology on the codomain. Fortunately is it much simpler. Since each Xi is finite, Xn/Sn is finite, and must therefore have the discrete topology. Since B(Xi) =

