To sum up, AR seeks to produce practical solutions to real problems, and expand scientific knowledge, especially when the situations are too ambiguous to conduct a precise research question [12,25]. Since AR is a participative research, its focus is on turning the people involved, into researchers who are more willing to apply what they have learned when they try it themselves [25], which enhances the competencies of all participants, unlike other research methods which keep the observer and the participants iso- lated [12,16]. It offers a guide model to monitor and improve the progress of a research project, through iterative stages. Finally, there are opportunities for a theory to emerge rather than always following a previously formulated theory [16], given that most approaches have a lack of test- ing and developing a theory. All these factors have given a justification why AR is chosen for evaluating e-government systems.

The description step, the researcher describes the facts which are socially shared realities agreed upon by all participants [34]. The background and the details interviews of the pro- vider should be read several times, then divided into para- graphs, and then each paragraph is given a code. This step will end by writing up the provider interview transcripts.

This step reviews objectives, designs the process to achieve the identified objectives, and participants should be agreed on. Also, tasks/actions, form task groups, and schedule/timeline should be determined. In addition, pilot survey (questionnaire) may be considered [37]. Hence, evaluation items can be listed. Furthermore, it should be taken into account that the plan should be flexible enough to adapt to any unforeseen effects and unrecognized constraints [38].

First: The situation before initiating the UES service: Usu- ally, each year, following the announcement of the Egyptian General Secondary Certificate results, students flooded the university enrolment offices to buy the paper application forms (costing EGP40.00 for each form). This application process took place in 19 offices distributed all over Egypt in order to try to cover all regions in Egypt. Students are asked to fill the admissions application by listing their choices of their desired discipline and university in a descending order of pref- erence. The forms were filled manually by affixing a stamp for each choice, the total number of choices that each student had to fill being 48. The applications are then submitted back to the university enrolment offices.

Second: The situation and benefits after initiating the UES service: The UES taken was replacing the traditional paper process by a comprehensive web-based application that accepts student university enrolment applications, and is sup- ported by a 24/7 call center hotline. Students were able to access the application with their student IDs and a special PIN code that they received along with their secondary school certificates. The online application was offered entirely free of charge.

Phase I: Service surveying step. The UES is a season- able service. Hence, it is not available in the Egyptian e- government portal all the year. Also, to examine this service student ID and password should be provided to log in.

Phase III: The description step. The background and the detail provider interviews were then read three times. Some information from the documentation in the background inter- view to get further details through some questions was merged too. The interviews were divided up into paragraphs, and then each paragraph was coded. By applying this step, a transcript consisting of 46 paragraphs in 5 pages was coded.

The research started by giving an introduction about research paradigms; and a comparison between the research paradigms has been presented. Background about the interpre- tive research is also outlined. The Grounded Theory and Action Research concepts have been discussed, and then the two frameworks for evaluating e-government systems have been proposed and applied to the UES, which are GEF and AREF respectively.

Vaccarino F, Comrie M, Culligan N, Sligo F. Action research initiatives: the Wanganui adult literacy and employment pro- gramme. Series: adult literacy and employment in Wanganui ISSN 1176-9807, Massey University Department of Communica- tion and Journalism, Wellington and Palmerston North, New Zealand; 2006.

