The indication to be measured to achieve the learning expertise can be viewed from cultural identity in learning, learning styles with cognitive basis, learning preferences, and creativity skills where this might be entirely enhanced to give insights on any sub- ject matter [1,2]. Being completely undertaken along with the indi- cation mentioned earlier, it becomes pivotal to recognise the way in determining the expertise concern. Along with the work on car- rying out determining the learning expertise, some can be viewed using wide range of approach including clinical experiment [3], technology cognition [4], psychometric statistical tests [5], and decision theory [6]. Since all these works have been elucidated with the lack of robustness once conflicting evidence combined highly with providing the framework in underlying the learning

interpretations depending on the way of interpreting the rule itself to yield the procedure of rules associative belief propagation. It indicated to have channel in connecting the interpretation of pro- cedure concisely enhanced with the corresponding chaining syllo- gism where the belief propagation procedure is derived in the sense which might apply throughout the proposed inference pro- cedures. This can also be enlarged with employing the lattice- structured inference network. The fundamental distinction between the Dempster-Shafer combination rule and the Hau- Kashyap combination rule is that with the use of Hau-Kashyap rule the combination conflict is put into the union.

This paper did elaborate in examining the learning expertise using Hau-Kashyap approach in order to achieve the measurement process more easily and fairly. The recent indication on learning expertise showed that some components like skills, creativity and preferences play a key role in enhancing the stage level of expertise. With providing the framework in underlying the learn- ing expertise, this enhancement process could be carried out at the early stage. Through the model of Hau-Kashyap used to

