In this paper we propose a framework for establishing healthiness conditions for predicate transformers. As far as the author knows, it fits to almost all situations in which healthiness conditions for predicate transformers have been worked out. It may serve as a guideline for finding new results; but it also shows quite narrow limitations.

In denotational semantics we distinguish two complementary approaches that we shortly call state transformer semantics and predicate transformer semantics. Let us begin with the well-known example of angelic nondeterminism to explain our intentions. As semantic domains we will use directed complete partially ordered sets (dcpos), maps will be Scott-continuous, that is, they preserve the order and suprema of directed subsets.

Our methods can be applied to quite some examples in the literature, in par- ticular for nondeterminism and probability [4,5,9,13,14,15,16,18,21,25]. There, the monads are usually presented in the form of powerdomains. For applying our results one has to find functional representations for these powerdomains of the type FRX, as we have seen in the Introduction. This paper is based on previous work by the author [11]. There, several examples are worked out explicitly which is not possible in this paper because of space restrictions. The reader is invited to consult that source for examples.

The framework for deriving healthiness conditions for predicate transformers devel- oped in this paper looks quite narrow, although it applies to almost all situations known to the author. (An exception is [7], where one meets a quite different notion of predicate.) There is some evidence that it may not be possible to characterize predicate transformers in situations that do not fit under this framework.

We have worked in the category DCPO of directed complete partially ordered sets and Scott-continuous functions. The results apply in particular to the sub- category SET of sets. One can use the same arguments in other Cartesian closed categories as, for example, the category of qcb-spaces (quotients of countably based topological spaces [1]) and the category POSET of partially ordered sets and order preserving functions. The relaxed setting will need poset enriched categories, of course.

I. Hasuo [5] deals with predicate transformers for monads enriched with order in a very general way. The results in his main examples on weakest precondition semantics for two player games [5, Sections 4 and 6] can be recovered by our methods if one transfers them to the category POSET which of course contains the category SET.

The referees would have liked to see a new striking example, where our methods can be applied. But our Theorems 6.4 and 7.6 clearly indicate quite narrow limita- tions to the use of predicate transformer semantics. It is quite a rare phenomenon that operations commute or subcommute. One may not be able to go far beyond the known examples. And if the operations do not commute, one has to find a manageable collection of operations that commute with or subcommute with the given ones, a task that I have no idea how to be attacked except for some very simple cases.

