A region of a diagram is any, possibly empty, area of the diagram that is completely enclosed by lines of that diagram. 7 Any region of the diagram completely enclosed by a closed curve is referred to as a basic region. Each basic region has a unique label, the label of its enclosing curve.

A region which can be defined using the previous operations from basic regions, but is not represented in the diagram (has no area in the diagram) will be called a missing region. A minimal region is any non-missing region which is not crossed by any of the lines of that diagram (i.e., any region that can not be thought of as the union of other non-missing regions).

information type based framework for defining heterogeneous rules of inference given in [17]. Furthermore we will attempt to define this rule in the spirit of the Observe rule presented in that same article. Stated briefly, one should only be able to observe information from a diagram when that information is explicitly expressed in that diagram. Thus we will present two such rules. The first will be syntactically based and thus defined using only the explicit information in the diagram. Then a second information type based notion will be presented and it will be shown that this notion can be characterized by the first notion.

Now the main definition of this section will be stated, that of strong obser- vation. As was alluded to earlier, our goal is to define when something can be observed, and when something can be observed to fail. These two definitions will be separate, and thus at times there will be things which can neither be observed nor observed to fail. Also in the case of inconsistent diagrams something might be able to be observed and observed to fail at the same time. The intuitions behind each of these relations of observation are given briefly below:

Proof Sketch: First note that an Euler/Venn diagram can be represented by discrete objects (cf. [16] with trivial changes to add named constants) in a machine. Since on the basis of these objects the process of deciding if any region of a diagram is shaded or contains a constant or variable symbol is decidable, observation is trivially decidable.	 

some intermediate representation. In this section a more semantic approach to defining a similar observe relation using a generalization of partial structures, which we will call information types, as our intermediate representation will be given. By using information types to define observation, will be able to more precisely capture the information content of the diagram. This definition will be based upon the framework given in [17]; we will begin with a brief overview of that work.

One way to model the information content of a sentence of a first order lan- guage is by means of the class of all the total structures that make that sen- tence true. A somewhat more fine-grained approach than this is to take the class of partial structures making the sentence true. Here a partial structure is taken to be a universe, an interpretation for each constant, and a positive and negative extension for each predicate. Modeling information content by means of partial structures gives a better model of explicit information, because sen- tences which are logically true are, by definition, true in all total structures but not in all the partial structures. It is also better when we are considering sentences containing inconsistent information provided we allow partial struc- tures where the intersection of the positive and the negative information is non-null.

these structures to model certain kinds of information, and thereby precludes the existence of a single minimal partial structure for Euler/Venn diagrams. Some of the information that these partial structures cannot express includes: disjunctive information about individuals, negative universal information, and certain contradictory information. Another source of divergence comes from the fact that Hyperproof diagrams embody a closed world assumption (all block in the domain of discourse are depicted in the diagram) whereas no such assumption is natural with Euler/Venn diagrams. Studying these diagrams forces us to think about the modeling of partial information in new ways.

Proof Sketch: Assume that D' :+ T . Since D' is an extension of D we know that all of the features of D are in D'. Suppose that it is not the case that D :+ T , then T and D would have to disagree on some feature, from the definition of :, but that same feature would be in D' and then it would not be the case that D' :+ T contradiction.	 

