In the undirected case, it was proven that determining the hull number of a graph is an NP-hard problem, even for bipartite graphs [2]. Recall that if arcs in both senses were allowed, then this result would imply the NP-hardness on the oriented case. Here, we first prove that replacing each edge by an oriented C4 has roughly the same effect in the class of bipartite graphs.

Recall that any hull set must intersect any co-convex set. Thus, any hull set must have at least one vertex of each unsatisfactory cycle. Let us now give some intuition on which vertices must belong to a hull set of an oriented cactus.

Given a vertex v, we consider a maximal directed path P containing v, such that P exits each cycle as soon as possible. There are three ways to end P : it finishes at either an extreme vertex or a trap cycle or an unsatisfactory cycle of type 2. In the last two cases, there is not a way out of the cycle, either because all its other cut-vertices are also receivers or there is only one, and we necessarily run through all the vertices of the cycle. In every case we can end the path in a vertex that will be in any hull set. This is roughly how we prove the following result.

With that we can obtain a path between two vertices in any hull set having v in its interior, but it does not guarantee the existence of a geodesic. However, for some vertices if there was a geodesic not containing v then that would create a block that is not allowed in a cactus graph. Next we present some restrictions for these paths.

Theorem 4.5 Let D be an oriented cactus graph. Then there exists a minimum hull set S of D composed by the extreme vertices of D and by exactly one non- extreme vertex of each unsatisfactory cycle. Moreover, I[S] contains all vertices that are not in a satisfactory cycle and I2[S]= V (D).

The above theorem motivated us to also work on the geodetic number for these oriented graphs. Since a geodetic set is also a hull set, every geodetic set must have a non-extreme vertex of each unsatisfactory cycle. Besides, seen as only some satisfactory cycles may have vertices that are not obtained in the first iteration of the interval function, we studied such cycles in order to obtain a minimum geodetic set. As a result, we define the falsely satisfactory cycles, FSC for short. These can be of two types:

Type 1: Ext(C) = {u1, u2}, u1 is a source and u2 is a sink. The (u1, u2)-paths have distinct lengths, P being the longest. P has length at least three and one of its internal vertices is a cut-vertex in D. Besides, all the following statements hold:

alent results were known in the literature [1,9] for the undirected case. We believe that the same is true concerning the class of chordal graphs. Determining hn(G) and gn(G) are NP-hard problems even if G is chordal [3,9]. A first open problem would be:

