Energy efficiency has recently turned out to be primary issue in wireless sensor networks. Sensor net- works are battery powered, therefore become dead after a certain period of time. Thus, improving the data dissipation in energy efficient way becomes more challenging problem in order to improve the life- time for sensor devices. The clustering and tree based data aggregation for sensor networks can enhance the network lifetime of wireless sensor networks. Hybrid Ant colony optimization (ACO) and particle swarm optimization (PSO) based energy efficient clustering and tree based routing protocol is proposed. Initially, clusters are formed on the basis of remaining energy, then, hybrid ACOPSO based data aggrega- tion will come in action to improve the inter-cluster data aggregation further. Extensive analysis demon- strates that proposed protocol considerably enhances network lifetime over other techniques.

[15] utilized simulated annealing technique to control the topology by maximizing the network coverage and lifetime of WSNs as objective functions. Nayak and Vathasavai [16] utilized type-2 fuzzy logic in WSNs to make a decision for CH efficiency. Ouchi- tachen et al. [17] implemented IMOWCA (Improved Multi- Objective Weighted Clustering Algorithm) for the selection of CHs. Residual energy is used to select the best performing node for further communication with BS. Base Station Genetic Algorithm is utilized to balance the energy among different clusters.

Elshrkawey et al. [18] addressed the issues of LEACH protocol like improper selection of CH, formation of unbalanced clusters, and continuous transmission of updating data. They used threshold value to elect CHs, sensor nodes send their updated data in their allotted time, and modified TDMA scheduling is utilized to break steady state phase. Rani et al. [19] used E-CBCCP protocol to cache the data at CH and relay node to evade the communication of same data packets. Control packets are used to inform all sensor nodes that data packets are same and do not transmit the data packets. Laouid et al. [20] designed an approach to select the best route based on hop count and residual energy of each sensor node to maximize the life of network.

In this section, level-based clustering will be discussed. CHs are formed using energy aware threshold function. It states that nodes who have more energy will have more probability to become CHs. Each node generates a random value and try to become CH. If ran- dom value is less than the evaluated Threshold (T(i)), then it will become CH. T(i) is mathematically evaluated as follows:

PSO initializes itself with output of ACO solutions so called par- ticles. Each particle keeps the stored record for all its coordinates which are related to obtaining the optimal solution by following the current best particles. Objective function of every particle is evaluated and stored. The fitness value of the current optimum par- ticle is called pBest. When all the generated populations are consid- ered then the best value is chosen among the generated population and that particular best value is the best solution called gBest. In this paper minimum path cost is taken as objective function. PSO always try to change the velocity of every particle towards its pBest. The velocity is determined by random terminologies, which is having randomly generated numbers for velocity towards pBest. PSO always stores and maintains a record of results for three global variables such as target value or condition, gBest, and termi- nation value. Every evaluated particle of PSO comprises the follow-

