This paper is focusing on feature extraction methods for malignant masses in mammograms and its clas- sification. It proposes seven texture features for GLCM method and to be applied on sub-images to enhance its performance. It also proposes three hybrid methods named Wavelet-CT1, Wavelet-CT2 and ST-GLCM. The three hybrid methods are merging two types of different features. In this research, we

for the detection of malignant masses [3]. The computer aided diagnosis (CAD) system can help to reduce that error. The most important benefit of CAD systems for breast cancer screening is the confidence of the final decision if the CAD decision is taken as a second opinion by radiologists in classifying breast cancer [4]. CAD system serves as second opinion and helps to enhance sensitivity of diagnosis by radiologists. For validating the perfor- mance, we and many researchers are using two popular databases for mammography for testing their features extraction methods. The first one is Digital Database for Screening Mammography (DDSM), which is a benchmark database for breast cancer detec- tion [5]. 1024 samples of digitized films are used. Each pixel is rep- resented with a 16-bit word and has been digitized to 42:50-mm

Archive (PEIPA) at the University of Essex. Our proposed methods are implemented using MATLAB as a programming language and using the two mentioned databases of mammogram images for testing. The DDSM samples consist of 512 normal breast images and 256 malignant images. The MIAS samples are 54 normal and 237 malignant masses images.

quency bands of wavelet at level one with Contourlet coefficients at levels [4321]. GLCM and ST-GLCM methods extract few fea- tures. ST-GLCM merges seven statistical features and seven texture features extracted at different directions of h from GLCM. We also employ the multi-resolution features using Discrete Wavelet, Rid- gelet and Curvelet transforms on sub-images of the ROI. The per- formances of all proposed methods are analyzed and compared. To examine the effectiveness of the proposed feature extraction methods, we employed Support Vector Machine (SVM) to classify suspicious ROIs into masses and normal cases. The best results were with using RBF kernel for SVM with certain tuning parame-

This research contribution are summarized in the following paragraph. It proposes seven texture features for GLCM method and to be applied on sub-images to enhance its performance. It also proposes three hybrid methods named Wavelet-CT1, Wavelet-CT2 and ST-GLCM. The three hybrid methods are merging two types of different features. The performances of all proposed methods are analyzed and compared. We implement Wavelet, Contourlet (CT1), Contourlet (CT2), Ridgelet, Curvelet, and Statistical methods. The feature extraction methods are applied on each sub-image of ROI. Dividing the image into sub-images enhances the perfor- mance of all proposed and implemented methods and got better results in terms of accuracy, and AUC measure. The method Con- tourlet (CT2) is implemented and applied in a new way which enhances the performance of Contourlet. Extracting Ridgelet fea- tures from the sub-images gives high Sensitivity and the highest number of features compared to other methods.

From the literature survey, there are many feature extraction methods developed by the researchers but still the wavelet based contourlet methods have not been tested and evaluated enough in extracting features for mammogram classification. This encour- ages us to do more research in merging wavelet and contourlet fea- tures. In this section, we present the details of proposed methods as feature extraction tools. New hybrid methods merging con- tourlet and wavelet features named Wavelet-CT1 and Wavelet- CT2 are proposed. The proposed methods are compared with six methods based on GLCM texture features, statistical features, and multi-resolution features using discrete wavelet, ridgelet, curvelet and two methods using contourlet transforms. ROI is divided into s

database. To reduce the number of extracted features values and reduce the burden on the classifier, the features may be computed in two options. The first is to work on every GLCM of the GLCMs resulted from the image or the second option is to work on every sum of pairs of GLCMs. The second option reduces the number of the features values to 50%. The second option gives the same accu- racy result as the first option and each feature in certain direction h has d/2 values. At the beginning of using GLCM, we used the 22 features mentioned in [28] but the sensitivity rates are not accept-

To classify images into masses or normal, the resulted features vec- tor is feed into SVM. We employ commonly used measures of fea- ture extraction method performance: Accuracy, Sensitivity and Specificity. Sensitivity is a measure of accuracy of diagnosis of true (masses) cases. It is defined as:

Sensitivity is the rate of detecting cancer while there is really cancer in the image. Specificity is the rate of detecting normal breast while the true state of the breast is normal. The sensitivity, specificity and accuracy are considered as the most important measures in this application so when the results show high value of sensitivity and accuracy that make the result more reliable.

false positive and false negative detections. ROC is a parametric plot of the hit rate (or probability of detection) versus the false alarm rate. It is assumed by researchers in medicine and biology to be better statistical measure than most other measures. The area under the ROC curve (AUC) researchers in medicine and biology is often taken as a scalar measure of performance.

The accuracy of an SVM classifier is dependent on the choice of a proper kernel function. The RBF kernel is a reasonable first choice because of it has fewer numerical difficulties [44]. The training pro- cess is done in two phases. In the 1st phase, we tune the SVM by calculating the best parameters for the SVM as explained in [28]). The algorithm in [28] is used for tuning the parameters of

fold cross validation are tested for evaluating the performance of the classifier and compared. The best performance is when using 2-cross validation for MIAS and DDSM. The obtained results are evaluated using four common metrics specificity, sensitivity, accu- racy, and AUC to measure the performance.

Contourlet (CT2) and Wavelet-CT2 that applied on sub-images are very close in terms of accuracy and sensitivity. The merge of fea- tures in our proposed methods Wavelet-CT1 and ST-GLCM for fea- ture extraction gives highest AUC measure. The result of high value of sensitivity in Contourlet CT2 makes the method more reliable in cancer diagnoses. Applying Ridgelet gives high Sensitivity and unfortunately very high number of features.

