Essential tools for the professional growth and development of nurses are not merely limited to participation in seminars or symposiums, where experienced professionals update the former's knowledge base, but also include the facilitation of learning and developing expertise through training and workshops, such as simulations. Additionally, training, such as simulation experience, is crucial for improving nurses' competency in providing safe and precise healthcare. Experienced and knowledgeable nurses are considered optimal in terms of providing excellent healthcare to patients. Nurses dedicated to continuous learning not only strengthen the foundation of healthcare organizations but also generate onward momentum in their professional careers. During this global crisis, nurses worldwide played a crucial role as frontliners in healthcare through their active involvement in assessing and monitoring patients, both suspected and infected with the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). They

bachelor's degree in nursing and a license to practice in Saudi Arabia as nurse specialists, and were employed at the DSFH in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. They had served at patients' bedsides from August 2019 to August 2021 and had no simulation experience. Of the total 256 nurses employed at the DSFH, the researcher randomly selected 60 nurses for Group A (for exposure to HFS) and another 60 for Group B (for exposure to VS). The random selection process was performed by writing the nurses' employee numbers on a sheet of paper and, then, selecting through a process similar to a lottery. The groups comprised male and female participants ranging from 27 to 48 years, and both Saudi and non- Saudi nationals.

The HFS session was administered at the medical-surgical simulation laboratory of the CSSC, using a CAE Apollo simulator and CAE Lear- ningSpace, to record and document the participants' performances. The sessions were divided into three phases: pre-briefing, simulation, and debriefing. Conversely, the VS session was performed in the team-based learning hall of the FCMS, wherein the participants used the Body Interact multiplayer software on the institution's iPads. The sessions were divided into three phases: virtual pre-briefing, virtual simulation, and virtual debriefing.

The OSCE was also executed before and after the simulation sessions to assess the nurses' acquired skills. In the OSCE, the rubrics used a 4- point Likert scale comprising 3 (performed correctly), 2 (performed incompletely), 1 (perfromed incorrectly), and 0 (not performed). The OSCE checklist was based on the procedures performed in every scenario. The nurses and raters were informed of their specific roles and tasks in the OSCE. The raters included FCMS's nursing faculty members and DSFH's clinical preceptors. The pre- and post-OSCE checklist underwent a pilot test with 10 nurses, and the reliability was tested using kappa co- efficients, with a result of 0.91, implying an almost perfect agreement. The OSCE checklist was also encoded in the institutions' Speedwell sys- tems. Additionally, facilitators of both simulation sessions and in- vigilators of the pre- and post-tests were unaware of who was included in and excluded from the study.

The benefits of simulation-based training for proficiency and clinical practice expertise depend on the simulation program's influence and strategy, as well as the nurse's metacognitive management of medical affairs in their academic and clinical practices (Guerrero et al., 2021; Nash & Harvey, 2017). Thus, participation in a simulation program im- proves registered nurses' knowledge (Bliss & Aitken, 2018; Disher et al., 2014), improves critical thinking and learning retention (Guerrero, Ali, & Attallah, 2022), and advances expertise in the field (Guerrero et al., 2021). Owing to its positive outcomes, simulation-based practices are deemed an efficient process for enhancing nurses' competency through healthcare training (Hegland et al., 2017).

HFS in nursing education revealed that HFS could improve learning outcomes in terms of knowledge and skills, with a medium-to-large effect size, compared to traditional clinical teaching. Furthermore, this is consistent with the finding of Chang et al. (2021) that the experimental group that experienced VS scored significantly higher on knowledge and skill performance than the control group. However, previous findings are contrary to the current study's results, demonstrating that the knowledge and skill acquired through simulation experience depend on modality (Allaire, 2015; Sunnqvist et al., 2016).

The researchers express their gratitude for the support from staff nurses and educators of the Dr. Soliman Fakeeh Hospital, and the faculty members and clinical instructors of the Fakeeh College for Medical Sci- ences, Nursing Department. We sincerely thank all the observers and raters who participated in the pre- and post-tests and the objective structured clinical examinations.

