Solid-state implementations seem to offer the best scalability prospects. While su- perconducting qubits are currently the leading platform, semiconductor CMOS spin qubits are emerging as a serious contender owing to the possibility to leverage the in- tegration capabilities of silicon technology[7]. Very recently, promising developments of spin-qubits in Si/Ge heterostructures have reached a quantum processor of up to 6 qubits [8, 9]. For both superconducting and semiconducting qubits, the quantum pro- cessor functions at very low temperature, typically below 0.1 K, but it has recently been shown that silicon qubits can be operated even above 1 K with limited loss of fidelity[10, 11].

In the quest to scale-up to larger numbers of qubits, the use of classical cryo- genic electronics positioned as close as possible to the qubits is widely considered a necessity[12, 13]. Various transistor building blocks have been demonstrated at low temperatures to proof their feasibility. These include (de)multiplexers[14, 15], analog- to-digital and digital-to-analog converters[16, 17, 18, 19], low-noise amplifiers[20, 21], RF oscillators[22, 23], and transimpedance amplifiers[24, 25]. More elaborated circuits involving RF Arbitrary Wave Generators have been developed for high-fidelity qubit control, operating at 4 K for reasons of cooling power [26, 27, 28, 29, 30]. CMOS- based cryogenic controllers operating at 4 K were reported enabling high-fidelity operations on Si electron-spin qubits[31] and on superconducting qubits[32]. In an even more complete approach of the controller, qubit-readout components have been added to the cryogenic circuit[33, 34]. In a random-access strategy with microwave multiplexing of qubits [35, 36], these cryogenic controllers can significantly reduce the number of electrical lines running through the host cryostat, thereby limiting the associated heat load.

Measuring the qubit state involves detecting small capacitance variations in the impedance of an LC tank circuit coupled to the qubit, which is commonly done through RF reflectometry. The inductive element of this tank circuit is typically made up of a surface-mount inductor or a microfabricated superconducting coil. Even for this second case, the corresponding footprint is relatively large ( mm2) compared to the qubit size ( 100 nm) and hence hardly compatible with large-scale qubit integration.

factor of the resonator, which is crucial for optimizing measurement sensitivity in terms of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Besides the performance of the active inductor in terms of noise, also the power consumption forms an important issue in the evaluation of the proposed cryogenic CMOS inductor. The circuit is completed with an RF current source exciting the LC tank containing the capacitor of the Device Under Test (DUT) and an amplifier to read the voltage response of the resonator. We characterized the circuit sensitivity and tunability at 4.2 K with an addressable capacitor bank demon- strating its capability to measure capacitances as low as 10 aF. Finally, the proposed approach has enabled in-situ impedancemetry measurements of the capacitance of in- dividually addressed gate-coupled transistors. The observed oscillatory signals in the gate capacitance demonstrate the capability to measure quantum phenomena with an on-chip resonator composed of active inductance and nanometric transistor.

The chosen implementation of an active inductance consisting of transistors and capacitors enables an inductance density as high as a few mH/mm2 which is 3 to 4 orders of magnitude higher than passive inductances. In addition, active inductances couple only capacitively to each other, allowing for an even denser layout in large- scale implementations. On the contrary, passive inductances couple magnetically over a longer range which can be more challenging to deal with compared to capacitive interactions. In the following, the realized active inductance will be treated in relation to sensitive capacitance detection while considering the important issues of dissipation and noise.

Fabrication details. The impedancemetry chip was designed in a commercial CMOS FD-SOI 28nm technology with low-Vth (LVT) thin-oxides (GO1) for both the circuit transistors and the DUT nanotransistors. The chip is wire-bonded onto a QFN48 package directly soldered on a 4-layer PCB with FR4 substrate.

