WSNs are widely used in various applications types such as: medical treatment, battlefield, industrial monitoring, and threat detection. One of the major concerns in WSNs is the maintenance of sensor nodes, as most of them are battery operated. These sensor nodes are often positioned in harsh environments that are difficult to reach. Thus, short battery lifetime in WSNs is one of the major limitations of sensor node. Moreover, it is mandatory to deploy of large number of wireless sensing devices for various purposes like temperature sensing, humidity sensing and many more. Energy harvesting is a method to recharge the nodes, that is, it is

Section 2 presents a literature survey based on lifetime exten- sion techniques and techniques to improve long distance charging in WSNs. Section 3 illustrate the design of MRC based drone model. Further, in Section 4, Introduction to MRCRLB architecture is repre- sented followed by its technical specifications. Section 5 represents the results and discussion after the implementation of proposed model on various modulation schemes. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

MRC runs on the theory of Magnetic Resonant (MR) coils in which MR coils are strongly coupled on identical Resonance Fre- quency (RF) via non-radiative magnetic resonance. Energy is then transmitted from a sender coil to the receiver coil on the same RF with few losses in the direction of external off-resonance objects. In our proposed model these coils are made small enough so that they can exactly get fit into sensor nodes without affecting its efficiency. Some of the issues in MRC includes: interference and orientation if the sender and receiver coils are aligned coaxially. Further, if the rotation is at angle of 45 degrees for coaxial align- ment, mutual coupling between the receiver and other objects leads to interference. For power transfer from a single resonant transmitting coil to multiple resonant receivers two conditions are mandatory:

The concept of load balancing is chosen for our proposed model because during routing process when sender sends data to the receiver, there may occurs traffic congestion on one particular node. This could lead to loss of packets or packet drops. Therefore, to avoid this, we introduced the Modified AODV (MAODV) that helps to avoid congestion. In this case, during the process of data transmission every sensor node keeps on checking the traffic rate

Extensive simulation results show that selection of appropriate modulation scheme depends upon the type of application and parameter in WSNs. Further, to regenerate the power in wireless sensor nodes, UAV is deployed which is based on magnetic coupling-based recharging and load balancing to enhance the life- time of sensor networks. Indeed, MRCRLB has the advantage of re- generating power along with the load balancing. In this paper, the proposed MRCRLB model when implemented on real-test beds can be used to increase the lifetime of WSNs, but to examine its feasi-

bility with modulation scheme, BPSK, QPSK, 16QAM and 64QAM modulation schemes are tested in rechargeable scenario. The out- comes of simulations (in NS2) proved that 64QAM is inappropriate model for rechargeable sensor nodes, while QPSK is optimum solu- tion in terms of AVGd when the network size is small. However, when the network size grows, BPSK and 16QAM are more efficient. Besides this, BPSK modulation scheme best fits with rechargeable sensor networks if the considered parameter is number of packet drops. It works best for both small and large network size. There- fore, type of modulation scheme to be selected for wireless rechargeable sensor network totally depends on the size of net- work and the parameter to be considered.

