Increasingly, theoretical computer science techniques such as process algebras are being used to tackle biological problems [3,15,14]. The belief is that formal specifica- tion will lead to more insight into the problem being described. Certainly, process algebras provide different forms of analysis not previously available to biologists. In the case of epidemiology, the study of disease spread, process algebra gives us a way to describe individual based models (drawn from observations of individual behaviour) and to then automatically derive population level models (allowing inves- tigation of the properties of epidemics, and the result of control methods). Largely, theoretical biologists have worked at one scale (individual based) or the other (pop- ulation based), but had no way to move between these scales.  Process algebra

This paper presents models of biological epidemics in the PEPA process alge- bra [7]. This is a novel use of PEPA. Our aim is to evaluate the suitability of language features of PEPA for epidemiology, and to compare the results with our previous modelling work in WSCCS [12]. The most important difference between the formalisms is the move from actions occurring in discrete time and weighted choice (WSCCS), to actions occurring in continuous time at a specified rate and choice driven by competition between rates (PEPA). In addition, PEPA allows syn- chronisation between multiple components.

The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 provides an introduction to PEPA and ODE derivation as previously described in [8]. Section 3 presents the epidemiological models and compares the derived ODEs with simulation results. The insights gained through these models lead to the modified ODE derivation method presented in Section 4. Finally, we discuss the results in Section 5.

Choice: The component P + Q represents a system which may behave either as P or as Q. The activities of both P and Q are enabled. The first activity to complete distinguishes one of them: the other is discarded. The system will behave as the derivative resulting from the evolution of the chosen component.

distribution. In this case the derivation graph can be considered to be the state transition diagram of a continuous time Markov chain (CTMC). Thus one Marko- vian state is associated with each syntactic term. Performance analysis is then carried out in terms of the steady state probability distribution, or the transient probability distribution, which is extremely costly when the state space is large.

As it stands, the Hillston method cannot be used to derive ODEs for this model due to the use of passive rates. This problem is easily overcome by setting all passive rates to the matching local rate (e.g. all actions (contact, T) become (contact, cr));

We have presented two models of disease spread in PEPA. These follow the main classification of transmission into direct and indirect transmission. The first obser- vation is that it is possible to model these different mechanisms at all in PEPA. The second observation is that indirect transmission is slightly more naturally expressed in PEPA. Use of PEPA provides considerable advantages over use of WSSCS in terms of tool support, links to other formalisms, and active language developments for biology.

method, but it should be noted that the Hillston method was developed for mod- els of computer systems and not for models of disease spread. In the context of epidemiology we presented a modification of this method, based on our experience with WSCCS. The resulting ODEs provide a better fit to the results of stochastic simulation. Current work is underway to fine tune the method, and to establish the precise relationship between the Hillston method and the Stirling amendment. Even if shown to be more general than the Hillston method, the method presented here does not apply to all PEPA models. For example, hidden actions are not considered.

Cardelli [4] has also developed a method of deriving ODEs from process algebra models. The motivation there is to provide a process algebra semantics matching the mass action behaviour of chemical systems. This therefore presents a new semantics which is not related to the usual synchronisation semantics of process algebras. In our work it is important to be able to move between the scales of individual and population in such a way that the transient dynamics of the system are preserved (i.e. that the ODE approximation matches the CTMC semantics).

Use of process algebra for epidemiology provides new insight into disease spread because it is possible to rigorously justify the population level ODEs in terms of observed individual behaviour. More work in this area remains to be carried out. This is planned as part of the System Dynamics project mentioned below. It is also planned to apply the knowledge gained in modelling biological diseases back to computer systems. An obvious candidate for such modelling is the spread of computer viruses and other malware.

