The approximation of depth 0 is the one in which no use of virtual information is allowed and valid inferences are those that can be justified directly by the informa- tional semantics for the logical operators. This basic system enjoys the subformula property and admits of a simple polynomial time decision procedure. A k-depth approximation is obtained when at most k nested applications of the structural rule for virtual information are allowed. 4 Each k-depth system enjoys the subformula property and admits of a polynomial time decision procedure whose complexity increases with k.

a disjunction A V B is intuitionistically true (roughly speaking, provable 10 ) if and only if either A is intuitionistically true or B is intuitionistically true. This is the so-called disjunction property of intuitionistic logic. While this property is appropriate for (constructive) mathematics, it is quite at odds with ordinary usage outside mathematics. As Michael Dummett puts it:

Unlike mathematical information, empirical information decays at two stages: in the process of acquisition, and in the course of retention and transmission. An attendant directing theatre-goers to different entrances according to the colours of their tickets might even register that a ticket was yellow or green, without registering which it was, if holders of tickets of either colours were to use the same entrance; even our observations are incomplete, in the sense that we do not and cannot take in every detail of what is in our sensory fields. That informa- tion decays yet further in memory and in the process of being communicated is evident. In mathematics, any effective procedure remains eternally available to be executed; in the world of our experience, the opportunity for inspection and verification is fleeting. 12

A 3ND-valuation can be seen as describing an information state that is closed under the implicit information that stems from the informational meaning of the logical operators. The claim is that such an information state contains information that we actually possess and with which we can operate, in the precise sense that we have a feasible procedure to decide, for every formula A, whether the information that A is true, or the information that A is false, or neither of them actually belongs to our information state. This claim will be substantiated in Proposition 3.8 below, by showing that all the implicit information that stems from the informational

A detailed proof of the above proposition can be found in [20]. The subformula property of intelim proofs and refutations paves the way for a feasible decision procedure for intelim deducibility and refutability. The following proposition is also proven in [20].

Each application of this rule allows us to introduce virtual information concerning an arbitrary formula A by appending both T A and F A as sibling nodes at the end of any branch of the tree, generating two new branches. The formula A involved in a specific application of the rule is called PB-formula. The S-formulae T A and F A are called virtual assumptions. Such a step invites us to consider information states that, besides containing all the information expressed by the preceding S-formulae

