Internet is the main information provider in the world. The estimates vary from 15 to some 30 billion Web pages shared with heterogeneous information about prac- tically all matters. However, the organization of this information has not been centralized, and each independent node is responsible of maintaining its own in- formation. This makes the classification of the information contained in the Web pages a very difficult task, and thus, the search for information is one of the most important problems in Internet nowadays. One of the most extended solutions in order to find information in Internet is the use of search engines. For instance, the

Surprisingly, the scientific community has put little attention on this problem, and currently there are no tools available to suitably filter the information of a single Web page. In this work, we present a method to extract relevant information from a Web page based on a process of filtering. In our approach the user specifies a filtering criterion, i.e., a text which says what is being searched and then, a new Web page is automatically produced which only contains the information related to the filtering criterion. From the best of our knowledge, this is the first tool able to produce a slice from any Web page. In the following sections we will describe how this approach works and how it has been implemented and distributed.

the usefulness of a Web filtering tool by means of an example. In Section 3 the filtering process is described. In Section 4 the Web Filtering Toolbar which is the implementation of our approach is presented. We describe related work in Section 5. Finally, in Section 6 we present the conclusions and we define some future lines of research.

Our filtering algorithm first constructs a tree-like data structure which contains all the information of the Web page hierarchically organized in document order. This data structure is really an object with provides methods to query the tree. Hence, after this phase, we have a Web page represented as a data structure, and a mechanism to explore such a data structure.

tool. In general, the user only needs to specify words, because flags contains options that can be left unchanged with their default values 4 . words specifies the information that the user is looking for; therefore, the filtering technique has to produce a new Web page which only contains those nodes containing information related to this text. This can be easily checked by comparing words with the information contained in the attributes of each node.

Web page is adapted to the slice. Otherwise, the original size is kept. Usually, the Web page of an iframe is bigger than the area reserved for the iframe; hence, the iframe uses scrolls. Often, the slice extracted from an iframe is small, and thus, reformatting the size of the iframes avoids unnecessary empty areas produced by the scroll.

