In this paper, a protocol for extending the lifetime of wire- less sensor networks is proposed. Section 2 reviews the work related to the proposed protocol. The remaining part of this paper is organized as follows: Section 3 describes in details LEACH-C protocol as a base to the proposed protocol. Sec- tion 4 describes LEACH-CS protocol and its detailed function- ality. Section 5 discusses the evaluation of LEACH-CS in comparison to LEACH-C through simulation results. Finally, Section 6 discusses the conclusions and future work.

In [9], LEACH-CE protocol had been proposed where 5% of alive nodes in the network are cluster heads. The base sta- tion makes 10% of the nodes in the network to go to sleep mode. This is done before the selection of cluster heads. The nodes in sleep mode do not sense any data nor do they receive cluster head information from the base station. Base station controls the operation of all nodes. The base station chooses 5% to be cluster heads, and the cluster heads of previous rounds are not eligible to participate in the cluster head selec- tion unless all nodes in the network have become cluster heads. This model chooses randomly the nodes switched to sleeping mode which does not guarantee the quality of data even if it preserves the lifetime.

In [10], a protocol had been proposed which also switches a percentage of nodes into the sleeping mode using three factors which are; the energy level, the number of neighbors, and the average distance among neighbors. Nodes that have a lot of neighbors and have a high energy level are good candidates to be switched to sleeping mode, as the more the number of neighbors of a node is the more overlap it has, and also the lower the energy the more likely it is to die. This protocol as others does not consider sleep- ing mode according to the sensed data which is the novel approach of this paper.

This section explains in details the functionality of LEACH- CS protocol which is a modified version of LEACH-C. Sec- tion A explains the proposed network model in designing the protocol. Section B describes the adopted radio model in the protocol operation. Section C finally defines LEACH-CS oper- ation in details.

Before each round, the base station receives a packet from every node in the network with its current energy level. Depending on this energy level, the base station sorts the nodes descendingly and chooses 5% of the alive nodes to be cluster heads of the round. This approach has been concluded by authors of [8] to be the optimal number of cluster heads for en- ergy minimization.

