Owing to the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, physical movement and face-to-face contact have become difficult, resulting in various changes in daily life. Since regular activities at school or work could no longer be continued, technologies such as video conferencing, virtual reality (VR), and the metaverse have been imple- mented (Hyun & Park, 2020). In particular, the size of the related market has grown significantly owing to the spread of user experience in VR and the metaverse. According to Grand View Research (2021), the global VR market was estimated at $15.81 billion as of 2020, with an annual growth estimate of 18% from 2021 to 2028. As technological develop- ment and dissemination accelerate, potential ethical issues have also become complicated. At a time where laws and institutions cannot keep pace with technological development, ethical consciousness among members of society is important (Noddings, 2010). Hence, there is a need to discuss educational methods for cultivating morality.

Public education approaches for the youth's moral development vary from country to country. Unlike the United States, South Korea has separate morals-related subjects in its elementary schools (National Youth Policy Institute, 2011). The moral curriculum in South Korea consists mainly of learning the ethical theories of classical thinkers or explaining correct moral judgment through stories (Ministry of Educa- tion, 2015). However, this method of teaching makes it difficult for people to develop the capacity to sensitively perceive moral issues, make

Using VR to a moral development program has considerable advan- tages. Introducing VR is needed to understand the effects. In general, VR technology has characteristics that make it possible for participants to immerse, interact, and imagine. Education using such VR technology is known to have positive effects by increasing motivation and interest in learning and lowering anxiety (Huang et al., 2016). Until now, research on educational programs incorporating technologies such as augmented reality and VR has been actively conducted in various subjects such as science (Wojciechowski & Cellary, 2013), mathematics (Chen, 2019), and foreign languages (Hsu, 2017). However, there has been little dis- cussion about the application of such technologies to moral education.

Moral education should be directly related to the daily experience of children. Moral education which is related to the specific experience is effective in promoting the morality of children. For example, Nobumichi (2017) got a similar conclusion that the relation with experience can improve morality through his study about the connection between two accidents in Japan and the improvement of morality. With prior moral education, a teacher introduces some episodes to children and then the children think of and discuss them. This activity aims for children to get a moral realization. However, after the research by Nobumichi, he got the implication that some materials used in moral class like episodes have nothing to do with children's morality because they are not addressed in real experience.

In addition, various kinds of technology are used in moral education (Moon, 2019). Teachers conduct classes with a computer and students follow it watching the screen. Sometimes they watch videos related to some moral situations and also they play games using electronic devices. Especially watching videos about some moral situations is helpful for children to understand and be absorbed in them. Considering the recent tendency that children are very interested in electronic devices and media with the development of science and technology, it would be worth trying to organize classes that are more interesting and can make children fall into situations using VR and other electronic devices.

cognitive development theory has focused on moral thinking, psycho- analysis has focused on moral emotion, and behaviorism and social learning theories have focused on moral behavior. Rest (1983, 1986) presented the Four-Component Model of Morality as a theoretical framework synthesizing these three elements. Rest (1986) viewed mo- rality as the way to determine rights and obligations in social interaction, as well as the way of interacting for cooperation and promoting mutual welfare. He also suggested that moral behavior is accomplished through four components.

Rest's (1986) model consists of moral sensitivity, moral judgment, moral motivation, and moral character. Moral sensitivity involves perceiving moral issues embedded in a situation, appreciating how one's actions may affect or result in others, and identifying and understanding one's feelings about the problem. Moral judgment is the ability to inte- grate various situational considerations and determine which actions best satisfy moral ideals. Moral motivation is the degree of motivation to put moral values above other values (e.g., economic, social, and religious values). Moral characterization includes sub-characteristics such as ego-strength, patience, and courage; it refers to the ability to behave morally.

This study focuses on moral sensitivity and moral judgment among Rest's four moral components to investigate the effectiveness of VR-based programs for moral development. This is because moral judgment is a key factor in enabling moral behavior, and many studies using Rest's theory also focus on moral judgment (Rest, 1975, 1986, 1988; Rest & Thoma, 1985). In addition, moral sensitivity is inseparable from moral judgment, and the ability to perceive a specific situation as a moral issue is the foundation of moral judgment (Jordan, 2007). In particular, empathy plays an important role in moral sensitivity (Bebeau, 2002; Hoffman, 2000; Rest, 1983), and it is expected that the strengths of VR education, including presence, will increase moral sensitivity.

DIT provides more empirical evidence than the measurement method of Kohlberg at the last level of morality, the Postconventional Level. According to this method of Kohlberg, there is little evidence about stage 5 and no evidence about stage 6. To measure the whole stage of moral development, it is helpful to use DIT. It has already been widely used in studies that investigate a wide range of moral issues for college students. So it plays an important role in understanding the moral judgment development of colleges (Patricia & Matthew, 2002).

training purposes. Since the 2010s, as a result of the development of software and hardware, the use of VR technology has been significantly expanded, such as for games, culture, tourism, medicine, education, exploration, and scientific visualization. As non-face-to-face activities increase after COVID-19, interest in the metaverse has increased, and the VR industry, which is closely related to this, is expected to grow significantly.

This study involves the use of VR in the education field. VR-based learning environments provide real virtual learning environments and help learners interact and immerse themselves in the virtual space using various senses (Huang et al., 2016; Pantelidis, 2010). It also provides a practical context and a safe environment for learners to perform specific activities (Burdea, 1999).

The three main characteristics of VR are interaction, immersion, and imagination. Regarding interaction, the user explores the VR content through their sensory organs centered on vision and responds physically, psychologically, and behaviorally. VR content also detects the user's response and responds immediately or provides a new situation or scene. The sense of reality is maximized through the process of interaction be- tween the user and the VR content, and between users participating in the same VR environment. In the VR learning environment, meaningful learning should be led by providing timely feedback on learners' re- sponses (Burdea & Coiffet, 2003).

Imagination refers to the ability to recognize things that do not exist (Burdea & Coiffet, 2003). In a VR-based learning environment, imagi- nation helps learners refine their thinking and participate in meaningful learning (Jonassen, 2013). In other words, learners can creatively perceive and imagine things that do not exist when learning in a virtual environment. The VR learning environment stimulates the imagination and leads to meaningful learning (Huang et al., 2010).

choose in the moral dilemma situation and then vote individually. This allows students to consider moral conflict situations from a different perspective and experience the process of deliberation on which decision is better. Thus, group decision-making provides students with an expe- rience to reflect on moral issues socially and rationally.

Classroom discussion proceeds once the VR activity has concluded, enabling a more in-depth approach to moral issues encountered through VR content. In the discussion activity, students talk about moral issues they have not sufficiently considered or expressed while performing the VR activity. Through this, students have the opportunity to look back and reflect on what they judged and acted on in the VR activity. This also helps students consider practical ways to practice morally mature judg- ment and moral action in real-life situations.

The main point is that this moral education method with VR has a process with both VR activity and classroom discussion. Until now, without VR activity, most moral education is given just through class- room discussion. The VR activity which proceeds before the original way can lead to additional results in moral education for elementary school students.

The participants were 162 students from the 4th to 6th grades attending an elementary school in Seoul. In detail, there were 15 fourth- grade students (eight boys, seven girls), 70 fifth-grade students (35 boys, 35 girls), and 77 sixth-grade students (36 boys, 41 girls), with a total of 79 male students and 83 female students. We obtained informed consent to participate in the study in advance from the parents of all participants. This study was approved by the IRB.

In this study, tools for measuring VR components and moral devel- opment were used. First, in addition to the three major VR elements, that is, imagination, interaction, and immersion (Ban~os et al., 2004; Huang et al., 2010, 2016, 2021), collaborative learning (Dillenbourg, 1999), which is one of the main interests of the study, was measured. Each

Rest's Four-Component Model consists of moral sensitivity, moral judgment, moral motivation, and moral character. However, it turns out that each component is mutually independent and cannot predict or explain others (You & Bebeau, 2013). In addition, many previous studies focused more on moral sensitivity and reasoning ability than on moral motivation or moral characterization when examining the effectiveness of educational programs (Abdolmohammadi & Reeves, 2000; Park et al., 2012; Rest & Thoma, 1985). Therefore, this study also attempts to investigate the effect of the program focusing on moral sensitivity and moral judgment.

Simply explaining, one group consisted of six students. Each student who participated in this study became a VR player and the other five students did a discussion and made a decision. It took 10 min per student so in total it took 1 h. After this, six members did a classroom discussion together for 40 min.

When the VR activity was over, the six students were divided into two groups and discussions were conducted in each team. In the first dis- cussion, the teacher determined in advance the behavior that could be selected in the moral conflict situation, and the team discussion was conducted on the relevant basis. Second, a free discussion was conducted wherein each student freely chose their behavior and presented reasons. In the final discussion, everyone in the classroom participated and several groups freely expressed their opinions. Through the discussion activities, students were given an opportunity to think more deeply about the moral issues experienced in the VR activity and to actively express some ways to implement moral behavior in real-life situations.

STATA 16.0 was used for all statistical analyses. It was confirmed through a t-test whether the average difference between moral sensitivity and moral judgment measured through Alice's story and the escaped prisoner's story was statistically significant. In addition, a t-test was conducted between groups in the sense that the degree of moral devel- opment would be different depending on the score of interaction, imagination, immersion, and collaborative learning for the experience of participating in the VR-based morality education program. To this end, after deriving the average score of each factor measured with five items, the average score of each participant was divided into upper and lower groups. For each VR factor, it was verified whether the upper and lower groups showed a significant average difference in Alice's moral sensi- tivity, Alice's moral judgment, general moral sensitivity, and general moral judgment.

conventional level of social cooperation (Narvaez & Rest, 1995). For this, logical and cognitive development is the key, so moral judgment seems to be a difficult construct to develop only in the VR environment. These findings suggest that to strengthen moral judgment ability, there is a limit to simply providing an environment that facilitates a sense of reality, and that educational content that can lead to the development of thinking skills should be included more directly.

The purpose of this study was to explore whether a moral education program using VR devices is effective in improving the morality of elementary school students. The results can be summarized as follows. First, moral sensitivity measured in Alice's story was statistically signif- icantly higher than that measured in the escaped prisoner story. How- ever, there was no statistically significant difference in moral judgment between the Alice story and the escaped prisoner story. Further, the group that responded high to the VR factors also showed significantly higher Alice-based moral sensitivity on average than the group that responded low. However, there was no significant difference in moral sensitivity measured through the escape story, which was not similar to the scenario experienced in VR activities, depending on the VR compo- nent score. Finally, the mean difference in moral judgment according to the VR score was not significant in both stories.

development directly because it affects only moral sensitivity. Visual and auditory stimulations of VR draw out the attention and motivation of elementary school students but there is a difficulty to lead to improve- ment in moral judgment. Eventually, growing moral judgment in elementary moral education is necessary for students to practice morality in daily life. Thus more elaborate teaching-learning method is needed.

The limitations of this study are as follows. First, it is necessary to validate the test tool in consideration of the change in educational media and target age. Further, unlike previous studies on moral education programs that revealed the effects of classes in the mid-to-long term over several sessions, this study collected data for only one class owing to practical constraints. The limitations of this study must be supplemented through more strictly designed follow-up studies.

