A pot experiment was conducted to evaluate the beneficial effect of grain presoaking in spermine (0.15 mM), spermidine (0.3 mM) and their interaction with waste water (25%, 50%, 100%) polluted with heavy metals on yield and biochemical aspects of yielded grains of wheat plants (Triticum aestivum L.) variety Sakha 94. Irrigation of wheat plants with waste water decreased significantly all yield components (100 kernel weight, grain yield/plant, straw yield/plant, mobilization and crop indices) and water use efficiency. On the other hand, polyamines appeared to ameliorate the harmful disordered of heavy metals of waste water on yield components as well as water use efficiency. The effect was more pro-

response to waste water stress in wheat plants, meanwhile, chloride, heavy metals content and abscisic acid level were increased in yielded grains of wheat plants. Application of spermine, spermidine or their interaction appeared to mitigate the deleterious effects of waste water on the above biochemical aspects of yielded grains of wheat plants. Protein banding pattern in yielded grains showed induction of proteins with molecular weights 73, 70, 24, 20 and 15 kDa in response to waste water application. Furthermore, spermidine treatment caused appearance of new proteins with molecular weights 73, 70, 57, 24, 23 and

The use of waste water for irrigation may serve as an addi- tional source of water with fertilizing properties after appro- priate dilution. Irrigation water quality not only affects the growth of crops, but also have long term effects on soil health, grain quality, fodder quality and health of consumers [1]. The waste waters of (paper, automobile, textile and food industry mills) are alkaline in nature with variable concentrations of different chemical species. Application of these untreated effluents altered the physicochemical properties of the soil and rate of seed germination in plants [2]. In suburban areas, the use of municipal and industrial waste water is common practice in many parts of the world [3]. Waste water carry appreciable amount of toxic heavy metals and concentrations of heavy metals in waste waters vary from city to city [4]. Important sources of heavy metals in waste water are urban and industrial effluents. Heavy metals are extremely persis- tent in the environment and accumulate to toxic levels [5]. High concentrations of heavy metals affect mobilization and balanced distribution of the elements in plant organs via the competitive uptake [6].

Several investigations showed that, polamines played important role in cell elongation and cell division of different plant species [12]. Polyamines stimulated DNA replication, transcription and translation [13]. In addition to their function in plant development, polyamines may play a role in stress responses because their levels in plant cells increase under a number of environmental stress conditions [14]. Plants respond to pollutants such as lead, producing high levels of

polyamines [15]. Putrescine (Put) has been shown to accu- mulate in the plant cells following many different types of stress (drought, deficient mineral nutrition, acid stress, phytotoxic metals), and therefore it can be considered as a stress marker [16]. In addition to exogenous application of both Spd and Spm effectively reversed the harmful effects of Cu stress in Nymphoides peltatum plants [17].

sets were irrigated to field capacity by normal tap water. Fifteen days after planting, the plants were thinned to five/ pot. On day 21 from sowing, the pots of each set were sub- divided into four groups each one contained 20 pots. The pots of the first group in each set still irrigated with tap water, while 2nd, 3rd and 4th groups in all sets were irrigated with 25%, 50% or 100% waste water respectively. The resulting sixteen treatments were marked as follows:

Extraction procedure for abscisic acid, indole-3-acetic acid, gibberellic acid and cytokinin was that originally described by Shindy and Smith [32]. Abscisic acid, gibberellic acid, indolyl acetic acid and cytokinins were determined using two- dimensional HPLC according to Crocier et al. [33].

supply to grains [40]. This phenomenon was manifested particularly when we found that, there was a positive corre- lation between phloem area in both flag leaf and peduncle of main shoot of wheat plants which accelerate rapid trans- location of photo-assimilates from source (i.e. flag leaf) to sink (i.e. grain in spike) [41]. In this respect, PAs play very important role in many physiological processes (related to yield quality) such as reproductive organ development, tuberization, floral initiation and fruit development and ripening [42].

The values of WUEG and WUEB in the waste water- irrigated-wheat plants were significantly lower than that of the control ones. These decreases in WUEG and WUEB might probably be due to the decreases in grain yield and biomass yield of wheat plants. Treatments with Spm, Spd or their interaction mitigated the harmful effect of waste water stress on WUEG and WUEB of wheat plants. The improvement of WUE in non-stressed or stressed wheat plants under treat- ment of polyamines might be due to the increases in both grain and biomass yields of wheat plants. Furthermore, the

of wheat plants in response to waste water treatments might be explained on the fact that, CdDD stimulated the degra- dation of polysaccharide and at the same time increased the rate of dark respiration (Aldesuquy et al. [39] during which total soluble sugars were consumed as respiratory substrate. Furthermore, the noticed decrease in polysaccharides of wheat grains as a result of waste water stress could be attributed to impaired effect on the utilization of carbohy- drates during the vegetative growth and reduced the area of conductive canals (mainly phloem), so reduction in the translocation of the assimilates towards the developed grains might have occurred [41]. Furthermore, the reduction in phosphorus contents of yielded grains as a result of waste water stress may probably be due to the accumulation of aluminum and iron in the irrigated soil with waste water under adverse acidity conditions leading to the production of

Cadmium is probably either translocated directly via xylem to the grains during maturity or is translocated as a result of the bulk stream of photosynthates from source to sink (i.e. from leaves to the grains via the phloem). According to Mengel and Kirkby [51], the flag leaf is the most important donor of photosynthates to the grain in the later stage of the grain- filling period, contributing to 70e80% of the grain filling .The remainder of assimilate mainly comes from the ear itself. Furthermore, Herren and Feller [52] suggested that, the xylem- to-phloem transfer is important for the Cd accumulation in the maturing grains of wheat.

of yielded grains in response to waste water stress was relieved when grains were presoaked in Spm, Spd or their interaction. This ameliorating effect of PAs on mineral con- tents of yielded grains in response to waste water stress may presumably due to that these compounds are able to increase the uptake and transport of NaD, KD and CaDD increasing the rate of water uptake by roots. On the other hand, PAs appeared to suppress the accumulation of heavy metals in wheat grains and this may result in an increase in the tolerance of wheat plants against heavy metals in waste water.

Irrigation of wheat plants with all examined concentrations of waste water significantly decreased the protein content of the developed grains. In this respect, cadmium negatively affected soluble protein content as well as some enzyme ac- tivities such as nitrate and nitrite reductase or glutamine synthetase in Corchorus olitorius plants [53]. In addition, the decrease in protein content of wheat grains may be explained as follows, (1) cadmium increased the content of free amino acids due to the inhibition of protein synthesis in Cd-treated plants (Vassilev et al. [54], (2) cadmium bound with three families of peptides forming high-molecular-weight Cd-bind- ing complexes, so the free peptides decreased and conse- quently protein synthesis inhibited [55]. Degradation of soluble protein is one of most obvious signs in plants exposed to heavy metal; therefore, Cu stress significantly decreased soluble protein content in Nymphoides peltatum plants [17]. Moreover, cadmium, lead and zinc treatments led to a decrease in

assimilation of nitrogen and biosynthesis of amino acids and proteins in the aquatic moss Fontinalis antipyretica [56]. The decrease in protein content in yielded grains as a result of waste water application was alleviated by the application of Spm, Spd or their interaction. In connection with these results, Ye et al. [57] stated that, PAs increased the protein content in tobacco, cucumber and Arabidopsis thaliana plants.

acts the stress induced by heavy metals of waste water on the internal growth bioregulators of wheat grains by reducing the ABA level and at the same time increases the production of growth stimulators within the developing grains. The increase in IAA level in wheat grains by the treatment of Spm, Spd or their interaction may probably be due to the stimulation of IAA biosynthesis or the inhibition of IAA-oxidase. Grain priming with polyamines resulted in an increase in gibberel- lins in the grains of wheat plants treated with waste water. Such increase led to the induction of influx of certain me- tabolites particularly sugars into the grains, resulting in an increase in the osmotic uptake of water resulted in sharp rise in fresh weight of the grains [40].

Irrigation of wheat plants with waste water at different concentrations induced marked increases in polyamines content (i.e. spermine, spermidine and putrescine) in yielded grains of wheat plants. In this connection, accumulation of Put has been shown to occur in response to a large variety of stress factors, especially in cereals [61]. The accumulation of Put under heavy metals stress (Cd, Cu and Co) in wheat plants might be explained on the fact that; (1) these heavy metals enhanced both ADC and ODC activities; (2) these metals decreased DAO activity; (3) cadmium caused ethylene release that diverted S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) precursor a way from polyamines biosynthesis and inhibited the conversion of Put into Spm and Spd. However, Spm and Spd contents were

uble conjugates in Cd-treated tobacco cells coincided with the decline in the activity of diamine oxidase, an enzyme cata- lyzing Put oxidative deamination. This fact points to the important role of PA conjugation in controlling of free PA levels in cells under oxidative stress [63]. Furthermore, Yan- bao et al. [64] showed that, Spm, Spd and Put increased in Populus cathayana populations under Mn stress. Copper at

Irrigation of wheat plants with waste water mostly polluted with heavy metals increased the number of protein bands (8e10) as compared to the control plants (6 bands) and caused the induction of new proteins at molecular weights 73, 70, 24, 20 and 15 kDa in yielded grains of wheat plants. In this regard, the appearance of new protein bands with molecular weight 33 and 5 kDa in response to the three different whey concentra- tions could be considered as treatment-specific protein [66]. Moreover, the application of Al, Cu, Cd, and Co induced the accumulation of polypeptides with molecular mass of 14 and 16 kDa and a group of polypeptides around 27 kDa in the cell wall of barley plants. More pronounced accumulation and earlier induction of individual cell wall polypeptides in barley plants; might indicate some possible role of these polypeptides in plant resistance to heavy metals stress [67].

i.e. heavy metals present in sewage water result in an increase in the transcription of a number of stress-induced genes and lead to the accumulation of their polypeptides [68]. Giordani et al. [69] observed an accumulation of transcripts after exposure to trace metals such as copper and cadmium. Under waste water treatments, grain presoaking in Spm, Spd or their interaction led to appearance of new protein bands with mo- lecular weights 57, 23, 18 and 17 KDa as compared to either control or waste water treatments alone in yielded grains of wheat plants. The ameliorating effect of PAs on heavy metals of waste water by inducing the synthesis of specific proteins may be attributed to the role of PAs in increasing the tolerance of wheat plants to heavy metals of waste water [70].

Gorecka K, Cvikrova M, Kowalska U, Josef Eder J, Szafranska K, Gorecki R, et al. The impact of Cu treatment on phenolic and polyamine levels in plant material regenerated from embryos obtained in anther culture of carrot. Plant Physiol Biochem 2007;45:54e61.

Groppa D, Benavides P, Tomaro L. Polyamine metabolism in sunflower and wheat leaf discs under cadmium or copper stress. Plant Sci 2003;164:293e9. Bradford MM (1976) A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein dye- binding. Analytical Biochem.72: 248e251.

