It has been predicted that more devices will be connected to the internet network along with the devel- opment of IoT, and that will increase the complexity in the security system. The most important thing in security systems is the process of encryption and authentication. Various encryption techniques are developed to overcome security problems of the data. One of the methods used for authentication of data is Zero Knowledge Proof. This method works to identify the authenticity of someones statement to proof without showing any knowledge of the statement mentioned. This research will mainly discuss about the security of data transmission system by combining data encryption and data authentication. The pro- posed data encryption is using Advanced Encryption System and method for authentication of data using the Zero Knowledge Proof. This research will conduct the development methods of authentication Zero Knowledge Proof from previous research and the result was compared with the proposed method based on the simulation results transmission system client and server. Experiments will be conducted using thirty-text data, each of data will be measured on the performance of both encryption and authentication process between the previous method and proposed method. Experimental results show the performance of the proposed method has better speed to process application for security of data transmission systems, with performance to authenticate approximately 5 ms from the client side and server side.

Basically the security system on the internet network is to maintain the data transmitted so that users can be fulfilled ele- ments of confidentiality, integrity and availability. The transmitted data may include statistical data, financial data, privacy data, etc. To ensure the data can be delivered to the right person, needed a security system to secure the data at the time the data is transmitted.

jammed and it is very dangerous because the hacker be able to control traffic. More over the data sent is still in a plain text. It is very dangerous if the plaintext data is retrieved by an unauthorized person. In [6], only focus security for this data with Zero Knowledge Proof Authentication system with plaintext. Therefore, in this paper we introduced our algorithm and compared with algorithms that have been developed earlier. Our proposed method can protect data if the unauthorized person get these data by include the encryption technique in our proposed method.

With this method, Victor would not possible to convince a third party of confidential by Peggy ownership proof and he also can not obtain any information about the secret information that is known by Peggy. This result may not be able to guess correctly Peggy con- tinuously which side Victor will ask her out. Peggy probability guessing would be very small if done repeatedly [10].

good level of security, performance, efficient, practical and good flexibility. Rijndael algorithm was developed by John Daemen and Vincent Rijmen from Katholieke University Leuven [4]. Accord- ing to [8] highly efficient AES encryption used in both hardware and software implementations, has good security and a high rate of speed. In the application of the hardware, AES encryption is very useful especially in the wireless security as well as military com- munications and mobile telephone.

In 1997, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) of the United States announce the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) to replace the Data Encryption Standard (DES). AES is built with a goal to securing the government data in various departments. A new algorithm needed to embeded in AES. NIST made a contest to choose a new algorithm for AES. In 1998, NIST announced that there were 15 proposals have been received and were evaluated. After a selection process, in 1999, NIST announced that there were only 5 algorithm were chosen as candidate to be the AES, the algorithms are:

Discrete logarithm problem is very difficult to solve, especially when the value of n (primes number) is very large [15]. There are several solutions are used to find the value of the exponent on the discrete logarithm such as the Baby-step giant, function field sieve, the index calculus algorithm and others. These solu- tions are less effective since there is no solution algorithm that runs in polynomial time.

Most of modular arithmetic is used in cryptography, because the calculation of the discrete logarithm problem is difficult. Modular arithmetic is easier done on the computer, because it lim- its the operation so that the results obtained from the k-bit opera- tions modulo n will not be more than n. One of the methods that can be used to calculate the operations modulo large integers (am mod n) quickly is fast exponentiation algorithm [10].

Our study proposed a method of development of Zero Knowl- edge Proof in the recognition process the data owner with one of the best encryption algorithm that has become standard in Amer- ican government, namely the Advanced Encryption System that uses the Rijndael algorithm. Development of the method aims to secure the transmission of data that has been encrypted and can only be decrypted by the person entitled, on this transmission also performed recognition process data sender (authentication). There are two phases to the development of this method, because there is a change in the way of getting the value g0 from Zero Knowledge Proof methods by Brandon [7]. The two phases of our proposed method are as follows:

is applied using the Advanced Encryption System and also calculations for the code that will be inserted into the encrypted data to be transmitted. Then the data is sent to the receiver (server) and performed the authentication pro- cess. If valid, the authentication process will be decrypted, if not valid then the data will be rejected. The steps of authen- tication as follow:

The server receives data from the client and do the authentication process first. Server calculates T2 = ((Yc mod N) (gzx mod N)) mod N and matching c = hash (Y, T2, a) where the value of Y obtained from matching user- name and a value obtained from the database. The value of a is found from matching the sessionID and database.

The focus on this study is to design a security system with encrypted data transmission. We used Zero Knowledge Proof algo- rithm for authentication and encryption of data using Advanced Encryption System. Zero Knowledge Proof Authentication System utilizes discrete logarithm method as a process of calculating the authentication data. To test our method, experiments performed by making a simulation of the Zero Knowledge Proof methods that have been developed and the method of Zero Knowledge Proof of

s. The proposed method has a performance level which is much better with long range authentication process is less than 1 s. In addition, the proposed method can have a range of values is much larger calculations so as to break into the security will be much more difficult.

