IoT sensors for measuring various sea water parameters, are explored here, aiming towards an educational context, in order to lead to a deeper understanding of the use of aquatic environments as natural resources, and towards the adoption of environmentally friendly behaviors. Sea-water sensing via IoT has not been extensively explored, due to practical difficulties in deployment, and the same applies to devising appropriate scenaria for understanding aquatic parameters in STEM education. A short hands-on IoT sensing trial, that has been conducted in various location of the Aegean sea, is reported in this paper. This research set out to gain insight into real data sets on which to base observations for devising realistic educational scenaria pertaining aquatic parameters. The results of this experiment are meant to guide research further, by shedding light into the IoT sensing issues that are involved in an educational scientific context. The goal is conducting broader research in the area of IoT water sensing towards its further utilization in STEM education.

Challenges to ocean ecosystems and marine resources on which society depends on, are growing, and so is the need for a well-trained ocean science workforce. The ocean economy contribution as percentage of gross domestic product for the EU (2008- 2011) is 4.0% [20], and expected projections is for it to double by 2030 in the fields of aquaculture, offshore wind, fish processing, and shipbuilding and repair sectors [3]. To meet the need of a scientifically trained workforce in this area, researchers and educators need to consider introducing scientific understanding of aquatic resources, in educational activities . Starting at the schools where students can be motivated to get interested in this area and provide them with technology-rich experiences that develop their knowledge and skills.

The rest of the paper is structured as following: Section 2 presents some base work in the area of water quality monitoring and its usage in education. Section 3 presents the base parameters that need to be monitored to measure the quality of water. The design of our device is presented in Section 4 together with its measuring capabilities. The execution of our experiment is presented in Section 5 and the collected data in Section 6. Finally, we present the lessons learnt from the experiment in Section 7 and the educational applications that can be implemented from this work in Section 8.

At the University of Minnesota, a large number of water-quality measurement data per day are taken, with use of underwater sensors that relay the data to mobile phones and then to the University Laboratory. Buckets to get water samples, is the traditional way, in which water quality in urban water resources is measured. Nevertheless sensor measurements give a faster and more accurate picture of how much pollution is going through water and the effectiveness of cleanup methods in the water resources is made visible in a fast and practical way . The sensors used, measure the flow and depth of the water, as well as its turbidity, temperature, salinity, pH, nitrate and oxygen levels [5].

Andrei Florian, as reported at huckster.io website [2], describes an improvised device for remote use. It is constructed by an Arduino 5 MKR FOX, a pH sensor, a water level sensor, a LED and a photo-resistor (for assessing water clarity and water transmission properties), and 2AA batteries. The device is plunged in a river or lake and then the user can read the measurements on his smart phone or computer anywhere, as they are relayed to wia (the IoT cloud platform providing a simple way for people and things to communicate via a few lines of code).

IoT sensing for aquatic environments that ultimately aims to be used off the shelf by many students, has to be based on cheap sensors and is also more sensitive to wear and tear. This can end up in not accurate values taken. The initial deployment in the Rome [21] experiment has shown that there is often a slack between the measurements produced from the IoT sensors, that are inexpensive and are not meant as scientific measurement tools to start with. Similar differences in values of sensor readings have also been noted in the GAIA project [7,11,12], a project reporting on an IoT environment sensing approach used for education.This reported slack in measuring parameters can result in important differences to the conclusions drawn; for example, during the Rome game deployment, water has been measured and found alkaline (pH 8.1). It is therefore very important, to ensure the quality and output of the measurements tools used, from the start and in intervals while using such IoT sensors systems in education. Students who follow the scientific method, can be guided to always question their tools, to choose the right method for taking measurements, and to test, calibrate or repair the tools they use if needed. Robustness of the tools used and accuracy of the values received, is crucial, and therefore such issues have to be addressed from the early design of packaging IoT sensors as well as in the activity and scenario design level [6].

the distribution of the solar radiation entering the water. At mid-latitudes, due to the large variations in atmospheric temperature, the temperature of sea surface layer exhibits seasonal fluctuations. In winter as the waves intensify, and the surface layer undergoes complete mixing, the water temperature is low. In the summer, the atmospheric temperature is high, and the wave intensity is small, turbulent mixing is minimal and the surface layer temperature increases significantly. A variation in the surface temperature during the day is also intense in spring, summer and autumn. It is important to measure the water temperature as it affects several water parameters such as Dissolve Oxygen (DO), phytoplankton blooms, bacteria, pH.

directly related to ion concentration and in 1978, the relevant UN Commission for oceanography, has established internationally, that salinity calculation is done by measuring the conductivity. The seawater conductivity depends mainly on salinity, but also on temperature and pressure. When water temperature rises, the conduc- tivity increases. For every 1C temperature increase, conductivity increases by 2-4% (0.02-0.04). This is attributed to increased ion mobility and increased solubility of

many salts and oxides, and can be observed daily, as during the day the sun warms the sea and increases its conductivity, while at night the conductivity decreases, as the temperature reduces. The surface salinity of seawater in the oceans has a zonal distribution. The geographical distribution of salinity is mainly associated with precipitation and evaporation. Maximum salinity values are found at latitudes where annual evaporation is greater than annual precipitation and minimum salin- ity values are found at latitudes where precipitation is greater than evaporation. Near land, salinity values deviate significantly due to freshwater pouring and lim- ited communication with the sea. Conductivity levels can be affected by discharges. A failing sewage system or runoff would raise the values because of chloride, phos- phate, and nitrate ions. On the other hand, an oil spill would lower the conductivity of the water body.

Turbidity: The degree of cloudiness of water caused by suspended particles of organic or inorganic compounds - plant or animal organisms. It is a key parameter for controlling water quality. Determination of the degree of turbidity is based on the scattering of light from the suspended particles (plankton, silt, clay, sewage, organic matter, industrial waste). High turbidity decreases the amount of sunlight able to penetrate the water, and therefore reduces aquatic plants photosynthesis. High turbidity also, leads to higher water temperature because cloudy water absorbs more of the suns energy than clear water. Thats why turbidity is an indication of eutrophication in water of lakes and seas.

The sensor unit used in our experiments is based on the open-source (hardware and software) Arduino platform. The Arduino platform was selected as it is a well-established electronics prototyping platform and offers multiple variations that provide us with the appropriate core components for building sensing devices with the lowest cost and effort. The use of the Arduino platform for delivering measur- ing devices within education, has been studied in the past with extremely positive outcomes [18] and is in total accordance with the principles of the Arduino commu- nity. Arduino was built by instructors and artists that wanted to build and teach electronics and interactive design easily, without the need for deep knowledge in electronics and hardware design.

Students immersion in authentic learning environments has been shown to be a very effective approach to learning ([9] & [17]). The ultimate purpose of the research reported here is to pave the way for design educational activities that lead students to acquire experience by participating in coastal field exercises and collecting data with IoT technologies. The aim is to engage experiences that speak to their interests in an active learning concept that moves beyond strict classroom delivery and mem- orization to interaction with teachers, peers and the environment ([13]). The way for students to investigate the process of water-monitoring is to design a study that supports their own student project. The study design process follows the scientific method, that strives to answer a research question, collecting and analyzing data, drawing conclusions and offering recommendations from the analysis. A systematic and carefully designed monitoring procedure could identify water quality problems and help to answer questions that lead to problems solution. The first step is to define the purpose: for example, if the issue is the threat of pollution entering a bay from the sewage pipeline of a large hotel unit, you might ask the question: Is the hotel sewage pipeline affecting the aquatic bays life? The answer to this will

