If a password has been compromised, it can be changed, but if the biometric template is compromised it cannot be changed. Also, biometrics are not secret. A biometric template can be protected by using a cancelable biometric system [2] which stores the irre- versible transformed version of biometric templates. As the trans- formation is one-way, so leakage of the cancelable template does not reveal information about the original biometric template. Bio- metric cryptosystems [3] combines biometric and cryptography to get the best of both worlds. Biometric cryptosystems (BCSs) are used to either bind or generate an encryption key to biometric data. In key binding schemes, the helper data is generated by the fusion of the biometric data and secret encryption key. Helper data is then used to generate or retrieve the secrete key/password from the given biometric data which eliminate the user to memorize password or hold tokens. Fuzzy commitment schemes (FCS) use the combination of error correcting codes and cryptography to per- form key binding [26].

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 pre- sented the related work in the field of secure health care data solu- tions and biometric cryptosystems. In Section 3, the new cancelable Iris-based biometric cryptosystem scheme is proposed. The experimental results and security analysis is provided in Sec- tion 4. In the end, the conclusion and future work are presented in Section 5.

Zhang et al. [13] proposed an ECG-based authentication method for the smart healthcare system. They used a hybrid ECG feature extraction method for patient recognition. The proposed scheme performance is affected in case of alteration in ECG signals because of the effect of cardiac disease in patients.

Yang et al. [9] proposed a cancelable finger-vein based biomet- ric cryptosystem for securely storing the healthcare data of patients on a healthcare card. It binds the finger-vein template with the encryption key by using BCH error correcting codes. The maximum key length that can be achieved is 63 bits only which is insufficient to use in modern cryptographic algorithms e.g. AES [11].

Hao et al. [18] presented a method to generate a cryptographic key from iris code and for error correction purposes they use the combination of Hadamard and Reed-Solomon codes. The crypto- graphic key cannot be generated either with an iris template or auxiliary data alone.

Ruthgeb et al. [19] developed a two-factor authentication sys- tem based on iris biometric. They performed the XOR operation between a random number and iris code to generate an iris tem- plate during the enrollment phase, and the same random number is used during the matching/authentication phase. The security of the system depends on the secrecy of a random number.

The biometric recognition system security mainly depends on the protection of biometric templates. The biometric cryptosystem based on the iris is proposed in [20,21] which utilizes the digital modulation paradigm to provide iris template protection. The access control mechanism utilizing the biometric iris and finger- print matching on the smart card is proposed in [22,23]. The main constraints of low storage and limited processing power on the smart card are resolved by efficient translation of biometric templates.

We performed the experiment to evaluate the performance of our proposed iris based cancelable biometric cryptosystem. We use a CASIA-IrisV3-Lamp database. This database consists of twenty iris images of each left and right eye of 411 users with a total of 16,440 iris images. Our experiments are conducted only on left eye iris images. We use the first iris image of the left eye from 100 users for training purposes and the third image of the left eye from the same 100 users for testing.

The first information stored on the healthcare smart card is a cryptographic hash of the encryption key. If the card is stolen, the attacker would not be able to find the encryption key from its hash value because SHA-512 is a one-way hash algorithm [6]. The attacker cannot get the key from the SHA512 hash value of the key [7].

The second information stored on the healthcare smart card is encrypted healthcare data by using the AES algorithm. The possible length of the encryption key can be a maximum of 252 bits with FAR 0% and FRR 7%. So, if an attacker performs the brute force attack on encrypted healthcare data, it would not be possible to get the key or the original message from it in a reasonable amount of time [8].

This paper proposes a secure and authenticated iris-based cancelable biometric cryptosystem to provide user authentication and secure encryption of healthcare user data. In the proposed scheme, there is no need to store the cryptographic key use for the encryption of healthcare data. It can be retrieved at run time after successful iris-based biometric authentication of the user. We utilize the Reed-Solomon codes to bind the cancelable iris tem- plate with the secret key. The experimental results show that we can successfully get a key of maximum 252bits with the FAR of 0% and FRR of 7% from the input iris template as compared to [9] where the maximum key length is 63bits with FAR of 0% and FRR of 63%. The security analysis indicates that the adversary is not able to get the secret key from the data stored on the smart health- care card. A non-invertible cancelable transform function applica- tion on the iris template before biding it with a secrete key prevents the attacker to perform cross-matching attack or get a secret key from the stolen iris template of the user.

