Non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) is an effective model in converting data into non-negative coef- ficient representation whose discriminative ability is usually enhanced to be used for diverse pattern recognition tasks. In NMF-based clustering, we often need to perform K-means on the learned coefficient as postprocessing step to get the final cluster assignments. This breaks the connection between the fea- ture learning and recognition stages. In this paper, we propose to learn the non-negative coefficient matrix based on which we jointly perform fuzzy clustering, by viewing that each column of the dictionary matrix as a concept of each cluster. As a result, we formulate a new fuzzy clustering model, termed Joint Non-negative and Fuzzy Coding with Graph regularization (G-JNFC), and design an effective optimization method to solve it under the alternating direction optimization framework. Besides the convergence and computational complexity analysis on G-JNFC, we conduct extensive experiments on both synthetic and representative benchmark data sets. The results show that the proposed G-JNFC model is effective in data clustering.

graph regularization and local coordinate coding [19], we addition- ally constrain the summation of row elements in the coefficient representation matrix to be one. This allows the proposed G-JNFC model to be illustrated from two different perspectives, improved local coordinate coding and joint representation learning and fuzzy clustering. We propose an efficient algorithm to optimize the objec- tive function of G-JNFC. Once G-JNFC is solved, we can categorize each data point to a specified cluster by checking the largest value of each row of the coefficient representation matrix. Moreover, if there are multiple non-zero values in each row, this means the cor- responding data point has fuzzy membership to different clusters. The computational complexity and convergence of the optimiza- tion method are given. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and benchmark data sets show the effectiveness of G-JNFC.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We give a brief introduction to the related works, NMF and local coordinate coding, in Section 2. The proposed G-JNFC model including the model formulation, optimization, convergence and complexity analysis are given in Section 3. In Section 4, we conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of G-JNFC. Section 5 con- cludes the whole paper.

of [20] to prove that the objective function of G-JNFC is nonincreas- ing under the updating rule of (10). When updating the variable V, objective (13) is a quadratic programming problem with con- straints [28]. Since the matrix A is symmetric and positive semi- definite, the optimal solution could be obtained. Then, Algorithm 2 converges to the global optimal solution. As a whole, we con- clude that the convergence to the optimization of G-JNFC can be guaranteed. In the section of experiments, we will show the mono- tonically decreasing of objective function values in terms of the iterations.

Below we give the explanations to some representative num- bered samples of two different scenarios. 1) The first one is that though the data point was generated by one cluster, it is sur- rounded by data points from the other cluster. For example, the 33rd data point was originally generated by the blue Gaussian dis- tribution; however, it is obviously much closer to the data points from the purple cluster based on our visualization. Therefore, it

is more reasonable to group it into the purple cluster. The 214th and 433rd data points share similar properties. 2) The other sce- nario is that if a data point is in the boundary area of multiple clus- ters, it may have non-zero membership degrees to those clusters. For example, the learned coefficient vector corresponding to the

In this paper, we proposed a joint non-negative and fuzzy cod- ing with graph regularization model, termed G-JNFC in which the learned coefficient matrix has two roles. One is that it can be viewed as the data representation and the other is that it is the fuzzy membership degree matrix. Based on the learned coefficient matrix, we can not only determine the membership of each data point to a specified cluster, but also can obtain the membership degree of each data point to different clusters if it is near the clus- tering boundary. Compared with existing matrix factorization based clustering methods, G-JNFC effectively avoids the limitations in the two-stage clustering methods. Finally, we perform extensive experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of G-JNFC.

