exogenous phytohormones in conferring salt tolerance in Ni- gella sativa L. [17,18]. Shu et al. [1] concluded that Spermidine can alleviate salt-induced damage on cucumber seedlings by regulating the levels of endogenous polyamines, which was associated with an improvement in the photochemical effi- ciency of PSII of the salt stressed plants.

ing not only on the species but also on the surrounding environmental factors [3]. It is well documented that salt stress exerts its deleterious effects on plant growth and development through its induction to the reduction in Chl a, Chl b, carotenoids and total pigments [4]. Aldesuquy and Gaber [5] found that seawater at 25% induced massive reduction in soluble, insoluble and total photosynthates as well as ratio of soluble/insoluble photosynthates during growth and development of Vicia faba plants. Furthermore, reduction in the pigment content by various stress conditions was previously recorded [6]. Clear reduction in Chl a, Chl b and carotenoids concentrations was observed in pineapple ex- plants treated with seawater [7]. High salinity induced a decrease in photosynthetic efficiency is often associated with inhibition of photosystem II (PSII) [8,9]. PSII has been consid- ered the main site of salt stress-mediated damage to electron transport processes [10], yet the damage site of PSII seems to vary with the severity and duration of stress [11] and plant species [12].

the structure of the chloroplasts becomes disorganized, the number and size of plastoglobuli increased and their starch content decreased [13]. Similarly, under saline conditions, the chloroplasts of Aster tripolium plants were partially horseshoe- shaped. Their thylakoid membranes showed dilations, the spaces between the membranes looked swollen and undilated thylakoid areas were developed. In particular, the number of grana stacks was considerably reduced [14].

L. var. Sakha 93 grains were selected. The grains were surface sterilized by soaking in 0.01 M HgCl2 solution for 3 min, then washed thoroughly with distilled water. The sterilized grains were divided into four sets. Grains of the 1st set were soaked in distilled water to serve as control, while those of the 2nd,

drilled in 15th November 2011 in plastic pots (20 cm in diam- eter) filled with 5.5 kg soil (clay/sand 2/1, v/v), where fifteen grains were sown in each pot. The pots were then kept in a greenhouse at Botany Department, Faculty of Science, Man- soura University, Egypt. The plants were subjected to natural day/night conditions (minimum/maximum air temperature

6. Seawater + Spermine (SW + Spm), 7. Control kinetin  +  spermine  (Cont.  K  +  Spm),  8. Seawater + kinetin + spermine (SW + K + Spm). Irrigation with seawater was applied after 30 days from sowing with a

As described by Arnon [21], 4 g of detached leaves were ground three times for 5 s at full speed in a chilled blender in 50 ml of 50 mM N-Tricine (N-Trishydroxyl methylglycine, pH 7.8), 0.3 M sucrose and 2 mM MgCl2. The resulting homogenate was filtered through four layers of nylon mesh. Chloroplast pellets

6 dichlorophenolindophenol (2, 6-DCPIP) photo-reduction [22] was monitored at 600 nm using spectronic 21 D spectropho- tometer. The sample cuvette was illuminated by tungsten lamp (6000 lux) using head filter (CuSO4 solution). The photosystem II reaction mixture contained 200 mM Na phos- phate (pH 6.7), 2 mM MgCl2 and 0.5 mM DCPIP. The chlorophyll concentration range for this experiment was 10 mg/ml of the reaction mixture (4 ml).

passed through the pores in the upper part of the inner container to the main apparatus where it could be photo- synthesized by the green leaf discs. The experiment was car- ried out in natural sunlight at 10 a.m., when light intensity was about 3500 Lux. At the end of the fixation period (10 min), the leaf discs were quickly transferred to be killed and then extracted in a mortar by grinding. After being cooled, the

The leaf tissues were processed for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) according to the method of Woods and Gay [23]. The plant tissues were cut into 1 mm2 pieces and fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer for 24 h at room temperature, and then post-fixed in 1% osmium te- troxide in the same buffer. Leaf tissues were dehydrated in a graded ethanol series and infiltrated with Araldite. Sections showed silver-gray interference colors cut by Reichert ultra- microtme were collected on copper grids, stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate [24]. Sections were examined and photographed by using Jeol 1010 TEM.

Number of chloroplasts in flag leaf mesophyll tissue of wheat plants was counted for each treatment in 1.0 mm thick sections cut parallel to the epidermis from Araldite-embedded material using ordinary light microscope. A computerized method was followed to count chloroplasts in semi thin sections. The image

In this contribution, the effects of exogenous kinetin, sper- mine or their interaction on leaf area, pigment content, photosynthetic activity and chloroplast ultrastructure of flag leaf in alleviating the damage induced by seawater stress were manifested. The general pattern of plant response to salt stress is a reduction in the rate of leaf surface expansion, followed by a cessation of expansion as the stress intensifies [26]. The reduction of cell expansion due to salt stress may result from the decrease in cell wall extensibility [27]. For that, it is assumed that salt stress could reduce cell extension by lowering the apoplastic acidification through its osmotic stress [28]. Furthermore, it is demonstrated that both cell number and cell area are significantly reduced below a threshold of soil water content [29].

reducing the rate of leaf elongation, enlargement and the di- vision of the cells in these leaves [30]. On the other hand, it is proposed that due to abiotic stress originating from salinity, the plant tries to cope with the situation by decreasing its leaf area and hence allows the conservation of energy [31]. The inhibition of leaf area in response to seawater irrigation was alleviated when the grains were soaked in kinetin. This

Grain presoaking in kinetin enhanced the production of different pigment in flag leaves of stressed and unstressed wheat plants. In agreement with these results, Demetriou et al. [36] found that when kinetin was applied to Raphanus sativus plants, it led to substantial production of pigment. The stimulating effect of kinetin on pigment production may be attributed to the ability of this hormone to regulate the biogenesis of chloroplast which was previously manifested as one of the typical biological activities of cytokinins. This phytohormone is known to control the development of chlo- roplasts, biogenesis of photosynthetic membranes and syn- thesis of chlorophyll as well as senescence resistance. In addition, the dramatic effect exerted by kinetin may be due to the fact that kinetin could increase the rate of transpiration Aldesuquy et al. [37] and this could result in increased rate of translocation of minerals and cytokinins from root to the developing shoot. In addition, kinetin was presumed to in- crease the activity and concentration of some protochlorophyllide-synthesizing enzymes [38]. Supplemen- tation of cytokinin could eventually increase the number of chloroplasts in the leaf of Vigna sinensis and Zea mays plants by increasing both intensity of cell growth phytohormones and

stimulation on chloroplast development as well as the whole photosynthetic machinery [5,43]. Generally, the inhibition of photosynthesis by seawater was alleviated and even pro- moted over the control value by all pretreatments especially kinetin. However, the leaf area was inhibited by seawater and might undergo changes in chemical composition that would affect the photosynthesis. A very important point was that the plants at salinity might respond as plant under water stress, and thus the reduction in photosynthesis could well be the result of more closed stomata, which may wider opened by kinetin, spermine and their interaction.

In the present investigation, grain priming with Spm, whether alone or in combination with kinetin, seemed to enhance the accumulation of different pigment fractions in seawater-stressed and unstressed wheat plants. Similar pro- moting effects of polyamines (PAs) on photosynthetic pig- ments had been observed by El-Bassiouny et al. [44] on mulberry, bean and wheat plants; respectively.

A possible explanation for the promoting effect of exogenously-applied spermine on photosynthetic pigment of wheat plants is that PAs might retard chlorophyll destruction and/or increase its biosynthesis. The role of PAs in chlorophyll synthesis is supported by Askar and Treptow [45] who sug- gested that the enzyme diamine aminotransferase transfers the amino group from PAs to oxoglutaric acid which is the precursor of chlorophyll. Furthermore, retention of photo- synthetic pigments by PAs via the interaction with thylakoid membrane was also stated by Gonzalez-Aguilar et al. [46] who demonstrated that PAs may retard senescence by altering the stability and permeability of such membranes, in addition to protecting membranes and preventing chloroplast from sen- escing and therefore retarding chlorophyll loss.

with changes in the structure and function of the photosyn- thetic apparatus, such as the increase in the functional size of the antenna as light-harvesting centers [47]. Thus, the enhanced effect of Spm on ultrastructural features of chlo- roplast may be another reason for pigment retention in seawater-stressed wheat plants. In accord to these results Shu et al. [1] found that spermidine (Spd) is involved in the pro- tection of photosynthetic pigments content under salt stress. Spd induced an increase in the amount of both total Chl and Chl a/b ratios as compared with non-Spm treated salt- stressed plants. Furthermore, Chattopadhayay et al. [47] demonstrated that at physiological concentrations, Spd and Spm significantly prevented chlorophyll loss and down- regulated chloroplast-encoded genes, such as psbA, psbB, psbE and rbcL. Similarly, it was reported that Spd mitigated the degradation of chlorophyll in salt-stressed rice [48]. Therefore, this result indicated that Spm could protect the integrity of PSII from salinity-induced damage.

The results of the present work indicated a substantial increase of carotenoid levels in Spm-pretreated wheat plants. Carotenoids may act as photoreceptor pigment [36]. The accumulation of carotenoids is of great significance to the photosynthetic plant cells, where there are at least five roles of carotenoids to play in photosynthesis. These are; (i) light harvesting via singlet state energy transfer, (ii) photo- protection via the quenching of chlorophyll triplet state, (iii) singlet oxygen scavenging, (iv) excess energy dissipation and

0.1 mM kinetin caused the chloroplast of stressed wheat plants to be more regular, with organized membrane system, large starch grains and projections in the form of tails. Cyto- kinins are known to stimulate chloroplast maturation and grana development as well as amyloplast formation [53]. It was demonstrated that the internal structure of chloroplasts was maintained in cytokinin-treated wheat leaves during senescence, with well-organized grana thylakoids and small plastoglobuli [54]. In contrast, chloroplasts of control leaves deteriorated rapidly with disorganized internal membranes, and more and larger plastoglobuli (osmiophilic globules).

Transmission electron micrograph cleared that grain pre- soaking in kinetin caused the chloroplast of stressed wheat flag leaves to appear as dividing. As a similar effect, Aldesuquy and Baka [50] reported that application of GA3 to salt-stressed wheat plants appreciably enhanced chloroplast division. For that, cytokinins are considered to be crucial endogenous reg- ulators of chloroplast biogenesis. They activate the synthesis of  chloroplast  proteins  and  photosynthetic  pigments,

Polyamines are known to be involved in the delay or pre- vention of plant senescence [56]. Ultrastructural analysis cleared that grain priming with Spm, either alone or in com- bination with kinetin, caused the chloroplast in flag leaf mesophyll cells of stressed wheat plants to be more regular in shape with more starch grains. Spermine-promoting efficacy to intensify starch grains in chloroplast of stressed wheat plants may be related to the enhanced accumulation of photosynthetic pigments in flag leaves of the plants treated with Spm. Higher pigment content resulted in faster photo- synthesis with the production of more starch.

In conclusion, the changes in pigment content and photo- synthetic activity of flag leaf appeared to depend mainly on chloroplast ultrastructure and its numbers, showing a positive correlation between chloroplasts number and pigment con- tent. Application of exogenous kinetin, Spermine or their interaction increased leaf expansion and pigment content as well as improved the photosynthetic capacity of the seawater stressed wheat plants. Furthermore, the positive effect of Spm on photosynthesis might be involved in exogenous Spm regulating endogenous polyamines as well as the physiolog- ical effects of exogenous Spm on the structure and function of chloroplast. The applied kinetin or spermine and their inter- action on ultrastructural characteristics of wheat flag leaves are reflected on enhancing overall growth and productivity of wheat plants as indicated by noticeable accumulation of photosynthetic pigments as well as photosynthetic activity of flag leaf at ear emergence.

