about 300 years BC. Today, Damietta is one of the most important industrial centers of Egypt and its importance has increased as a new container platforms harbor along the Mediterranean Sea was constructed in 1980s. Damietta Governorate consists of four administrative centers, Kafr Saad, Faraskour, El-Zarka and Damietta center. Population of Damietta is about 1.3 million during the last formal census with most population lives in Damietta City. Agricultural land

constitutes the majority of Damietta area. There are other lands that are barren mainly at the north and east of the Governorate. The northern barren lands represent the coastal sandy strip bordering the Mediterranean Sea and covered by sand dunes [1] while the eastern strip constitutes the western fringes of the Lake Maznala. According to the Central Labo- ratory of Agricultural Climate (www.clac.edu.eg) of the Min- istry of Agriculture, climate of Damietta is generally Mediterranean, where dry summer predominates with mild

much greater than precipitation rates. Maximum ET occurs in June (198 mm) with a total annual ET of 1374. Wind is generally bimodal. Most of incoming winds blow from the northwest direction in summer, spring and autumn and the other wind direction is from the southwest during winter. According to the UNESCO classification of arid lands [2], Damietta occurs within the arid zone, where its aridity index (the annual P/ annual ET) is 0.07.

Soils generally have distinctive characteristics from one to another. The soil classification deals with the systematic categorization of soils based on distinguishing their own characteristics. A comprehensive soil classification system provides a hierarchical grouping of natural soil bodies. The soil classification system now widely used worldwide is the American Soil Classification System developed by the United

soil classification systems. In addition, land assessment has attained the concern of soil scientists throughout the world. The Storie Index (SI) [4] is one of the accepted and widely known soil rating systems. It is a quantitative index, where, percentage values are assigned to the characteristics of the soil itself, including the soil profile (Factor A); the texture of the surface soil (Factor B); the slope (Factor C); and the con- ditions of the soil, for example, soil salinity (Factor X). A score rating from 0 to 100% is determined for each factor, and the scores are then multiplied together as:

Awareness of the land use and land cover is an important process for many planning and management activities and is considered an essential element for modeling and under- standing the earth as a system [5]. Land cover maps are presently being developed from local to national to global scales. The use of satellite data and aerial photographs has been an accepted practice to map land use. The term land cover relates to the type of feature present on the surface of the earth. Lakes, rivers, deserts, and forests are all examples of land cover types. On the other hand, the term land use relates to the human activity or economic function associated with a specific piece of land [6]. Remote sensing is one of the bur- geoning and indispensable tools for assessment the best use of land in the natural/human ecosystems. NASA began a

space in July 1972. All satellites in the series carried the Landsat designation [5]. Eight generations of satellites have been launched into space since 1972. The latest one is the Landsat-8 or the Operational Land Imager (OLI) which was launched in 2013. It has 12 bands in the visible and infrared bands and has 30 m spatial resolution. Features in satellite images can be identified using visual or automated methods. The most common approach is the automated image classi- fication, in which a computer algorithm groups pixels in the image into classes that the analyst defines. There are many studies on the land use and land cover mapping close to the study area. Most of these studies operated satellite images in order to highlight temporal changes [7e10]. The main objec- tives of the present study are to highlight the spatial distri- bution of barren lands in Damietta; to determine the soil quality at such barren lands; and to rate their suitability for different land use.

Image processing was carried out using ERDAS Imagine soft- ware. An unsupervised classification was performed using the iterative self organizing data analysis (ISODATA) algorithms. It uses cluster analysis techniques to create a user-defined number of clusters or classes in an image that must later be labeled to create a land cover map [11]. The ISODATA algo- rithms were applied for clustering the image into 50 different classes. A careful recoding of each class was done and these fifty classes were reduced to four land cover units according to the USGS Land Use/Cover Scheme [6]: water, urban, agricultural and barren lands. Finally, a majority filter of 3x3 was applied to remove odd and random pixels and to enhance the appear- ance of the classification process. Finally, the DEM of the re- gion was classified using ArcGIS software to generate five

Factors of soil formation at Damietta region (parent materials, climate, topography, biota and time) [16] were examined in order to highlight the maturity of the soils in the region. Parent materials were identified using the soil characteristics and the Field Book for Describing and Sampling Soils [17]. The climate was studied in terms of the temperature, precipitation, and evapotranspiration. Topography was obtained from digital elevation models. Biota and time information were extracted from previous literature. The formal soil classification of Damietta was applied using the American System of Soil Classification [3]. The point of strength in this system is that it apply a full taxonomy to the soil based not only on the geo- morphology, but also upon the pedon characteristics, chemi- cal and physical characteristics as well as the climatic characteristics of the region. In this study, the soil was clas- sified to the Subgroup level in the classification hierarchy. Soil rating was determined using the soul rating index of Storie [4], which contains four factors: the soil profile (Factor A); the texture (Factor B); the slope (Factor C); and the salinity of the soil (Factor X). Each of these factors was assigned the appro- priate percentage ranging from 0 to 100% depending on the characteristics of this factor. The Storie's Index was then

Soil texture. The fluvial soils of the Nile have generally clayey textures. These soils are the typical deltaic sediments predominating the entire Nile Delta, which are the real agri- cultural land of the country. On the other hand, the coastal strip of Damietta is covered by sediments of sand size. The course sediments along the coast differ in the origin from those of the deltaic sediments.

Electric conductivity. Agricultural lands have the lowest EC (1.13 dS/m) with a mean value of 3.38 dS/m. This lower salinity is attributed to the origin of these soils from the Nile sedi- ments and the quality of irrigation water. Other bare soils have a mean EC value of 139 dS/m and soils along the lake Manzala shores have a mean salinity value of 227 dS/m.

Soil pH. The soil reactivity in terms of the hydrogen ion concentration falls within the neutral/alkaline range. The majority of soil sediments have a pH around 8.0 and only one sample (sample #15) has a greater pH than 8.5 and falls within the alkaline range.

Calcium Carbonates. Soils of the study area are generally non-calcareous. The least calcium carbonate was observed within the bare Sabkha soils that have a mean value of 0.81. The highest carbonate content was in Lake Manzala shore sediments (3%) due to the presence of remnants of marine fauna skeletons and shells. Agricultural land soils range from

Available Potassium. Potassium is a minor cation that presents in the soil and coincides with the total salinity of the soil. The most available K+ is observed in the Lake Manzala shore soils (3143 mg/kg), which are mainly of marine origin. The lowest available K+ is observed at the bare soils (216 mg/ kg). Agricultural lands have available K+ of 155 mg/kg in the sandy textured soil and rises to 1080 mg/kg in the clayey textured soils. Fertilization is the primary source of K+ in these

Available Phosphorous. Soil phosphorous is another nutrient that affects the fertility of the soil. The highest available phosphorous was observed in the soils of the Lake Manzala shores with a mean value of 18 mg/kg. This high availability of phosphorous may be attributed to the use of fish fodders rich in this element. Available phosphorous of agri- cultural land accounts for 14 mg/kg, which may be attributed to the use of fertilizers.

Total Nitrogen. Nitrogen may enter the soil through rain- fall, plant residues, nitrogen fixation, animal manures and fertilizers. Agricultural land has the most mean total nitrogen content (1334 mg/kg) due to fertilizers application. Soils in the shores of Lake Manzala have the second abounded in nitrogen (1296 mg/kg).

action in the soil profile. Regions under grasses are influenced by the plant residues and their effects on the maturity of the soil profile. However, in arid climate, where vegetation is scarce and soils are exposed to wind action, biotic factors do not have significant impact upon soil formation [19]. With the exception of the agricultural lands, which are under the cultivation management practices, the bare soils of the governorate are generally poor in natural vegetation. The only vegetation cover is represented by halophytic vegetation. Plant species occurring at the region are Arthrocnemum macro- stachyum and Atriplex portulacoides [20].

100 and 60% in the studied soils, as they are formed along flood plains or from aeolian/coastal processes. Soils having 100% are deep, whereas those having 60% are shallow. Factor B describes the texture of the soil in each site, where fine texture soils have a higher score than coarser soils. Factor C describes the slope of land in each site, where all the sites take the score of 100 because soils are flat. Factor X describes the

pedogenic and soil genesis processes are not observed and no diagnostic epipedon or endopedons have been recognized. Soil classification reveals the presence of one soil order; Enti- sols, with three sub orders: fluvents, psamments and aquents. Five classes of Soil Storie's Index are identified: 1 e Excellent, 2 e Good, 3 e Fair soils, 4 e poor, and 5 e Very poor. Bare soils

Domestic wastewater could be diverted after a primary treatment. There, swamp vegetation should be grown in these basins to reduce nutrient levels. It is not recommended to convert these areas for agricultural purposes due to the high salinity of the soil, otherwise expensive and careful manage- ment are needed.

Damietta Governorate occupies an area of about 910 km2 with barren lands occupying 12%. Soils are generally either: agri- cultural non-saline of alluvial origin or barren saline of aeolian or marine origins. Soils have a thermic temperature regime and an aridic moisture regime. They are generally deep, however,

