stand which lane has heavier vehicles because of the restricted viewing range. Assuming that the decider in lane four switches to room in the second choice and faces two options, either to con- tinue in this blocked lane or go back to the previous lane, the rider is likely to switch back to his previous lane. The rider may also decide to switch to space first choice in lane three, as there is more room there. In this case, it may be a better option to stay in lane three or the decider may switch the room in lane 2. Therefore, anticipated upstream lane-level data are vital to achieve mobility advantages, which would allow deciders to create better decisions in route choice.

where n is the number of times the sudden action is measured for each car, sud.brk is the number of sudden breaks performed by that driver at high speed, and Chg. Loc is the number of sudden lane changes executed by this driver at high speed. If the average AvSud in the current network is high, then the unexpected behavior can be predicted to suddenly change the shape of the traffic. Going back to

In the third case, the vehicle has a higher speed than other vehi- cles, but there is a high likelihood of sudden breaks or lane changes, so that there is a risk of possible crashes. Therefore, this choice is not preferred. For the fourth choice, the decider vehicle is faster than other network vehicles, and the other vehicles have no habit of changing lanes or unexpected breaks; in this case, this option is preferred. Hence, the RSU will send its analysis to the

a driver choose an optimal lane travel direction to reduce driving time. The system can be used for the estimation of future condi- tions of road cell traffic by spatial and temporal details. The simu- lation results reveal that, depending on the congestion level, the proposed system has good performance scores ranging from 12.5% to 20%. Furthermore, the simulation results indicate that the heavy-traffic scenarios with richer traffic information can lead to optimal decisions.

A further experiment was conducted to compare the effect when the system is deployed and when it is off. As revealed by the results, when the system is off, there is always a delay, whereas system performance is much higher when the system is on. The third experiment shows the impact of the ODA. More ODAs mean more information that can help drivers arrive at optimum deci- sions. In order to enhance the robustness of the system, the secu- rity of the system should be investigated in future works.

Yuan, Y., Scholten, F. and van Lint, H., 2015, September. Efficient traffic state estimation and prediction based on the ensemble Kalman filter with a fast implementation and localized deterministic scheme. In 2015 IEEE 18th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (pp. 477- 482). IEEE.

