Abstract In MANETs, the cooperation is considered as an important entity for enabling reliable data dissemination among the mobile nodes. But, the existence of selfish nodes weakens the degree of cooperation and in turn reduces the network performance. Hence, the computation of reputation level for each and every node in the network becomes essential in order to make optimal routing decisions. In this paper, we propose a Laplace Stleltjes Transform based Conditional Survivability Coefficient Model (LCSCM), which manipulates the survivability of the network through a param- eter called Conditional Survivability Coefficient (CSC). This Conditional Survivability Coefficient aids in determining the reputation level of mobile nodes as well as quantifies the survivability of the entire network. The performance of this conditional probabilistic approach is analyzed using ns-2 based on the network related parameters such as packet delivery ratio, throughput, total overhead, and control overhead by varying the number of mobile nodes in the network. The results obtained through these extensive simulations make it obvious that, this approach outperforms PCMA model with a successful detection rate of 24%. This LCSCM also facilitates in framing 0.25 as the saddle point for selfish node detection.

In multi-hop networks like ad hoc network efficient data dis- semination among mobile nodes necessitates maximum degree of collaboration [1]. Since the mobile nodes in MANETs are dynamic in nature and could drastically change its behavior, the maintenance of cooperation between nodes is crucial [2]. The various mechanisms contributed for mitigating misbehav- ing nodes in the literature have been formulated based on the concept that these nodes exploit the network resources without considering their own profit [3]. But, the selfish nodes make the

best out of the network resources for its own gain [4]. This kind of exploitation on the network resources by these nodes may result in performance degradation of the entire network [5]. Hence, a need arises for formulating a mathematical model which periodically computes the reputation level for each and every node that contributes in identifying the cooperation level of these nodes in the network.

In this paper, we contribute a Laplace Stleltjes Transform based Conditional Survivability Coefficient Model for identi- fying and isolating selfish nodes. This conditional probabilistic model estimates the level of reputation for each and every mobile node through Conditional Survivability Coefficient (CSC). This coefficient computed based on second hand infor- mation obtained from neighbor nodes. This mathematical model also measures the survivability of the individual nodes present in the network based on two independent exponen- tially distributed parameters viz., the parameter for computing the failure rate of cooperative nodes and the parameter for computing the failure rate of selfish nodes. AODV protocol is used for studying the proposed mathematical model.

The remaining part of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the related works for detecting selfish nodes based on reputation factor computed by means of probability. Section 3 depicts the Laplace Stleltjes Transform based Conditional Survivability Coefficient Model for isolat- ing selfish nodes. Section 4 presents the algorithms used in the deployment of the proposed mathematical model in an ad hoc environment. Section 5 details on the illustration of the proposed model. The evaluation parameters setup for study and the experimental analysis are enumerated in Sec- tions 6 and 7 respectively. Section 7.3 depicts the major con- tributions of the proposed model and Section 8 concludes the paper.

A competent approach based on Bayesian theorem contrib- uted by Buchegger and Boudec [6] for measuring the degree of reputation possessed by each and every node existing in an ad hoc scenario. Beta distribution, an adaptive version of Ber- noulli distribution is utilized for calculating reputation rating for the mobile nodes. The nodes in the network are categorized into cooperative or selfish nodes based on a factor called threshold tolerance computed using the reputation ratings. They also considered priori probability set as (1, 1) and uni- form distribution with (0, 1) for modeling the events. The authors have also addressed the various feasible vulnerabilities that could arise during reliable data dissemination between mobile nodes. Another trust based evidence model proposed by Kargl et al. [7] introduces a routing protocol called SDSR which makes each routing decisions based on the negotiation performed between mobile nodes in the network. This approach also possesses the capability of over hearing. The authors also introduce a secured architecture called SAM for detecting selfish nodes.

nodes in an ad hoc scenario. The reputation level is computed based on first and second hand information obtained from neighbor nodes. The authors have used a factor called opinion metric for detecting malicious nodes. They have also used con- fidence and trust limits for making statistical prediction about the reliable delivery of data packets. Rizvi and Elleithy [9] proposed a mathematical model based on time division tech- nique to reduce the malicious behavior of nodes.

Furthermore, Marti et al. [10] contributed a reputation framework based on watchdog and path rater. The author used neutral routing and suspected routing as two rating levels for identifying misbehaving nodes. Their mechanism mainly isolates the malicious nodes which are not cooperating rather than punishing them. Chen and Varatharajan [11] have pro- posed a selfish node detection mechanism based on Demp- ster-Shafer theory. Authors computed the cooperation level of nodes based on posterior probability. They also combined multiple evidences through a numerical procedure based on posterior probability.

Yet another, a collaborative mechanism called CORE pro- posed by Michiardi and Molva [12] utilized watch dog mecha- nism as the deduction component. They also incorporated three reputation categories viz., subjective reputation, indirect reputation and functional reputation for identifying the selfish based on their deviation of behavior. In addition, Hernandez- Orallo et al. [13] introduced a reputation based trust frame- work based on watchdog mechanism. The authors computed the detection time and total overhead that could originate due to the presence of selfish nodes through transition proba- bility matrix. They also used two states namely NOINFO and POSITIVE based on continuous time Markov model.

In this section, we propose a Laplace Stleltjes Transform based Conditional Survivability Coefficient Model. This mathemati- cal model makes use of a parameter called Conditional Surviv- ability Coefficient (CSC), manipulated for estimating the reputation level of nodes present in the network. This probabi- listic mechanism also aids in determining the impact of selfish nodes towards the survivability of the network.

Algorithm 3 illustrates the steps in the estimation of CSC based on Laplace Stleltjes Transform using total theorem of probability. Initially, the survivability of cooperative nodes and selfish nodes are computed as Sc and Ss respectively. The Conditional Survivability Coefficient (CSC) for the entire network is manipulated with the aid of Sc, Ss, Pr(0) and Pr(1) values.

When the CSC value for the entire network approaches to zero, the selfish nodes are mitigated using Selfish_rehabilitate (). As per the simulations conducted in this paper, the thresh- old of rehabilitate is determined as 0.01, since the network evaluation parameters degrades significantly at this point.

The proposed Laplace Stleltjes Transform based Conditional Survivability Coefficient Model isolates selfish nodes through the computation of Conditional Survivability Coefficient (CSC) which is based on three factors viz., cooperativity coef- ficient (Pc), rate of survivability (k) and rate of failure (l). Moreover, these factors are directly computed through num- ber of packets received by a node from its neighbors and num- ber of packets forwarded by that node to its neighbor. Since this detection strategy purely depends only on the rate of packet delivery of a mobile node, it does not possess any false negative and false positive probabilities for detecting selfish nodes.

0.009 using (10) with the help of survivability of cooperative nodes and selfish nodes computed through (7) and (9) respec- tively. Since the value of CSC in Scenario 2 is less than the threshold of rehabilitate, it infers that the impact of selfishness in the network survivability is maximum.

The maximum numbers of selfish nodes are detected, if the threshold value for detection is set in between 0.20 and 0.30. Hence, these values are considered as the maximum and min- imum threshold value of the LCSCM proposed for detecting selfish nodes.

In this paper, the survivability of the network is studied with the help of Laplace Stleltjes Transform based Conditional Reliability Coefficient Model. The contributed LCSCM identi- fies the maximum number of selfish nodes when compared to the existing PCMA model available in the literature. In an average, the LCSCM approach has a successful detection rate of 24%, which is found to be remarkable. The experimental results makes it obvious that this conditional probabilistic approach outperforms the PCMA model in terms of packet delivery ratio, throughput, control overhead and total overhead.

