Abstract We introduce a novel way to authenticate an image using Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) and Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA) based iris recognition method with reversible water- marking scheme, which is based on Integer Wavelet Transform (IWT) and threshold embedding technique. The parity checks and parity matrix of LDPC encoding and cancellable biometrics i.e., hash string of unique iris code from SHA-512 are embedded into an image for authentication purpose using reversible watermarking scheme based on IWT and threshold embedding technique. Simply by reversing the embedding process, the original image, parity checks, parity matrix and SHA-512 hash are extracted back from watermarked-image. For authentication, the new hash string produced by employing SHA-512 on error corrected iris code from live person is compared with hash string extracted from watermarked-image. The LDPC code reduces the hamming dis- tance for genuine comparisons by a larger amount than for the impostor comparisons. This results in better separation between genuine and impostor users which improves the authentication perfor- mance. Security of this scheme is very high due to the security complexity of SHA-512, which is 2256 under birthday attack. Experimental results show that this approach can assure more accurate authentication with a low false rejection or false acceptance rate and outperforms the prior arts in terms of PSNR.

Embedding the iris in the form of cancellable biometrics into an image increases the secrecy and use of reversible water- marking does not degrade the quality of original image i.e., with naked eye no one can find the differences between original image and watermarked-image, since data are embedded in the LSB of IWT coefficients. In this paper, we propose a new way to authenticate an image using LDPC and SHA based iris rec- ognition method with reversible watermarking scheme, which is based on IWT and threshold embedding technique. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 exhibits the loss- less data hiding using IWT and threshold embedding tech- nique. The idea of enrolment process of proposed system is presented in Section 3. How verification process (authentica- tion) works in the proposed system is discussed in Section 4. Some experimental results and performance analysis are given in Section 5. The conclusion is drawn in Section 6.

so that it has fixed dimensions in order to allow comparisons. The dimensional inconsistencies between eye images are mainly due to the stretching of the iris caused by pupil dilation from varying levels of illumination. Other sources of inconsistency in- clude, varying imaging distance, rotation of the camera, head tilt, and rotation of the eye within the eye socket.

After forming ECIC by multiplying all columns with G, segregate the parity checks p form each codeword of ECIC. Following example illustrates the method of LDPC encoding. Ignoring any lines going out of the picture, there are 8 possible 6-bit strings corresponding to valid codewords (i.e., 000000, 011001, 110010, 101011, 111100, 100101, 001110, 010111).

To illustrate LDPC decoding, assume that the first three bits from live person and the next three bits are appended from parity checks. Consider that the valid codeword 101011, from the example discussed in Section 3. If the first bit of iris code from live person is changed then we get 001011. Since the iris code must have satisfied the code constraints, the iris code can be represented by writing them on the top of the factor graph.

