Camera-based object tracking systems in a given closed environment lack pri- vacy and confidentiality. In this study, light detection and ranging (LiDAR) was applied to track objects similar to the camera tracking in a closed en- vironment, guaranteeing privacy and confidentiality. The primary objective was to demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed technique through carefully designed experiments conducted using two scenarios. In Scenario I, the study illustrates the capability of the proposed technique to detect the locations of multiple objects positioned on a flat surface, achieved by analyzing LiDAR data collected from several locations within the closed environment. Scenario II demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed technique in detecting mul- tiple objects using LiDAR data obtained from a single, fixed location. Real- time experiments are conducted with human subjects navigating predefined paths. Three individuals move within an environment, while LiDAR, fixed at the center, dynamically tracks and identifies their locations at multiple instances. Results demonstrate that a single, strategically positioned LiDAR

can adeptly detect objects in motion around it. Furthermore, this study pro- vides a comparison of various regression techniques for predicting bounding box coordinates. Gaussian process regression (GPR), combined with parti- cle swarm optimization (PSO) for prediction, achieves the lowest prediction mean square error of all the regression techniques examined at 0.01. Hyper- parameter tuning of GPR using PSO significantly minimizes the regression error. Results of the experiment pave the way for its extension to various real-time applications such as crowd management in malls, surveillance sys- tems, and various Internet of Things scenarios.

15  cance of LiDAR usage and the fusion of deep learning techniques in object and human detection across diverse environments. LiDAR-based inspection, exemplified by its efficacy in identifying flaws in bridge construction, en- hances operational efficiency and mitigates the risks associated with the presence of humans in high-risk locations (Liu et al., 2017).  Techniques

25 ject detection (Alejandra et al., 2016; Yao et al., 2023). However, challenges persist in the precise location of objects within complex scenes, fueling the need for advancements in segmentation methods (Wang et al., 2021). De- spite strides in these methodologies, acquiring pinpoint accuracy in object location remains an ongoing challenge. Comparative studies of 2D and 3D

30  LiDAR data for pedestrian detection demonstrate the comparable or superior results obtained with the 2D LiDAR data (Bu et al., 2020; Sohn et al., 2021). Combining 2D LiDAR with camera data to estimate the indoor environment layouts, leveraging motion cues, and optimization algorithms demonstrates the versatility of this sensing modality (Li and Stevenson., 2021). Moreover,

40  data processing methods related to computational complexity and privacy. In this study, this gap is addressed by introducing an innovative approach centered on estimating object coordinates. This approach involves using camera target values derived from LiDAR data while focusing on error min- imization and reducing reliance on visible light. The potential impact of

70 plications. In GPR, hyperparameters can be tuned using various methods, including manual tuning, grid search, random search, Bayesian optimiza- tion, maximum likelihood estimation (Pintea et al., 2016), and PSO. In this study, PSO is adopted to tune hyperparameters in LiDAR-based applications and minimize object detection errors in closed environments. In this work,

These standardized and processed data matrices, each representing a single LiDAR dataset with distance measurements at fixed-angle intervals, can now be used for further analysis and modeling. Depending on the specific goals, they can be applied to various statistical or machine-learning techniques to gain insights or make predictions. The uniformity in the data size and interpolation step could facilitate the use of the data and enable consistent analysis across different datasets.

215 imum of a given objective function (Kennedy and Eberhart., 1995). The algorithm iteratively updates a population of particles in a search space, in which each particle represents a potential solution to the problem (Kennedy and Eberhart., 1995; Gopi., 2020). The algorithm 2 combines individual and collective learning to move the particles toward the global minimum.

Polynomial interpolation is used to obtain the length of the LiDAR data, identical to several attempts. The target points are collected for both envi- ronments in a closed space by mounting the Android mobile phone camera onto the top view. The camera captures the target image of multiple objects at different locations.

