Reptilian species possessed varieties of anatomical and func- tional diversity of the Squamata tongue structures accomodated their feeding habit and environmental habitats [1,2]. It is served for other functions such as olfaction in combination with the vomeronasal organs [3]. Reilly and McBrayer [4] speculated that the tongue is accommodated for both fluid and food transport.

Chameleonidae species is characterized by their high peristaltic movement to capture the prey and their length may exceed the whole body length [7]. Its lingual system is composed of the hyoid body, lingual muscles and other collagenous structures [8,9]. The accelerator muscle creates a great power in contracting and projec- tion of the lingual body [10].

Anderson et al. [10] reported that the ballistic tongue apparatus in the juvenile chameleons needed more feeding apparatus com- pared to the adult age. Juvenile chameleo calyptratus exhibited an increase of the tongue retraction time comparative to their body size due to immature mouth closing until the tongue has been fully retracted [11].

Fore tongue of the developing ages were fixed in 2.5% glutarald- hyde in cacodylate buffer pH (7.4), dehydrated in ascending per- centages of alcohol, critically drying in critical point dried in Polaron apparatus and coated with gold in Ion Sputter model 3 Pelco 91000. The samples were examined and photographed at dif- ferent angles with Jeol scanning electron microscope at accelerat- ing voltages of 5 or 10 kV.

The present findings declare that the chameleon tongue is a striking pattern structure. It is composed of functional fore tongue for capturing the prey and mid & hind tongue for pumping the muscular force for elongation and prehension prey. Anatomically, the mid-tongue region is composed of a central cartilaginous ele- ment which provide the tongue solidification during protrusion. It is the first time to record the presence of cartilaginous elements in the mid-tongue region of chameleon. The surrounding connec- tive tissue coat softens and allow external muscular coat for more

contraction and sliding along the interior connective tissue which facilitated more protrusion of the tongue. The hyoid play an inte- gral in tongue projection. It is a movable skull components and located in the thoracic region by a system of strap-like muscles attached anteriorly the mandible and posteriorly the sternum and shoulder.

The investigated glandular structures in the dorsal lingual mucosa with characteristic variations of alcian and periodic acid Schiff reaction reflected the diversity of acid mucins and glycogen derivatives. The increased numbers of mucous glands and their secretion all over the tongue surface facilitate the capturing of prey and its swallowing. The moisture secreted by the lingual glands may be necessary to maintain the structural integrity of the lingual papillae. Also, the discharge of glandular secretions may facilitate the promotion of lingual muscle contraction.

Different forms of filiform papillae were identified. They took different shapes such as club-shaped, cubical, biforked, multi- branched papillae and finger- like structures. These seemed to be a rigid tooth filaments helping in capturing of the prey and swal- lowing of the food items.

Although there is no obvious keratinization of lingual epithe- lium, cytokeratin expression in the epithelial cells of the dorsum lingual mucosa. However, moderate staining affinity was identified in the epithelial cells of the alveolar glands of the juvenile chame- leon stages. These epithelial cells exhibited over expression of the antibody of stem cell factor.

Shimada et al. [32] attributed the expression of cytokeratin expression to the increase of sulphur in filiform papillae, the mark- ers of product of keratininzation cystine and cysteine amino acids. Iwasaki et al. [33] reported over expression of cytokeratin 13 and 14 in the filiform papillae during 13, 15, 17 and 21 days

Different studies correlated between cytokeratin expression and stem cells identification. Tanaka et al. [34] identified that the lingual epithelial stem cells over expressed cytokeratin 14 and 5. Increased expression of stem cells in lingual epithelium during juvenile ages revealed marked proliferation and differentiation of the lingual mucosa.

