Galois field, also known as the finite field is named after famous French mathematician Evariste Galois. It forms the basis of various applications like cryptography, digital signal processing, pseudo- random number generation, switching theory, error-correcting codes, etc. Data can be effectively managed and manipulated if stored in Galois fields/finite fields. Finite fields are based on mod- ular arithmetic. Modular arithmetic is extensively used in Mathe- matics and forms the basic building block of number theory. It is used in numerous practical applications like in calculating check- sums and detecting errors for international standard book num- bers (ISBNs), in modern commerce which employs public-key cryptography systems and also in error detection systems for bank identifiers.

Arithmetic operations like division, multiplication, addition, subtraction, and exponentiation can be computed on finite fields. Addition and subtraction are simply XOR operations. Division and exponentiation are performed using repeated multiply and square algorithms. However, multiplication is a very complex pro- cess and takes more time to do the computation. To perform the faster multiplication in finite fields, efficient multiplier architec- tures have to be designed [1]. There are three types of representa- tion of finite field elements: Dual basis, Polynomial basis or canonical basis or standard basis and Normal Basis. Among all these representations, the polynomial basis is preferred because it can be matched to any system without any external circuitry. Moreover, it has a very low complexity than normal and dual basis multiplier [2].

Encryption schemes like AES, RSA, NTRU, Torus-based cryptog- raphy depend on finite field arithmetic High speed encryption is a must to ensure efficient data security. To accomplish fast computa- tions, a bit parallel systolic polynomial basis multiplier has been proposed in this paper. The use of cut-set retiming in the multiplier design can significantly improve the critical path delay of the bit parallel systolic multipliers. The proposed multiplier is efficient in terms of area and time complexity. It has got the best area- delay tradeoff and therefore, it can be extended to work for other specific polynomials like trinomials, pentanomials, etc.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the literature of bit parallel polynomial basis systolic multipliers. Section 3 addresses the fundamentals of the theoretical bit parallel systolic polynomial multiplier. The algorithm for a bit-parallel sys- tolic multiplier of the polynomial basis is proposed in section 4 along with the description of multiplier architecture. The results and discussions of the proposed multiplier have been described under Complexity and Comparison in section 5. The FPGA imple- mentation results of the proposed multiplier are compared with the earlier best-reported bit parallel polynomial basis systolic mul- tipliers for m = 8 and m = 163 in sub-section 5.1. The conclusion is stated in section 6.

arbitrary GF(2m) fields are given in [19]. Irreducible pentanomial based bit parallel polynomial basis multiplier has less space and time complexity [20]. A bit-parallel and a bit-serial systolic array multiplier based on LSB first algorithms have been presented in [21]. More optimized architecture for Montgomery multiplication with reduced area and space complexity over [13] is proposed in [22]. The dual basis digit serial multiplication can be decomposed into sub-multiplication units to incorporate the parallel processing which will further reduce the latency of the multiplier [23]. The hardware accelerator can be made with high performance which can perform large-scale matrix multiplication [24]. Modified inter- leaved modular multiplication is employed to reduce the space and time complexity of all irreducible polynomials [25].

achieved the lowest time complexity and area-delay product. FPGA implementations of the proposed multiplier also show that the proposed multiplier is 90% delay efficient and 18% area efficient than [25] with a slight increase in the power consumption. Conse- quently, the area-delay product is the lowest as compared to the other multipliers.

In this research work, the best tradeoff for the area and time complexity is obtained with the help of modification of the logic components of the processing elements of the polynomial basis systolic multiplier. It is observed that the proposed systolic polyno- mial basis multiplier over irreducible polynomials achieves 66% and 17% less time complexity due to low critical path delay for m = 8 and m = 163 when comparison analysis is made with the ear- lier best-reported multipliers available in the literature. The area complexity obtained by the proposed multiplier matches with the best results available. The area-delay product of the proposed multiplier is 89% and 17% less as compared to the existing multipli- ers. It is concurrent and therefore, it performs computations faster. Being regular, modular and scalar, it is better suited for VLSI imple- mentations. The proposed low critical path delay multiplier can be optimized further to work for trinomials and pentanomials as well.

