This is a very short discussion of similarities and dissimilarities between membrane computing and brane calculi, insisting mainly on some recent ideas of bridging the two areas of research (from this last point of view, the bibliography tries to be as complete as possible) and proving that, in fact, there is no real dissimilarity. . .

2 This is indeed a young direction of research, [7]. Actually, I am considering here only the two brane calculi from [7], based on pino, exo, phago, respectively, mate, drip, bud operations, although L. Cardelli and his collaborators have considered also other process algebra calculi before or after [7]: see, e.g., [27] and [12].

Objects in regions, objects on membranes: This is a much mentioned difference, which, actually, is not totally valid. Even in the standard setup, of so-called transition P systems with symbol-objects, it is possible to assume that we have objects bound on the membrane, by simply assuming that the membrane is a bilayer with an interspace between layers. Actually, this was done already in [20], and was also briefly investigated in Section 9.3 of [24]. Sure, this trick with making a compartment from the membrane itself, raises a series of restrictions in handling the respective objects (and cannot be used for formalizing operations with membranes).

We arrive now at an important point, also many times invoked: brane calculi pay more attention to the faithfulness to the biological reality, membrane computing is mainly interested in computational issues. Right in both parts of the assertion, with the mentioning that in the case of membrane computing this is true only for those investigations . . . interested in computational issues. When trying to build computing models, powerful or efficient, we need mathematical models, as elegant as possible, hence as restricted as possible. When trying to build models of biological processes, we stay as close as possible to biology. This is the case with the many recent applications, from oscillations in eco-systems to EGFR

