To date, the investigations on the metric dimension of digraphs have thus been with respect to the definitions originally introduced by Chartrand, Rains, and Zhang. As a first step, they notably gave in [3], a characterization of digraphs with metric dimension 1. Complexity aspects were considered in [12], where it was proved that determining the metric dimension of a strong digraph is NP-complete.

To avoid any confusion, let us recall that an orientation D of an undirected graph G is obtained when every edge uv of G is oriented either from u to v (resulting in the arc (u, v)) or conversely (resulting in the arc (v, u)). An oriented graph D is a directed graph that is an orientation of a simple graph. Note that when G is simple, D cannot have two vertices u, v such that (u, v) and (v, u) are arcs. Such symmetric arcs are allowed in digraphs, which is the main difference between oriented graphs and digraphs. Throughout this paper, when simply referring to a graph, we mean an undirected graph.

In [4], Chartrand, Rains, and Zhang considered the following way of linking resolving sets of undirected graphs and digraphs. They considered, for a given graph G, the worst orientations of G for the metric dimension, i.e., orientations of G with maximum metric dimension. Looking at our definition of resolving sets and metric dimension, this is a legitimate question as it has to be pointed out that, for a graph, the metric dimension might or might not be preserved when orienting its edges. An interesting example (reported e.g., in [3,9]) is the case of a graph G with a Hamiltonian path: while MD(G) can be arbitrarily large in general (consider e.g., any complete graph), there is an orientation D of G verifying MD(D) = 1 (just orient all edges of a Hamiltonian path from the first vertex towards

Motivated by these observations, we investigate, throughout this work, the param- eter WOMD defined as follows. For any connected graph G, let WOMD(G) denote the maximum value of MD(D) over all strong orientations D of G. Let us extend this definition to graph families as follows. For any family G of 2-edge-connected graphs 5 , let WOMD(G) = max WOMD(G) . Section 2 first introduces tools and re-

Because v1 /= v2 and P1, P2 are shortest paths, note that all vertices of P1 and P2 cannot be the same; let thus x1 denote the first vertex of P1 that does not belong to P2, and, similarly, let thus x2 denote the first vertex of P2 that does not belong to P1. In other words, the first vertices of P1 and P2 coincide up to some vertex x, but the next vertices x1 (in P1) and x2 (in P2) are different. So, Daux contains the edge x1x2, and at least one of x1, x2 belongs to S. Furthermore, x1 and x2 are closer to v1, v2 than w is; this is a contradiction to the original choice of w.   2

By a grid Gn,m, we refer to the Cartesian product Pn Pm of two paths Pn, Pm. A torus Tn,m is the Cartesian product Cn Cm of two cycles Cn, Cm. In the undirected context, it is easy to see that MD(Gn,m) = 2 while MD(Tn,m) = 3 (see e.g., [10]); however, things get a bit more tricky in the directed context.

As a main result in this section, we determine the maximum metric dimen- sion of a strong Eulerian oriented torus. More precisely, we study the follow- ing slight modifications of the parameter WOMD. For a connected graph G, we denote by WEOMD(G) the maximum value of MD(D) over all strong Eu- lerian orientations D of G. For a family G of 2-edge-connected graphs, we set WEOMD(G)= max WEOMD(G) .

In this section, we consider the maximum metric dimension of a strong oriented grid. For every such grid, we deal with its vertices using the same terminology introduced in Section 4.1 for tori (i.e., the vertices of the topmost row have first coordinate 0, and the vertices of the leftmost column have second coordinate 0). Our main result to be proved in this section is the following.

In this work, we have investigated, for a few families of graphs, the worst strong orientations in terms of metric dimension. In particular settings, such as when considering strong Eulerian orientations of tori, we managed to identify the worst possible orientations (Theorem 4.1). For other families (graphs with bounded maxi- mum degree and grids), we have exhibited both lower and upper bounds on WOMD that are more or less distant apart. As further work on this topic, it would be in- teresting to lower the gap between our lower and upper bounds, or consider strong orientations of other graph families.

