characterization and transmittance tests demonstrate that the processed inner sidewalls satisfy the criteria for an optical channel. In addition, the construction of an integrated processing platform enables multilayer non-isothermal anode bonding, the filling of inert gases, and the recovery and recycling of noble gases. Measurements of the absorption spectra and free-induction decay signals of xenon-129 (129Xe) and xenon-131 (131Xe) under different pump-probe schemes demonstrate the suitability of our vapor cell for use in atomic devices including atomic gyroscopes, dual- beam atomic magnetometers, and other optical/atomic devices. The proposed micromolding technology has broad application prospects in the field of optical-device processing.

In this study, we develop a side-molding process to fabricate glass cavities with high-quality inner sidewalls in order to facilitate the mass production of MEMS multi-optical-channel alkali metal atomic vapor cells. In this process, a mold with a smooth surface is plugged into the glass cavity, and the mold and inner sidewalls squeeze each other at a specific viscoelastic temperature, such that the rough sidewalls of the glass cavity are deformed into an optical plane. Using this technique, an atomic vapor cell with multiple optical channels is fabricated, and its effectiveness is demonstrated through a series of optical tests. Platforms for testing the vapor cell are also developed to acquire the free-induction decay (FID) signal and the relaxation times of xenon-129 (129Xe) and 131Xe.

Compared with the traditional molding process, this process has several advantages: First, it can remove the inner surface morphology, whereas traditional molding processes cannot. Second, the glass deformation is minimal (only a few tens of microns) when the thermal expansion of the material is used during extrusion molding; thus, the internal stresses generated in the glass are miniscule, and the optical properties of the glass, such as the refractive index, are maintained. Third, no molding pressure is applied, indicating that mold damage is minor, which is conducive to mold recycling and results in reduced cost.

(e) Placing the Al2O3 molds into the previously bonded wafer holes. (f) Heating the wafer and mold under vacuum for side molding. (g) Anodic bonding of the molded wafer to the bottom glass. (h) Alkali metal injection. (i) Filling the buffer gas and bonding the wafer to the top glass. (j) Splitting the alkali metal vapor cell wafer.

The measured leakage rate was significantly higher than the actual leakage rates in air and nitrogen during real operation due to helium permeation of the BF33 glass substrate. During the actual operation, the lifetime of the atomic gas chamber must also be assessed. There are several ways to mitigate helium permeation, including switching to aluminosilicate glass instead of borosilicate glass [43]. However, this method is expensive. Other options include sputtering an alumina coating on the chamber walls [44] or using gallium phosphide as a sealing material for anode bonding [45]. These methods can significantly prolong the lifetime of atomic vapor cells.

The nuclear spin of 131Xe is 3/2, and the magnetic dipole interacts with the electric quadrupole. In addition, the nuclear spin of 129Xe is 1/2, and only magnetic dipole interactions are allowed. The NMR energy levels of 131Xe and 129Xe are 4 and 2, respectively. In terms of spin arrangement, fewer energy levels can ensure greater polarizability. Theoretically, compared with 129Xe, 131Xe exhibits a smaller magnetization and wider NMR width [20]. However, the NMR linewidth of the 131Xe processed in this study was much smaller than that of 129Xe. It is possible that the polarization gradient of the pump light causes the relaxation time of 129Xe to be shorter than that of 131Xe, leading to a smaller resonance linewidth for 131Xe.

The relaxation time of 131Xe observed in this experiment was small because of the wall relaxation of the 131Xe atoms. The quadrupolar interaction between the cell wall and the 131Xe nuclear spin was the main relaxation process. Filling a small amount of hydrogen (H2) or deuterium (D2) into the vapor cell to form RbH or RbD films can effectively prolong the nuclear spin-relaxation time of 131Xe, which will be the focus of our next study.

