Microarray technology has increased exponentially in the past few years. Such technology encompasses various applications related to drug design, tumor detection, clinical diagnosis and treatment, and envi- ronmental health research. However, the segmentation of the spots in microarray image is still a problem due to variations of spots qualities such as spots shapes and sizes for example. Hence, we have introduced a new microarray spot segmentation algorithm based on Integro-Differential Operator (IDO). Because it includes a spot detection step, this IDO can be used to find any spot regardless of its size and shape within the microarray image. The IDO algorithm is applied on the cDNA microarray images to improve the accu- racy and the efficiency of the spots segmentation process. As the IDO is able to segment each spot based on the fact that the illumination difference between the inside and the outside of the pixels in spot edge circle is maximum. We have also tested our algorithm on the Stanford Microarray Database (SMD). The numerical results show that, the IDO is a powerful technique to improve the overall spots segmentation on the microarray image and to also give better results in spot segmentation and analysis process.

This method assumes that all the spots have perfect circle shape and same size [8]. Some cDNA microarrays segmentation software have been developed based on the fixed circle segmentation method, like ScanAlyze developed by Eisen in 1999 [9], and Gene- Pix developed by Axon Instruments Inc. in 1999 [10].

This method assumes that the spots have a circular shape but also allows for adjusting the size of each spot [11]. Adaptive shape segmentation methods, like watershed [12] and seed region grow- ing [13], is based on selecting start points and enlarging the detected spot area step by step until some criterion is reached. Seed region growing has been implemented in the spot software [14].

In this paper we have used IDO to separate the cDNA microarray spots from its background. Segmentation by IDO is fast, reliable and extensively employed in image processing and analysis [21]. IDO is included in adaptive shape segmentation and it is a powerful technique where it combines the frontier approach and the region approach, IDO makes a fast detection of both edges and regions [22]. The paper organized as follows. In the second section, the pro- posed techniques are explained in detail. Experimental results obtained after applying the proposed method on real images from the Stanford Microarray Database (SMD) [23] are discussed in the third section. Finally, the conclusion is analyzed in the fourth section.

The previous HCT spot segmentation approaches assume that the boundary of gene is a circle. However, according to our obser- vation, circle cannot model this boundary accurately. To improve the quality of segmentation, a novel IDO is proposed to detect the irregular boundary of spot. The method can successfully detect all the spot boundaries in the SMD database [23] and increase the recognition accuracy. This new algorithm based on applying

Integro-Differential Operator (IDO) is included in adaptive shape segmentation and it is a powerful technique where it combi- nes the frontier approach and the region approach, it makes a fast detection of both edges and regions. IDO is based on the fact that the illumination difference between inside and outside of pixels in spot edge is maximum. In other words, if you calculate the dif- ference in values of pixels gray level in spot, this value is higher than any other object in the image. This fact turns to color of spot

