On the other hand, the microstructure of the coating pro- duced by Zn-40MgO at 1.0 A/cm2 was characterized with agglomeration of the solid crystal with few dispersed film which refuse to adhere properly. This challenge is associated with an increase in the particulate in the bath electrolyte which sig- nificantly affects the rate of transfer of films from the anodic region. In other words, the characteristic feature of this coating

the hardness trend, the control sample had a hardness value of 35 HVN. The hardness profile data for all the deposited coating show significant increase with 137.94 HVN for Zn- 20MgO at 1.0 A/cm2, followed by 222.6 HVN for Zn-40MgO at

1.0 A/cm2. The most improved hardness property was 236.4 HVN by Zn-20MgO at 0.5 A/cm2. From all facts, the improvements in hardness obviously provide a geometric increase over the substrate and this was attributed to the crystal formation and superior nucleation. The adhesion and nucleation which yield the significant microhardness are reported to depend on the operating condition. Previous works [13,14,22] had affirmed that the microstructure evolved in coating is linked to processing parameters and hence provide grain size which is para- mount to the buildup of surface hardness as shown by our result.

The microstructure, thermal-oxidation and micro-mechanical properties of Zn-MgO induced composite coatings have been studied. From the results, the deposition of admixed binary composite particles in the presence of the MgO ceramic par- ticulate significantly enhanced both mechanical and corrosion performance of the coatings. The most improved hardness prop- erty was 236.4 HVN by Zn-20MgO at 0.5pA/cm2. New crystalline structures are formed as a result of heat-treatment, with Zn- 20MgO at 0.5pA/cm2 coatings still maintaining its performance, thereby possessing best properties among all series. Thermal stability of the composite coating improved with moderate ad- dition of MgO into the Zn2+ interface. Good morphology significantly distorts easy penetration of the temperature that engenders stability of the coated alloy.

