We show that PMWGP is APX-hard for arbitrary k and admits a randomized PTAS when the number of clusters is fixed. These results significantly improve the current knowledge on the problem. The key idea to obtain these results is to explore connections between PMWGP and the geometric k-means clustering problem.

An impurity measure maps a vector u = (u1,..., ud), counting how many exam- ples of each class we have in a node (branch), into a non-negative scalar 3 . Arguably, one of the most classical impurity measures is the Gini impurity iGini , which mea- sures the probability of misclassification when an object is assigned to class i with probability  ui  . It is defined as:

The Gini impurity is used in the CART package for classification and regression decision trees [3]. It is therefore important to understand the complexity of the problem of finding optimal partitions w.r.t. Gini impurity, and also to build heuris- tics and algorithms for this task.

The key idea to obtain these results is to explore connections between PMWGP and the k-means clustering problem. In fact, the hardness of PMWGP relies on a reduction from the vertex cover problem in triangle-free graphs to the k-means clustering problem due to Awasthi et al. [2]. Furthermore, our randomized PTAS for PMWGP is a simple adaptation of the randomized PTAS for the k-means problem presented by Kumar et al. [9] and further explored by Ackermann et al. [1].

Related Work. There have been theoretical investigations on methods to compute the best split efficiently for impurity measures such as the Gini impurity. For d = k = 2, Breiman [3] presented a simple algorithm that finds the best binary partition in O(n log n) time for impurity measures in a certain class that includes Gini. The correctness of this algorithm relies on a theorem, also proved in [3], which is generalized for arbitrary d and k in Chou [5], Burshtein et al. [4], and Coppersmith et al. [7]. Basically, these theorems provide necessary conditions for partitions with minimum impurity and can be used to restrict the set of partitions that need to be considered. A connection between Gini and the squared l2 distance employed by k-means, that we explore here, is mentioned in the appendix of Chou [5].

The results presented here belong to the research project of the first author and his collaborators, whose goal is to obtain a better understanding, from the perspective of approximation algorithms, of clustering based on impurity mea- sures/Bregman divergences. In [10], new splitting procedures that provably achieve near-optimal impurity for binary partitions based on a family of measures that include the Gini impurity as well as the Entropy impurity are presented. In [6], ap- proximation algorithms for the same family of measures in the more general problem of k-ary partitions are given.

Proposition 2.1 Let V be an instance of k-means in which all vectors have the same l1 norm. If P is an optimal partition for instance V of k-means, then P is also an optimal partition for instance V of k-PMWGP.

Proof. Directly from Lemmas 3.1 and 3.2: since, for a fixed k, there are at most O(nk) calls to Algorithm 1, each performing at most O(n lg n) operations, the overall running time of Cluster(V j, k, {}) is O(nk+1 lg n).	2

