The aqueous extract of Avicenna marina (AM) has been suggested to be useful in the treat- ment of various diseases. In this study, the protective effect of oral administration of Avicenna marina extract against oxidative gastric mucosal injury induced by nonsteroidal anti- inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), indomethacin in rats was investigated. The aqueous extract of Avicenna marina was given by oral gavages (125 mg /kg) three times at 12 h intervals before administering indomethacin (20 mg/kg).The level of prostaglandin (PGE2) and pH gradient were markedly decreased following indomethacin treatment, with increase in acid volume. In ad-

levels. In indomethacin-treated rats, the superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) ac- tivities as well as reduced glutathione (GSH) content were significantly diminished in gastric mucosa. However, pre-administration with AM maintains the level of these parameters near to the control value. Thus, these results indicate the effective anti-peroxidative and preven- tive actions of AM against indomethacin-induced gastric mucosal damage.

The animals were deprived of food for 36 hours before the ex- periment but had free access to water. Then NSAIDs, indomethacin was used as the ulcerogenic agent by a single dose of 20 mg/kg of body weight [19]. Rats were divided into 4 groups, each of 8 animals. The first group did not receive any treatment and served as a control. The second group, animals were orally administered with aqueous extract of Avicenna marina with a dose of 125 mg/kg body weight thrice in 12 hours interval [20].The third group, animals received a single dose of indomethacin orally as 20 mg/kg of body weight. The fourth group, animals were orally administered with aqueous extract of Avicenna marina with a dose 125 mg/kg body weight thrice in 12 hours intervals; after one hour of last administration of AM, animals received a single dose of indomethacin orally as 20 mg/kg of body weight. After 6 hours of NSAID administra- tion, the animals were sacrificed by cervical dislocation. The animals were dissected and the stomach was taken out, the stomach was opened along the greater curvature and washed by saline solution. Then, the stomachs were photographed and the mucosa was exposed for evaluation.

For histopathological examination, part of the gastric tissue was removed and was fixed in 10% formalin. After complete fixation, thin sections were prepared from tissues. Xylol and Hematoxylin-Eosin was used for clearing and staining, respec- tively. The slides were examined by microscope.

boxane from arachidonic acid [27,28]. Moreover, prostaglandins reduce the activation of neutrophils and the local release of reactive oxygen species (ROS). In addition, the endothelium of mucosal microcirculation produces prostacyclin which will be highly relevant in ensuring the tonic inhibition of neutrophil adhesion [29,30]. Therefore, indomethacin can shift the mucosal balance toward the recruitment and endothelial adhesion of circulating neutrophils by the inhibition of prostaglandin bio- synthesis [28,31]. Neutrophils also clog the microvasculature causing a local drop in mucosal blood flow and a marked release of tissue damaging factors, like proteolytic enzymes and

Pretreatment with the AM reflected a tendency to in- crease PGE2 production in spite of indomethacin-induced depletion. These results may be attributed to the polypheno- lic compounds found in AM [47]. Phenols stimulate PGE formation based on their action as co-substrates for the per- oxidase reaction [48]. Hence, the leaf extract of AM has the protective effect on the stomach against NSAIDs induced gastric ulcer, and this may be attributed to polyphenolic compounds [49].

In the present study, the gastroprotective properties of AM leaf extract may be attributed to the presence of several com- pounds. As, in a previous study of the author [10], the phytochemical screening of AM leaves extract revealed that the presence of phenolic-flavonoids; alkaloids; terpenoides; steroides; cardiac glycosides; tannins; flavonoids and saponines.The major active components of the AM are polyphenols, represented majorly by polymeric tannins (80%), hydrolysable tannins (20%) and catechin, chlorogenic, gallic and elagic acids as well as gallotannins, elagitannins, and condensed tannins. These sub- stances which are portrayed by their polyphenolic nature have indicated cytoprotective properties [48] and have been related to antiulcerogenic action in different plants [49,50]. On the other hand, tannins may counteract ulcer advancement because of their protein precipitating and vasoconstricting effects [49].Their astringent action can help precipitating microproteins on the ulcer site, thereby forming an impervious layer over the lining, which hinders gut secretions and protects the underlying mucosa from toxins and other irritants [51,52].

