We resolve that difficulty in this paper. Specifically, we address it by the study of density: a small full subcategory D of a category C is dense if a canonical functor embeds C fully into the functor category SetD, which is necessarily locally small. Density is a fundamental notion within category theory [7] and its use brings us to a very satisfactory situation: we have a functor-category model of Idealised Algol, an object-spaces model of interference-controlled Algol with no unnatural size restriction, and a full embedding between them. There is one complication with this: we provably need not just density but an enriched version of density, with enrichment in the category Cpo. We provide a counter-example to show that ordinary density is insufficient in Section 5, then show that we have the Cpo- enriched density we seek. The enriched notion of density is a standard part of enriched category theory [6].

The languages are built over three base types: comm, the type of commands; nat, the type of natural-number valued expressions; and var, the type of assignable variables. Idealised Algol itself is an applied simply-typed lambda-calculus over these base types. Its types are therefore generated from the base types via product and function operations, and its syntax is that of the lambda-calculus together with a stock of constants for imperative programming with recursion, as follows.

The category of object spaces is locally small (hom-sets really are sets), so one could remedy this situation straightforwardly by restricting attention to the full subcategory on some set of objects. But what set should we choose? At this point a tension emerges between the desire to make the construction work and the desire to have a mathematically natural and appealing model. A quick fix could be provided by restricting to (for instance) just those objects used in the interpretation of base types and their products, but immediately one loses the distinction between the syntax and its model: good models should be constructed entirely independently of syntactic considerations.

Our goal is to find a small dense subcategory of FQop closed under finite prod- ucts. The category of presheaves over this will then be Cartesian closed, and FQop will fully embed in this category in a product-preserving fashion. We will then be able to provide semantics for Idealised Algol along the lines indicated above.

The interesting cases concern the done4 moves. When done4 is played, the previous move must have been either run4, so the last write was either 0 (for a first invocation) or 1 (for a second invocation); or done3, in which case the last write was 0. Thanks to the bracketing discipline for question and answer moves in the games model, these are the only two possibilities, so the proof is complete.	2

