Let us discuss now how CCS can be specified and executed in MSDF. We also present a strategy that solves the rules premises in depth-first search. Concrete labels and process identifiers are declared to test the execution of our specification. No runs are shown in the paper but the tool and this example can be downloaded from http://maude-msos-tool.sf.net/mmt+msl/.

Transition rules in MSDF represent quite directly standard mathematical nota- tion for transition rules. A few explanations may clarify, however, the notation for label patterns. Labels may have ellipsis (...) or a dash (-) to represent all the indices in a label not explicitly mentioned. When ellipsis are used it means that the part of the label it refers to may be changed in a transition. The dash is used otherwise. When they occur more than once in the same rule, they refer to the same subset of the indices. Metavariables, such as X1 and X2, may also be used to refer to a subset of the indices of a label and are used to distinguish between two sets of indices in the same rule.

Note that this strategy can be automatically generated by inspecting the seman- tics rules. It reflects the MSOS derivation mechanism, but it is not CCS dependent. Moreover, the strategy ccs-strat can only be used after concretizing the strategy prem-strat as the following module does.

applied when the second rule (r2) cannot be applied. That is, the binary relation on rules defines the order of their application when deriving transitions. So, a rule r can be used to derive a transition if all its premises are valid and no rule higher than r is applicable (it contains a premise which is not valid).

The current version of the prototype does not support strategy module inclusion, even though there is notation (and semantics) for them in [7]. All the strategy definitions have to be declared in a single module. Part of our future work is to fully support the strategy language. Besides the automation of the translation of negative premises to strategies, a case study that we would like to approach in a near future is the implementation of E-LOTOS semantics [6], where negative premises are used in order to guarantee that urgent actions occur before time elapses.

