Coalgebraic fixed point logics were first considered in the work of Venema [21], where a finitary version of the coalgebraic logic of Moss [14] was used as the underly- ing modal language. Our motivation for considering fixed point logics over different modal languages is rooted in our interest in verification techniques for systems modelled as coalgebras. In this setting, the logics obtained through the modular techniques described in [3] appear to be better suited as specification logics.

The results concerning the implicit negation and the alternation-free fragments of our logics make use of the notion of an S-modality (of some finite arity), with S a syntax constructor with an associated one-step semantics. This notion also allows us to relate logics induced by sets of polyadic predicate liftings, as considered in [17], with logics induced by syntax constructors. As a result, we obtain a way to add fixed points to logics of the former type.

We note that all of the above definitions are negation-free variants of the defini- tions in [3]. The restriction to negation-free fragments is a common way to ensure that fixed point logical operators defined on top of these languages have a well- defined (fixed point) semantics, see e.g. [19].

It is worth noting that, for languages where the semantic dual of each modal operator is also in the language, we do not lose any expressivity by leaving out the negation operator. We will show that, in this case, negation can be implicitly defined. To this end, we introduce the notions of an S-modality, and of a dual modality.

Example 3.9 For the spatial transition systems of Example 2.3, the modal oper- ator 0 is an S-modality of arity 0, the temporal operators   and   are unary S-modalities, while the spatial operator | is a binary S-modality.

We have extended the modular coalgebraic logics of [3,4] with general fixed points, of which until- and dynamic-like fixed points are an instance. Following [21], we have provided the resulting fixed point logics with a game semantics (by defining evaluation games for formulae and states of coalgebras), and have shown the ade- quacy of this semantics w.r.t. the standard fixed point semantics. Furthermore, we have shown that the moves corresponding to modal positions in these evaluation games can be replaced by so-called one-step games, whose boards can be built in-

