The pollen grains of forty species of the aquatic flowering plants (6 floating, 6 submerged and 28 emergent species) naturally growing in the four coastal Mediterranean lakes of Egypt were investigated during JanuaryeAugust 2012. These species belong to 17 families. Morphologically, the investigated pollen grains are mostly prolate-spheroidal, spheroidal or triangular, rarely prolate or elongated, tectum psilate, granulate, reticulate or micro- echinate. On the basis of aperture types pollen grains of most families are grouped under three distinct types, namely colporate, colpate and porate. On the other hand, pollen grains of some families e.g. Cyperaceae, Juncaceae, Potamogetonaceae and Ruppiaceae are ina- perturate. It is worth to stating that from a phylogenetic and evolutionary point of views, polarity, symmetry, apertural types and exine sculpturing are the most important char- acters to differentiate between the different pollen types. The identified pollen grains, conserved in the herbarium of Botany Department, Faculty of Science, Mansoura Univer- sity, Mansoura, Egypt, as reference key pollen in the northern lakes for palynologists, ecologists, taxonomists etc.

Through the palynology we can get tremendous knowledge from a little material in a short time [1]. Palynology is used in several applications such as a survey of atmospheric pollen, spore production and the archaeological excavation of ship- wrecks. The earliest investigation to use the morphological diversity of pollen directly concerned with the classification of plants [2]. Lindau [3] used a greater number of pollen

Several papers are published on pollen morphology of some dicots families from various parts of the world. Ana- cardiaceae, Bignoniaceae, Caricaceae, Myrtaceae, Mor- ingaceae, Meliaceae, Rhamnaceae and Zygophyllaceae have been studied by [9]. Palynology of families Apocynaceae has been investigated by Schill and Leuenberger [10] and Van Campo et al. [11]. The families Caesalpiniaceae and Mim- osaceae have been reported by Guinet [12] and Lock [13]. Morphology of pollen six aquatic angiosperms from Saudi Arabia has been studied by Perveen and Qaiser [14]. The main aims of this study are to contribute to our understanding the pollen morphology of aquatic plants naturally growing in four northern Mediterranean lakes of Egypt namely: Mariut, Idku, Burullus and Manzala by light microscopy and to be used as additional tool for plant taxonomy.

Pollen grains were extracted from fresh flowers of thirty seven aquatic species collected from the northern Mediterranean lakes during MarcheAugust 2012. Extraction and chemical preparations procedures of the flowers and pollen used is that described by Moore et al. [20]. Also, original pollen grains sizes were the mean values of the longest axis of 15 measured grains. The herbarium specimens of the studied plants were kept and well preserved at the herbarium of the Faculty of Science, Mansoura University, Mansoura, Egypt. Material for LM was acetolysed according to Erdtman [21]. Before acetol- ysis the pollens were boiled in 10% KOH for about 8 min, causing the apertures to open and making them easier to investigate [22]. The acetolysed pollens were mounted in glycerin jelly on glass slides. The pollen was examined using a

The pollen grains examined were usually radially symmetri- cal (except in Eichhornia and Ruppia, both with bilateral sym- metric), apolar, few taxa are isopolar and heteropolar (Plates 1 and 2). However, heteropolar grains were commonly found in monocotyledonous families (e.g. Cyperaceae) compared to dicot ones. Pollen grains of dicot families were usually apolar or isopolar. Pollen grains are usually categorized largely on the basis of their shape, size, apertural types, symmetry, polarity and exine sculpturing. However, from a phylogenetic and evolutionary point of view, polarity, symmetry, apertural types and exine sculpturing are the most important pollen characters [1].

In apertural types, the investigated pollens are mostly col- porate, colpate, porate rarely noneaperturate grains were observed. The colpate aperture is tricolpate with free apices in three taxa (Marsilea aegyptiaca, Ranunculus sceleratus and Rorripa palustris). The colporate aperture type is tricolporate in three taxa (Persicaria spp and V. anagallis-aquatica). The porate type is monoporate (14 taxa), triporate (3 taxa), tet- raporate as in M. spicatum and polyporate as in A. sessilis. The inaperturate pollen (14 taxa) as in Cyperaceae, Junca- ceae and Potamogeton spp. In E. crassipes the aperture is monosulcate.

The pollen grains examined were usually thick in exine texture except these of family Juncaceae. The following pollen surface patterns were recorded; psilate (22 taxa), granulate (8 taxa), microechinate (A. sessilis and M. spicatum), reticulate (5 taxa), only that of Typha domingensis is microreticulate in pattern. V. anagallis-aquatica pollen are perforate sculpture but those of R. maritima have exine which is reticulate in pattern in the central portion of the grain and appears smooth at the extremities. Walker and Doyle [1] on angiosperms and Fur- ness [34] on Acanthaceae considered that the psilate pollen surface is the primitive case.

