A system is context-aware if it uses context to provide relevant information and service to the user. Context-based information gathering for WMSN needs to have proper information and mea- sure of the context what we are using to represent the system. Context-aware computing helps to retrieve the relevant informa- tion from the environment, which in turn can conserve the net- work lifetime of WMSN as discussed in [4].

Some of the drawbacks of existing precision agriculture tech- niques using wireless sensor networks are that most of the works consider only real-time scalar data to improve the agriculture pro- cess. The performance of WSN with respect to energy conservation of the sensor nodes and prolonging the network lifetime of WSN is not considered in most of the existing works. Also a very few liter- ature exists for energy conservation in sensing, processing and transmission of multimedia data in WMSN.

tic and mobile agents for information gathering and detection of context based on soil fertility, fire, diseased plants and weeds. (3) Improvement in performance parameters such as context detec- tion time, fusion time, energy consumption, cluster head selection time etc. when compared to the existing systems.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a context-aware model for agriculture. Section 3 explains the content-based image retrieval for plant disease and weed detec- tion. Section 4 describes the agent technology. Section 5 presents the simulation model and performance parameters. Section 6 dis- cusses the results and Section 7 gives the conclusion of the work.

Identification of weeds using digital images is discussed in [32]. In the proposed system, some of the useful plant images are stored in the database. If the captured image exceeds the threshold of the stored image then the weeds are detected. The threshold consid- ered in this work is 85 percent.

images by matching similarity is called Image retrieval. The visual contents of the image such as color, shape or features is considered for similarity matching between the images stored in the database and the query image, then such kind of image retrieval is called as content-based image retrieval (CBIR). In the proposed work, to detect plant disease and weeds, CBIR is considered. Useful and healthy plant images are stored in the node knowledge base of the sensor node. The camera-enabled sensor nodes are turned on to sense the agricultural field periodically. The captured image is checked for the similarity of the images stored in the node knowl- edge base. If the images captured are similar, then the captured image is dropped else the captured image is stored and related message is sent to the sink node.

The CBIR system considered for the proposed work has the visual contents of the images in the database that are extracted and described by multi-dimensional feature vectors which are stored in the database related to the relative image. For feature extraction in the proposed system, color and texture features are considered. For color feature extraction color moments, HSV (Hue, Saturation, Value) histogram and auto color correlogram are used. A color moment is a method of image indexing, where the image can be interpreted as mean, standard deviation, skewness, and kur- tosis. In this scheme, only mean and standard deviation color moments are considered. HSV histogram provides perception rep- resentation according to human visual features. HSV histogram ignores spatial organization of pixels in images, auto correlogram is considered as it describes the correlation of the image color as the function of their spatial distance. For texture feature extraction discrete wavelet transform (DWT) is used. In CBIR, texture feature plays a very important role in computer vision and pattern recogni-

and is responsible for synchronizing the actions of the agents within themselves and outside agents too. SMA updates the NKB with sensed information, capture time and signal strength. It com- pares the sensed value with threshold values residing in NKB and interprets the context. If the context is detected then it computes arbitrary midpoint between the source and destination node and intermediate nodes around the reference axis between the source and the destination node. It also computes hop distance factor. In sleep mode, SMA does not transmit any information to sink. It monitors the battery life; if the battery is exhausting, it sends the information about the status of the battery to the sink node. It sends information of the node such as node id, location informa- tion, context, and signal strength information to the sink node, if and only if it has a signal strength above the predefined threshold set by the sink.

It is a mobile agent which resides in all sensor nodes. If the con- text is detected then SMA generates PFA and its clone for route dis- covery. PFA carry information of each node such as node id, residual energy, hop count, bandwidth and hop distance. Then this collected information is sent to the cluster head.

Whenever the query is sent from sink node, the information from all the sensor nodes has to be sent. The sensor nodes are divided into clusters. All the sensor nodes in the cluster send the sensed information to its cluster head. The information from all the cluster heads is fused and sent to sink node. The process of fusion takes place from the farthest cluster. The farthest cluster is decided based on the Euclidian distance.

The QA reaches the farthest cluster head and collects the information. The farthest cluster is decided based on Euclidian distance. The QA reaches next nearest cluster and collects the information from cluster head. Likewise, QA collects and fuses the information from all sensor nodes and reaches the sink node.

A multi-agent based context-aware information gathering for monitoring agriculture using WMSN is proposed in this article. The sensor node senses the data and updates the knowledge base. Sensor node comprises of an agent platform with static and mobile agents, camera and other sensory devices such as soil pH, moisture, temperature, smoke, etc. The sensor node forms a cluster on its own based on the communication range. Once the information is sensed by the sensor node, it compares the information with the threshold value; if it is not in range, a message is sent to sink node via cluster head using the multi-hop technique. Information from

