A pseudo-telepathy game is a game for two or more players for which there is no classical winning strategy, but there is a winning strategy based on sharing quantum entanglement by the players. Since it is generally very hard to perfectly implement a quantum winning strategy for a pseudo-telepathy game, quantum players are almost certain to make errors even though they use a winning strategy. After introducing a model for pseudo-telepathy games, we investigate the impact of several basic noisy quantum channels on the quantum winning strategy for the Mermin-GHZ game. The question of how strong the noise can be so that quantum players would still be better than classical ones is also dealt with.

Since quantum entanglement provides us with strong non-local correlations that cannot be achieved in the classical world, one can ask whether it can be used even to solve some distributed problems without any form of direct communication between the parties. Of course, we are interested only in such problems for which this does not hold in the classical world. On one hand, the answer is negative if we consider the standard communication complexity model [9] in which the parties compute a value of some function on their inputs and the whole result of the computation must become known to at least one party. Otherwise, faster-than-light communication would be possible which would contradict the Relativity Theory. On the other hand, if each party has its own input, computes its own output and we are interested only in non-local correlations between the inputs and the outputs, then the answer is positive. Such problems are often described using a terminology of the game theory. Therefore, they are usually called pseudo-telepathy games.

This paper examines the impact of quantum noise on the quantum winning strategy for the Mermin-GHZ game. A general definition of this problem is given in the next section. The Mermin-GHZ game and the quantum winning strategy as well as the best classical strategy for it are described in Section 3. The remaining sections are devoted to the study of how several basic noisy quantum channels influence the quantum winning strategy for the Mermin-GHZ game.

