(atom-dependent) function types and abstraction types. We establish meta-theoretic properties of NLC; define FM-cartesian closed categories, hence a categorical semantics for NLC; and prove soundness & completeness by way of NLC-classifying categories. A corollary of these results is that NLC is an internal language for FM-cccs. A key feature of NLC is that it provides a novel way of encoding freshness via dependent types, and a new vehicle for studying the interaction of freshness and higher order types.

Remark 1.1 The category central to this work is FMSet [5,15]. The category of nominal sets FMNom is relevant too: for a very clear introduction see [30]. While the properties of FMSet are less well known than FMNom, both are toposes f .

Remark 2.1 Until Section 5 we work with a subset of NLC. This will allow us to fully motivate the use of a form of dependent typing in order to formulate our extension of NEL with higher order functions. Abstraction and concretion is omitted until later in the paper.

We have two more lemmas that are crucial for proving some important facts about NLC. Lemma 3.2 is used in induction steps in which a binding variable in an abstraction also occurs in the environment (of the abstraction): For an example induction see the proof on page 11 of Lemma 3.3, and [28] (page 169) for a detailed explanation of the problem. Lemma 3.3 is used in proving Proposition 3.4; the proposition underpins our semantics and classifying category construction.

In order to obtain a completeness result we need a way to construct a cartesian closed category out of NLC syntax. To do this we augment the types, expressions and rules with a form of dependently typed atom-abstraction. In doing so we arrive at the final form of NLC (with abstraction) for which we have a categorical model that is both sound and complete. Please note that we only give a summary of the details in this preliminary paper; a substantial journal version will follow.

The Classifying Category and Categorical Completeness. The notion of classi- fying category, topos, etc is a standard one in category theory [10,22]. To prove completeness we now show that we can build an FM-ccc from the syntax of a NLC theory (Proposition 5.1), together with a generic model [10] (Propositions 5.3 and 5.4).

Future Work. Recall our motivation for this work: to develop a formal frame- work for nominal higher order functions, with a view to proving it a conservative extension over NEL by nominal gluing. Nominal gluing remains work in progress, but our preliminary results about the Yoneda Lemma and cartesian closure of nom- inal functor categories appear in [12]. From such a gluing proof, we might be able to extract a form of categorical normalisation result, taking the work in a more ap- plied direction through the construction of some form of abstract machine for NLC along with an implementation. Is there some form of nominal categorical abstract machine?

We have considered the possibility that the original NEL could be presented using dependent types in place of freshness assertions. However, the resulting type theory might be different. Such dependently typed theories, in which a # x : s is wholly replaced by x : sa, could be more expressive than NEL theories. This remains future work.

We thank Ranald Clouston for very detailed comments; John Power for being helpful and generous with his time over a public holiday; and for other useful comments and observations from Martin Hyland and Bill Lawvere. We must also thank others who have provided useful thoughts that we hope have improved this paper. Finally, and most importantly, we thank Andrew Pitts for extensive discussions about an earlier version of this paper which contained an error and assisting with its correction.

