Alves presented in his PhD thesis a normalization procedure for N-Graphs, a multiple conclusion natural deduction for propositional classical logic proposed by de Oliveira in 2001, with proofs as directed graphs. Here we develop a new normalization for N-Graphs inspired by A. Carbones work in 1999, where she proposed a combinatorial model to study the evolution of proofs during the procedure of cut elimination.

The system is defined somewhat like proof-nets. There is the concept of proof- graphs, from which all graphs are constructed with the valid links where each node is the premise and conclusion of at most one link, and the concept of N-Graphs, which are the correct proof-graphs, i.e. the proof-graphs that represent valid proofs. These constructions are analogous to the definition of proof-structure and proof-net, respectively [12].

Alves presented in his PhD thesis [2] a normalization procedure for N-Graphs. In- spired in the work of Statman [19], Blute et. al. [5] and others that created graph- ical and topological frameworks to study the normalization of natural deduction, he devised a set of operations divided in two stages: the first that handles gen- eral proof-graphs, i.e. trees and some specific cycles, and the second stage that was constructed to give a thorough treatment of cycle structures. In the end, the proposed procedure has four sets of transformations that eliminate maximum for- mulas/segments and an algorithm (named 3CA) designed to determine whether a cycle has a detour or not.

let u be a premise in Gj (i.e., no edge towards it in Gj) and u1, u2 its copies in D(G, Gj). Then a new vertex uj will be created and linked to u1 and u2 with an expansion. If there are edges in G towards u, then link those edges to uj in D(G, Gj).

let v be a conclusion in Gj (i.e., no edge from it in Gj) and v1, v2 its copies in D(G, Gj). Then a new vertex vj will be created and linked to v1 and v2 with a contraction. If there are edges in G from v, then link those edges to vj in D(G, Gj).

It is simple to check every reduction reduces an N-Graph G to another N-Graph Gj. The Theorem 3.5 is enough to validate the reductions with duplication of empires. All other reductions can be validated by a careful examination of every switching S(Gj), using the fact that the original S(G) is acyclic and connected.22

Proof. We can prove the normalization theorem by induction on the degree of the cut formulas, the number of cuts with maximum degree in the proof and the number of inversions of the maximum/structural segments (inversions as showed in the proof of Theorem 3.8). When an N-Graph G is reduced to Gj, a maximum formula is removed or the number of inversions in a maximum/structural path decreases. Even if new cut formulas are added by some reduction, we can choose an order to apply the reductions so the degree of the formula in the vertex is always smaller. This can be easily done for the simple reductions by choosing the cut formula with greatest degree, as the peripheral formulas have lower degree than the main formula of the reduction.

