Alex Simpson has suggested an observationally-induced approach towards obtaining monads for computa- tional effects in denotational semantics. The underlying idea of this approach is to use a single observation algebra as computational prototype and to obtain a computational monad as a free algebra construction derived from this prototype. Recently, it has been shown that free observationally-induced algebras ex- ist in the category of continuous maps between topological spaces for arbitrary pre-chosen computational prototypes.

The paper is organised as follows. In section 2, we recall the basic definitions of free observationally-induced algebras. In section 3, we show that under suit- able completeness conditions free observationally-induced algebras exist in carte- sian closed categories for arbitrary pre-chosen computational prototypes. Section 4 applies these results to investigate a lower powerspace construction in topological domain theory. The paper is concluded in section 5.

The characterisation of free observationally-induced algebras as subobjects of double exponentials is a very interesting result. Although one finds hints at it in the literature [5,8], it appears that the work at hand gives the most concrete account of this connection between algebraic effects and continuation types. However, deeper investigations are necessary for determining the benefits of this characterisation of observationally-induced algebras.

The construction of observationally-induced powerspaces as subobjects of dou- ble exponentials of Sierpinski space also bears resemblance to the work of Vickers and Townsend [15] on powerlocales. They show that lower and upper powerlocale constructions are both obtained as subobjects of a double exponential of Sierpin- ski space, and moreover their composition commutes and yields the full double exponential. It should be investigated under which conditions free observationally- induced algebra constructions commute and in how far it is possible to obtain full double exponentials with the observationally-induced approach. It should be men- tioned that the category of locales is not cartesian closed, hence it is not covered by the present paper. However, certain exponentials do exist in locales and there are certainly strong connections to the work on free observationally-induced algebras over topological spaces [2], which should be investigated further.

