Then, we tackle the problem of coalition formation. How and why agents should aggregate is not a new issue and has been deeply investigated, in past and recent years, in various frameworks, as for example in algorithmic game theory, argumentation settings, and logic-based knowledge representation. We face this problem in the setting of priced resource-bounded agents with the goal specified by an ATL formula. In particular we solve the problem of determining the minimal cost coalitions of agents acting in accordance to rules expressed by a priced game arena and satisfying a given formula. We show that such problem is computationally not harder than verifying the satisfaction of the same formula with fixed coalitions.

Another aspect that has not been fully analyzed in the literature is the problem of actions producing resources. On the one hand, in [2,3], actions can only consume resources; on the other hand, in [7], the authors state that whenever actions can pro- duce resources the model checking problem is undecidable. It can be easily argued that the undecidability comes from the unboundedness production of resources, thus we naturally constrain the way in which actions can produce resources: it is possible for an action to produce a resource in a quantity that is not greater than the amount that has already been consumed so far. Such a notion makes sense as, in practical terms, it allows one to model significant real-world scenarios, such as, acquiring memory by a program, leasing a car during a travel, and, in general, any scenario in which an agent is releasing resources previously acquired.

Finally, we also tackle the problem of coalition formation. How and why agents should aggregate is not a new issue and has been deeply investigated, in past and recent years, in various frameworks, as for example in algorithmic game theory, argumentation settings, and logic-based knowledge representation (see [8,5]). We face this problem in the setting of priced resource-bounded agents with the goal specified by an ATL formula. In particular we solve the problem of determining the minimal cost coalitions of agents acting in accordance to rules expressed by a priced game arena and satisfying a given formula.

The paper is structured as follows. In the next section, we formalize our logic to consider priced resources, then in section 3 we analyze the complexity of the model checking problem and in section 4 we deal with the problem of finding op- timal coalitions. Last, we conclude with some considerations on future research directions.

In each location, each agent can choose among a non-empty set of actions to be performed. Any possible combination of actions gives rise to transitions, that are the edges of the graph. In general, actions consume and produce resources. Each resource has a price that is variable and depends on, inter alia, the current avail- ability of that resource on the market. Thus, a transition can be executed if the resources needed to perform the actions are available and the agents of a team have enough money to acquire them.

Several formalisms have already been proposed to model such a kind of real- word situations [3,7]. Our main contribution is to present a new formalism, called PRB-ATL, based on a stronger notion of resource bounds and we show that its model checking problem We also introduce the problem, called the optimal coalitions (OC) problem, of finding optimal coalitions (with respect to the amount of money needed by the different coalitions) capable to perform the task. We have shown that both the model checking problem for PRB-ATL and the OC problem are in EXPTIME and have a PSPACE lower bound. As a matter of fact, to solve the OC problem we give an algorithm that explores the entire space of solutions to compute the optimum. The problem of finding the exact characterization of the computational complexity is an open problem and currently is under investigation.

Further research directions concern the study of variants of the logic, to naturally express more kinds of scenarios. As an example, it is interesting in our opinion to consider the money endowment as a component of the game arena (i.e., the model), instead of explicitly specifying a fresh money availability for each occurrence of a team operator in the formula. Furthermore, related to this argument, one can consider the money availability not as an input of the problem, but rather as a parameter to minimize, to establish how much money each agent should be provided with, to perform a given task.

