We introduce a sound and complete graph calculus for multi-modal logics. This formalism internalizes the (Kripke) semantics of modal logics and provides uniform tools for expressing and manipulating modal formulas. We present the graph calculus for logic K and show how to extend it to handle some modalities, like the global and difference modalities, in a natural manner. We also indicate how it can be easily extended to other normal modal logics, such as T, S4, S5, etc.

We present a graph approach to multi-modal logics yielding sound and complete calculi. Such formalisms internalize the (Kripke) semantics of modal logics and pro- vides uniform tools for expressing and manipulating modal formulas. Our derivation rules mimic the semantical properties of the modal operators, so their application is quite intuitive.

The structure of this paper is as follows. Section 2 introduces and illustrates the main ideas underlying our graph approach to modal logics. Section 3 presents our graph language for modal logics: syntax, semantics and some constructions. Section 4 introduces our graph calculus for modal logics, with its conversion and expansion rules, discussing its correctness. In Section 5 we indicate some extensions of our graph calculus to handle some special modalities (like the global one and difference) as well as some modalities with properties like reflexivity, symmetry, transitivity and determinism. Section 6 presents some concluding remarks.

This slice S has a conflicting situation. For, on node u, we have two contradictory unary arcs: a positive arc (labelled p) and a negative arc (corresponding to p). Indeed, within slice S we find under complement the above slice T. Now, consider the underlying drafts: T of T and S of S. By mapping z to u, we can map draft T into draft S, as follows:

We have examined a graph approach to multi-modal logics giving correct calculi. Such formalisms, which internalize the (Kripke) semantics of modal logics, provide uniform tools for expressing and manipulating modal formulas. Soundness and completeness indicate that our rules capture the intended meanings of the concepts. The uniformity of the approach yields a flexibility that is very useful in extensions: they can be presented naturally by expressing the corresponding intuitive ideas.

As the examples in Section 2 suggest, we have finite counter-models. The model provided by the construction outlined in 4.3 is not guaranteed to be finite, but we think that we can extend the filtration method [2] to our approach, thereby obtaining finite models. In a similar vein, it seems that familiar modal logic ideas, such as bi-simulation [2], have appropriate analogues for graphs.

