Cellular automata are one-dimensional arrays of interconnected interacting finite automata, also called cells. Here, we investigate one of the weakest class of cellular automata, namely the class of real-time one-way cellular automata. Additionally, we impose two restrictions on the inter-cell communication. First, the number of allowed uses of the links between cells is bounded. Moreover, the amount of information to be communicated in one time step is bounded by a constant being independent from the given automaton. In the weakest case, we consider cellular automata with one-way information flow where each cell receives one bit of information exactly once. In this case, we obtain a characterization of the regular languages for unary alphabets and the acceptance of non-context-free languages for non-unary alphabets. Next, a proper language hierarchy can be derived when increasing the number of allowed uses of the links between cells step by step. Finally, decidability problems of these restricted cellular automata are studied and undecidability of almost all problems can be proven even in the most restricted case of one-way one-bit communication.

Devices of homogeneous, interconnected, parallel acting automata have widely been investigated from a computational capacity point of view. In particular, many results are known about cellular automata (see, for example, the surveys [1,2]) which are linear arrays of identical copies of deterministic finite automata, where the single nodes, which are sometimes called cells, are homogeneously connected to their both immediate neighbors. Additionally, they work synchronously at discrete time steps.

Another resource restricted in order to study the power of communication has been investigated in [11,12]. There, two-way cellular automata are considered where the number of proper state changes is bounded. There are strong relations to inter- cell communication. Roughly speaking, a cell can remember the states received from its neighbors. As long as these do not change, no communication is neces- sary. In [5,6] real-time one-way cellular automata have been studied where the communication is quantitatively measured by counting the number of uses of the communication links between cells. One measure studied is the maximal number of communications that may appear between each two cells. Reducing the number of communications in such a way that each two neighboring cells may communicate constantly often only, leads to devices which still can accept non-context-free (even non-semilinear) languages. Again, almost all of their decidability questions can be shown to be undecidable.

In this paper, we combine these two approaches and study real-time one-way cellular automata which are allowed to communicate only a fixed, finite number of bits per time step. Additionally, the communication links between two cells are allowed to be used constantly often only. In the most restricted case, we consider real-time one-way cellular automata which can communicate one bit of information between two cells exactly once.

Next, we study real-time OCAs with minimal communication, that is, the family Lrt(MC(1)-OCA1). We start with a minimal input alphabet containing one symbol only. It is known that even unrestricted massively parallel real-time OCAs cannot accept more unary languages than a single deterministic finite-state machine [7]. The following result shows that, to this end, one communication symbol and one use of the links suffice.

Basically, M' works as follows. During the first time step the rightmost cell receives the message 1 associated with the boundary symbol. Any cell simulates the finite state machine M until it receives the message 1 from its neighbor. When this happens, the cells simulate one more step of M, but now change to the corre-

The previous result raises the question whether we can characterize or possibly capture the general regular languages by MC(l)-OCA1s, for some constant l. The next example reveals that one communication symbol and two messages per cell are sufficient to accept a non-regular language. On the other hand, it is shown in [3] that there are regular languages which are not accepted by any real-time CA with 1-bit communication. Thus, there are regular languages which cannot be accepted by any MC(O(1))-OCA1.

States with a hat send messages. During the first time step the internal counters are initialized and the b-cells change to a state that sends a message. The message associated with the boundary symbol is ignored. Roughly speaking, the counters indicate how many symbols b a cell is aware of. So, the counters of the b-cells are initialized with 1. Moreover, cells that are aware of l symbols b accept and ignore further messages from the right. Since a cell sends a message if and only if its counter is increased, any cell sends at most l messages.	 

at time step 1, the (m + 1)st $-cell from the right does not receive a 1 at time m. In the next time step, this cell starts a signal C by sending a 1 to its left neighbor which is forwarded with maximal speed to the left by all other $-cells. It should be remarked that by setting up an internal counter every cell can identify the (m + 1)st time step.

also works for SC(f )-CAs and MC(f )-CAs where f is not necessarily a constant function. Here SC(f )-CA denotes the class of cellular automata whose total num- ber of communications (appearing anywhere in the array) during a computation is bounded by f . For a proper definition of these models we would like to refer to [6,5]. Now, we can use Lemma 4.1 to reduce the undecidability problems for

Clearly, the undecidability carries over to, for example, MC(O(1))-CAk with two- way communication and the models SC(O(n))-OCAk and SC(O(n))-CAk having a different measure on the number of communications (cf. [6,5]). In particular, the following corollary shows the undecidability of almost all decidability problems for k-bit one-way cellular automata studied in [13].

