Abstract One of the most overlooked factors in evaluating performance of ad hoc routing proto- cols is the variation in received signal strength known as fading. Many types of routing protocols have been proposed based on simplified assumptions and unrealistic propagation models that neglect the effect of fading. The choice of propagation models have a great impact on performance, so realistic models are necessary to consider the effect of fading as far as an accurate analysis of performance of the routing protocols is concerned. In this paper, comparative analysis of two on demand ad hoc routing protocols is performed in order to study the impact of mobility and fading on performance. The non-fading models such as free space and two ray ground are simulated for comparison with fading models such as Shadowing, Ricean, and Rayleigh fading. The simulation results reveal that the fading models have a significantly degraded network performance with respect to two mobility scenarios.

nation by using a route discovery mechanism. On the other hand, a mobile node detects any network topology change by using the route maintenance mechanism. While using any of these two mechanisms, a routing protocol relies on radio wave propagation, which places a fundamental limitation on the performance of the ad hoc network. The phenomena which effects radio wave propagation can generally be described by five mechanisms as follow. Reflection is the abrupt change in the direction of a wave front at an interface between two dis- similar media so that the wave front returns into the medium from which it originated. Scattering is a phenomenon in which the direction of the wave is changed when the wave encounters

strength fades not only because of the distance between sender and receiver but also because of the antenna position, transmis- sion power, attenuation due to buildings etc. The probabilistic propagation models such as shadowing, Rayleigh, and Ricean can have a great impact on the performance of the mobile wire- less ad hoc network [19]. This paper presents a simulation study on the effects of mobility and different propagation mod- els on the performance of two on demand routing protocols. The motivation is to determine how the mobility and propaga- tion models affect performance metrics such as packet delivery ratio, delay and routing overhead. The results revealed that the use of fading propagation models changed the simulation results considerably.

The simulation is performed under window operating system using Cygwin [18]. The fading models are still not incorpo- rated in NS-2 simulator. Modifications are done to incorpo- rate the different fading models using C++ code to the wireless physical layer specifications [5,9,21]. The mobility and communication scenario files are created and the simula- tion Tool Command Language (TCL) code is written to set- up the wireless simulation component. The TCL script is compiled and run to generate a trace file that records traffic and node movement. It contains a list of all major events such as number of packets transmitted, packets received, packets dropped, source, and destination during the simula- tion. The traced data is stored in an output file for post pro- cessing. These files are parsed using AWK in order to extract the information needed to evaluate the performance metrics.

In general, the DYMO shows increase in the routing overhead when compared with AODV. Furthermore, much increase is observed under high speed as compared to low speed condi- tion. Increase in the routing overhead is due to local connectiv- ity through hello packets. Under all propagation models DYMO shows a higher increase in the routing overhead with increasing speed which can be attributed to ineffective usage of the routing packets. A lot of packets are dropped and up- dated each time the topology changes. This can be attributed to the constructive interference phenomena due to multipath signal propagation. In free space model, a sharp increase was observed in the routing overhead as the speed increases and

