Fuzzy cellular automata were first introduced in [5] as a model to describe the impact that perturbations (e.g. noisy sources, computation errors, mutations, etc.) can have on the evolution of Boolean CA (e.g., see [11]), They have been shown to be useful tools for pattern recognition purposes (e.g., see [13,14]), and good models for generating images mimicking nature (e.g. [6,18]). Their asymptotic behavior

This study is a first step towards the analytical support of the classification of FCA in terms of periodicity, and it opens interesting research directions. In light of the results of [2] on the probabilistic interpretation of FCA, particularly interesting would now be to understand the meaning of non-homogeneous periodic points of weighted average rules (and of other FCA rules) in terms of estimates of asymptotic density of their corresponding Boolean CA. Studies in this direction are underway.

Again, Theorem 3.2 does not apply directly to this rule since one of the values is inverted before it is averaged, so we will derive the asymptotic behaviour of FCA 78 by finding a topologically conjugate FCA to which Theorem 3.2 applies. In the

effectively have two separate weighted averages, one of the even indices, the other of the odd. The weight factors in each case come from the other set of values. We will exploit this structure to determine topologically conjugate FCA where to apply Theorem 3.2.

We can show convergence using sub-arrays as in the previous case. However, the rules for each sub-array are average the inverted values as for rule 27 so we will need to consider two steps at a time. The convergence lemma allows us to describe more precisely the point of convergence in the even case.

Rule 46 yields the most interesting results of all FCA in this group and it appears to be unique among all elementary FCA. In fact, from the experimental observa- tions of [9] it is the only rule with periodic behavior of length 4. It once again uses the central value as the weight factor, but the resulting rule individuates sub- automata where the rule uses one value directly while the other is inverted resulting in temporally periodic behaviour in each of the GW CA in the cross product.

