To this aim, we compare languages via their relative expressive power, i.e. we try to encode one language in another, while respecting some reasonable properties. Of course, the definition of such properties is crucial for the meaningfulness of our study: too liberal properties would lead to poorly informative results (most of the encodings would be possible), whereas too stringent properties would be fruitless (very few encodings would be possible).

erational correspondence, full abstraction, ...). Here, we take the proposal in [13] and consider only encodings that satisfy the following properties: compositionality, name invariance (i.e., the encodings of two source processes that differ only in their free names must only differ in the associated free names), operational correspondence

[13] the properties that encodings should satisfy. In Section 4, we formally build up our hierarchy: for every pair of languages, we give an encodability/separation result. Finally, in Section 5 we conclude the paper by also mentioning some related work. In this extended abstract we have omitted the motivations behind the languages; for more details, see the original papers where such languages were introduced.

Notice that a migration at l' is legal only if l' is an existing locality of the net. In the original paper [14], this check was carried out, among other tasks, by the type system. We prefer the present formulation for the sake of simplicity; however, all what are going to prove does not rely on this choice.

MA, like all the following Ambient-like languages, strongly relies on a type system to avoid inconsistent processes like, e.g., m.P or in n[P ]; these two processes can arise after the (ill-typed) communications (x).x.P  m and (x).x[P ]  in n . For MA, like for SA and BA, we shall always consider the sub-language formed by all the well-typed processes, as defined in [6,17,2].

We consider the Boxed Ambient calculus as presented in [2]. BA evolves MA by removing the open action that is considered too powerful and, hence, potentially dangerous. To let different ambients communicate, BA allows a restricted form of non-local communication: in particular, every input/output action can be per- formed locally (if tagged with direction ), towards the enclosing ambient (if tagged with direction U ) or towards an enclosed ambient n (if tagged with direction n).

2, is a function from 1 to 2. We shall call encoding any translation that satisfies the five properties we are going to present now. There, to simplify reading, we let S range over processes of the source language (viz., L1) and T range over processes of the target language (viz., L2).

As already said in the introduction, an encoding should be compositional. To for- mally define this notion, we exploit the notion of k-ary context, written ( 1; ... ; k), that is a term where k occurrences of 0 are replaced by the k holes  1,..., k.

where (x1, x2, x3) is a shortcut for (x1).open pol.(x2).open pol.(x3) and  b1, b2, b3 is a shortcut for b1	pol[ b2	pol[ b3 ]], with pol a reserved name for implement- ing polyadic communications. The proof that the translation just presented satis- fies all the properties listed in Section 3 is omitted for space reasons; the interested reader can find it in [10].		 

ents. We have organized all these languages in a clear hierarchy based on their relative expressive power. In [11], we also extend our analysis to various dialects of MA/BA/SA appeared in the literature in the last years and compare every dialect with the language it comes from.

