As it might be expected, rigour is not usually present in the majority of these informal representations. On the other hand, relevance is usually high as they directly relate to practice [2]. However, although all these channels and formats used by professionals can be effective to disseminate experiences, its organization into a practical body of knowledge remains loose (there is plenty of information available in many places) and difficult to track (information available in many places is continuously evolving).

An interesting way to capture and represent evidence is through theories. In this paper, we will try to leverage theories as a framework to devise a mechanism to represent and aggregate evidence. In most scientific disciplines, theories represent a solid ground upon which scientific knowledge is formulated and accumulated. Theories support scientists in providing an orderly depiction of some phenomenon in the real world in a manner that some complexity of the real phenomenon is reduced in the representation [13]. As a result, theories can facilitate the communication of ideas and knowledge by offering a common conceptual framework for structuring knowledge in a concise and precise manner [14].

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 details the theory conceptualization as well as the Dempster-Shafer Theory used as the aggregation mechanism. Section 3 presents the approach. Section 4 discusses its benefits and limitations. Section 6 comments on the industry perspective and Section 7 points to future works.

There are several criteria on how decision-making can be made with belief func- tions. One commonly used is to choose the hypothesis (i.e., the subset) with the highest associated belief. Usually, this is done only with the singleton hypotheses, which are the subsets with one element. In the next section we present a different criterion to support decision-making to better frame our problem.

It is important to notice that we have assigned the same belief (0.65) to all theory propositions, but this is not mandatory. In fact, in we have used qualita- tive (Grounded Theory) and quantitative (Categorical Regression) data analysis. The data type differentiation (i.e., qualitative and quantitative) and the analysis

results (e.g., p-value for quantitative analysis) could have been used to individually determine the belief in each proposition. However, we currently do not have a sys- tematic procedure to determine that. As we have not yet fully addressed how the belief is assigned considering these aspects, we have assigned the belief of 0.65 for all propositions taking into account the fact that the evidence was originated in a real-world environment through an Action Research study. This is just an estimate to illustrate this aggregation approach.

Before we describe the evidence used for the example, we need to characterize the steps and procedures taken in aggregating evidence using our approach. Notice, however, that at this point in time only a high abstraction level process description is going to be explained. Additional research efforts are being applied to detail such process. Nevertheless, for the purposes of a proof of concept, the steps described next should be sufficient to understand the core concepts:

To begin, we read and noted all the relevant information from the first paper comparing UBR against ad hoc. From our paper interpretation and the results it presented, we created the theory to represent this first evidence. The process of theory building, albeit systematic and with clear steps [15], is not exact in the sense that it depends on the interpretation and individual reasoning that is elaborating it. This way, the theory constructed represents our understanding of the evidence, but we are confident that it represents a widely accepted view as software inspection has been extensively studied by the empirical SE community and the authors already have conducted several studies related to this topic. Again, it was not by chance that this topic was chosen for this example.

Almost all data and its analysis reported in the paper are quantitative. This facilitated the construction of the theory as the variable constructs are basically the dependent variables defined for the experiment. The value constructs were based on the instruments used in the experiment, the study design and the considered inde- pendent variables. Having defined the constructs, the next step was the definition of the proposition values. As the study data and results are in quantitative form and, in our approach, the proposition values have to be specified in a qualitative way, we had to translate from one form to another. The quantitative values are given in percentage as two technologies are being compared. The intervals (0%, 33%], (33%, 66%] and (66%, 100%] were used to, respectively, derive the qualitative values weakly better, better and strongly better proposition values. We attempted

proposition values themselves (e.g., WP, PO or SP) are an interpretation from the study results. In addition, it should be stated clearly that we provide no a priori conclusive argument for the dismembering operation, only that it has a reasonable fit within the research reasoning process.

The final results show high belief values for most of the proposition. One possible interpretation when we look at a result like that is that the evidence aggregated until now had a high level of agreement for the proposition values (i.e., all defined the same qualitative values for the proposition) and a great level of certainty associated with it (i.e., the evidence came from reliable sources). That was exactly the case of the studies considered. The family of experiments had similar results and were all rigorously controlled studies generating reliable evidence.

thus it represents the current body of knowledge. Moreover, as some aspects such as the p-values of the statistical tests were not considered we could have obtained lower belief values. Nevertheless, in this regard we are still learning how to deal with the belief values both in its determination before aggregation as in its interpretation after aggregation.

general [28]. The agreement reliability can be used to address the subjective as- pects of many steps of the proposed approach including the selection of the relevant constructs to represent each evidence/study and the definition of the proposition values for them. For belief estimation, besides the use of a questionnaire to assess the quality of evidence we plan to consider the strength of evidence [29]. The use of an evidence strength grading scheme (e.g., GRADE [30]) in conjunction with the assessment of its quality can maximize the accuracy of belief estimation and better represent the weight with which each evidence contributes to the whole body of evidence. This is particularly important, considering the fact that in expanding the concept of evidence and starting to accept all kinds of evidence including the weak and incomplete form. The next section, discusses how the proposed approach can be used with this type of evidence which is commonly produced in real-world settings in the form of lessons learned.

There are many approaches to promote continuous improvement in a software project, but in general they can be classified into two types: benchmark-based and feedback-based [31]. The first is characterized by methods guiding organizations towards the identification of the potential general improvements while the second helps an organization enhance its problem-solving capabilities. Categorized in the feedback-based type, post-mortems represent a learning activity with a knowledge management nature. As our approach deals with knowledge representation and aggregation, we believe post-mortems represent an interesting source of evidence (weak and informal) representing an input for our approach. Adding to this is the fact that post-mortems are simple to organize and conduct [4].

By translating the produced knowledge to theory representation, even if it is already in a visual format such as Ishikawa diagrams, we gain the possibility of aggregating the evidence using the approach proposed. The body of knowledge can then, be used by practitioners in other projects for decision-making as well as by researchers proposing new hypotheses based on real-world data. However, even with these potential benefits, we do recognize that it will be quite difficult to make industrial practitioners use the approach in an unbiased way. Nevertheless, even with possible imperfections, we believe that this kind of evidence can be important to observe patterns emerging in real-world data, not only regarding the evaluation itself (i.e., negative/positive proposition values), but also in terms of technologies and environments (i.e., constructs) as cited by practitioners.

