In this study, we present an optimization sparse approximate inverse (SPAI) preconditioning algorithm on GPU, called GSPAI-Opt. In GSPAI-Opt, it fuses the advantages of two popular SPAI preconditioning algorithms, and has the following novelties: (1) an optimization strategy is proposed to choose whether to use the constant or non-constant thread group for any sparse pattern of the preprocessor, and (2) a parallel framework of optimizing the SPAI preconditioner is proposed on GPU, and (3) for each component of the preconditioner, a decision tree is established to choose the optimal kernel of computing it. Experimental results validate the effectiveness of GSPAI-Opt.

GPU. In [14], Dehnavi et al. propose a static SPAI preconditioner on GPU called GSAI. Recently, He and Gao et al. [15] propose a GPU-based static SPAI preconditioning algorithm called SPAI-Adaptive, and verify the effectiveness of SPAI-Adaptive for large-scale matrices. However, when the number of nonzero entries in each column of the precondi- tioner has significant difference, the performance of SPAI-Adaptive is greatly decreased. Furthermore, He and Gao et al. [16] present a sorted static SPAI preconditioning algorithm, called GSPAI-Adaptive, in order to avoid the drawback of SPAI-Adaptive.

group size for each column of the preconditioner. GSPAI-Opt fuses the advantages of SPAI-Adaptive [15] and GSPAI-Adaptive [16]. For SPAI-Adaptive, a thread-adaptive allocation strategy with the con- stant thread-group size is presented, and for GSPAI-Adaptive, a thread- adaptive allocation strategy with the nonconstant thread-group size is presented. For the convenience of readers, in the following contents, we introduce them respectively.

In this study, we propose an optimized sparse approximate inverse preconditioners on GPU called GSPAI-Opt. In the proposed GSPAI- Opt, for any given sparsity pattern of the preconditioner, a selection strategy is presented to determine the size of the thread group for each column of the preconditioner. Furthermore, no matter which strategy we choose, each column of the preconditioner is performed in parallel within a thread group. The experimental results verify that GSPAI-Opt can well fuse the advantages of SPAI-Adaptive and GSPAI-Adaptive and is highly effective.

