strength and thermal conductivity functions were generated using neuro-regression systematics. Multiple targets were defined, including minimizing the thermal conductivity and maximizing the compressive strength of the bricks. The genetic algorithm was employed to identify Pareto-optimal solutions, and the final sets of low thermal conductive-strength brick production were chosen based on these solutions. Two sets were proposed to achieve the lowest thermal conductivity, and the results confirmed the validity and feasibility of the optimization study.

Over the past two decades, the global population has grown by 27%, projected to increase by 30% over the next thirty years [1]. As a result, the energy demand for heating and cooling in developed cities where 57% of the population lives has increased. Existing buildings typically lose approximately half of their indoor heat to the outdoors. To address this issue, lightweight insulation materials with low thermal conduc- tivity (TC) are a popular solution to improve building energy efficiency. Thus, incorporating lightweight construction elements with low TC into building design is critical to achieving high energy efficiency [2,3].

Low-intensity building materials such as hollow clay brick and foam concrete are well-known for their excellent insulation and thermal performance due to the air spaces that prevent heat flow through the wall by conduction [2]. Closed pores can also be created as an alterna- tive to vertical holes for creating an air space in hollow or clinker clay bricks, which can be achieved by adding pore-forming organic and inorganic additives before firing [4,5]. Using additives in bricks reduces the amount of clay consumed while improving the physicomechanical properties of the brick. Sustainability is a crucial factor in selecting additives for the construction industry. Sustainable raw materials such as fly ash, waste marble, rice husk ash, waste glass, metal slags, rice husk, waste pomace, olive mill waste, tea waste, and wood sawdust have

150,000 metric tons of PNS can be inferred. The PNS, denoted as a smokeless fuel source [20], combusts with minimal residue (1.7% ash content) [21] and yields high calorific value (4912 Kcal/kg) [22]. This makes combustion a widely preferred method for the disposal of organic waste containing PNS due to its favorable characteristics. Some studies have focused on evaluating PNS using it as activated carbon [23], as supercapacitor electrode material [24], as biomass [25], as anode ma- terial for Na-ion batteries [26], and in Chromium(VI) adsorption [27]. The chemical composition of PNS ash predominantly consists of high

levels of potassium oxide, magnesium oxide, and calcium oxide, with the remaining portion comprising oxide phases of soil elements [22]. Despite the similarity in composition between the ash and clay raw material, PNS has not been employed in direct or ash-based brick pro- duction. Nevertheless, the incorporation of PNS into the clay matrix at low proportions is anticipated to result in low CO2 emissions and negligible adverse environmental effects during the sintering process.

In porous brick production, the type, size, shape, thermal behavior, and proportion of the additive material determine the form and density of the resulting pores. These pore characteristics directly influence the density, TC, and CS properties of the fired clay brick [3]. Organic resi- dues like PNS create pores within the brick structure after the combus- tion process, varying in size and shape based on their dimensions. Materials such as rice husk and wood chips tend to create long and slender pores, while those like palm, walnut, and hazelnut tend to generate more spherical pores [3,28]. The dimensions and densities of these pores are contingent upon the additive amount and sintering pa- rameters. Barnabas et al. [28] incorporated walnut shell powder with

In the literature, various additives have been employed in brick production using a similar experimental approach. In these studies, the results obtained have generally been evaluated based on their ability to meet specific brick standards. However, there has not been an experi- mental arrangement aimed at simultaneously optimizing multiple properties of the bricks. In this context, this study aimed to develop a genetically based design method to optimize the thermo-mechanical properties of fired clay bricks. The objective was to achieve maximum CS and minimum TC simultaneously. The multi-objective optimization process involved several steps, including determining brick production parameters using Box-Behnken design of experiment (DOE), producing and testing bricks, analyzing their physical, mechanical, and thermal properties, preparing objective functions for CS and TC using neuro- regression analysis, conducting multi-objective optimization of CS and TC simultaneously using genetic algorithms, and validating the results

through testing. This study investigates the effects of using PNS wastes as a pore forming additive in brick production on mechanical and thermal properties. It also presents the first study in the literature in this field by optimizing the multiple properties of bricks using a multi- objective optimization approach.

Behnken DOE design. The semi-dry mixtures were molded into 20 mm pellets under a pressure of 20 MPa. Following drying and settling, the cylindrical pellets were fired in an electric oven. The firing process of the bricks involved a two-stage heat treatment, determined based on the thermal gravimetric analysis results of the raw materials. In the first

This study aims to find optimum production parameters that mini- mize heat conduction and maximize CS in the same fired clay brick. A MOGA was used to optimize the two targets described above for fired clay bricks. The ratio of pore-forming additive, firing time and firing temperature are defined as three variables to be optimized for fired clay bricks.

The optimization procedure was carried out by preparing the objective functions for the TC and CS of the fired clay bricks and obtaining Pareto optimal results with MOGA. The data used to derive the objective functions were obtained from samples generated according to the Box-Behnken DOE. The data were divided into two parts according to the neuro-regression approach [57]. First, the objective functions

been determined. In addition, the ignition loss was determined as 9.2% by weight. This value is the mass loss of the raw clay material during heating due to the removal of physically and chemically absorbed water and the decomposition of organic and inorganic components.

enhanced formation of a vitreous phase within the matrix. Additionally, the rise in temperature correlates with a noticeable reduction in pore size. Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDX) analyses were conducted on the pores left by each pore-forming agent and from the bulk material.

Uniform elemental compositions were identified in both EDX regions for all samples. This consistency indicates that the elemental distribution of the PNS ash closely resembles the mineralogy of the brick matrix. It can be inferred that the ash contributes some elementally similar constitu- ents (K, Si, Al) to the feldspathic phase within the brick structure.

within the brick matrix. PNS, by leaving minimal ash content at firing temperatures, generates pores within the structure. When examining the SEM images of the fractured surfaces of the bricks, no residual ash particles are observed in the pore regions left by the combustion of the PNS. This observation suggests that due to the chemical composition of the ash resembling that of fired bricks, it is inferred that the ash inte- grated with the clay components at elevated temperatures. In this study, both the low incorporation of PNS and its low ash content render its identification through XRD analysis unfeasible.

18.842%, respectively. The sample with 10% PNS added and fired for 4 h decreased by 17.918%. Moreover, it was found that the TC values of the bricks were related to the AP and BD values, where an increase in porosity led to a decrease in TC. Therefore, the porosity parameters of the bricks also influenced the TC values. Incorporating organic additives at levels of 10% and above significantly enhances the AP while reducing TC. Similar outcomes have been reported in the literature for different organic residues such as tea waste [13], argan nut shell [29], olive mill waste [7], and walnut shell [28].

The characteristics of bricks, including their physical, thermal, and mechanical properties, can vary widely. Therefore, it is important to identify the best combination of properties for a given application. Materials are typically designed to achieve multiple targets, with vary- ing levels of importance placed on each target. This study aimed to optimize the most critical objectives for fired clay bricks to achieve energy savings and successfully produce strong and lightweight bricks. To achieve this, the CS and TC values were determined experimentally and modeled using the neuro-regression method, then optimized using MOGA.

The utilization of PNS as a pore-forming agent has led to a reduction in both TC and CS due to its direct correlation with AP and BD. More- over, the elevation in firing temperature of the bricks has resulted in the emergence of novel phases. This phenomenon has concurrently decreased the visible porosity while elevating the brick density. The transformation of the muscovite phase within the brick composition into another phase (amorphous or feldspathic) or its dissolution into another

Regarding the modelling and optimization results, CS and TC models have been shown statistically to describe the process with high accuracy. Furthermore, the high-accuracy prediction capabilities of the models ensured success in the optimization study. In the multi-objective opti- mization study, many solutions have been proposed to produce strength bricks with low TC. Among the proposed designs, validation tests were performed on the two lowest TC solutions, and the success of the model predictions was proven.

The properties of fired clay bricks vary significantly and the selection of the best matches between existing and designed profiles is crucial. In this article, the most important objectives of fired clay bricks were optimized for energy saving, resulting in the production of strength-light bricks. The experimental results indicated the effects of firing parame- ters and different ratios of additives on brick production. The use of additive organic waste PNS resulted in lightly baked bricks with low TC, but high WA values limit their use to cladded walls in harsh weather conditions. Firing temperature affects CS values more than TC values,

