Oil-type transformers (OTT) are used more than dry-type transformers, based on cost in the transmission and distribution of electrical energy. Therefore, this usage density increases the importance of cost in OTT. Weight is important in transformer cost. The weight of the transformers depends on the variable parameters of the weights of the core and windings, C (iron cross section conformity factor) and s (cur- rent density), respectively. In this study, unlike the previous heuristic optimization studies, an innovative and complementary optimum weight was obtained by using the Gray Wolf - Whale Optimization hybrid algorithm for both distribution type and power transformer type OTT. A weight reduction of 44% and approximately 14% in power transformers was achieved. It was determined that this decrease in weights provided the same reduction in OTT costs. The comparison test of the study was performed both with the values of other algorithms and statistically.

From these studies, it was determined that the weight of a dry- type distribution transformer was reduced by using the optimal value variable parameters in the study using genetic algorithm [10]. Similarly, genetic algorithm optimization was developed by using variable parameters s and C to optimize the weight of oil- filled distribution transformers [11]. In another study using parti- cle swarm optimization, a distribution type dry type transformer weight was optimized with the same variable parameters [12]. Optimal values were obtained by using artificial neural networks in dry-type transformer design [13] In dry-type transformer, better results were obtained with firefly algorithm, one of the current heuristic algorithms, and better weight optimization compared to previous algorithms [14] micro genetics for optimal design trans- former optimization studies with an algorithm-based design also included positive results [15].

In transformer optimization studies using WOA, it was deter- mined that, similar to GWO, a hybrid structure was created with genetic algorithm by using support vector machine optimization used in transformer fault diagnosis, and fault diagnosis results were realized by 94.05% and the margin of error was reduced by 5% [20]. In a different study, WOA was used in transformer fault diagnosis with an extreme learning machine and it was deter- mined that it could increase fault diagnosis efficiency by optimiz- ing power transformers [21].

WOA has been used in optimization studies that provide greater accuracy and reliability to the global values of the values obtained in the stability analysis of power systems [25]. In addition to this study, WOA found positive results in finding electric vehicle charg- ing stations with service capacity, and that it was effective for prac- tical positioning, planning projects and reducing social costs [26]. These heuristic algorithms have been created in hybrid struc- tures through different algorithms that can work in harmony, con- sidering their features. With these hybrid algorithm applications, it is aimed to obtain better results than the studies in which the algo-

Another study, investigated if the hybrid GWO-WOA algorithm, which was compared with the Partical swarm optimization algo- rithm in determining the robot model parameter, provided an improvement in parameter determination [35]. Similarly, for the Leader-Follower Robot (LFR), which is a different robot, the average was calculated while obtaining the model obtained through the gray wolf algorithm It was determined that the squared error value improved from 73.6% to 78% with the hybrid gray wolf whale algo- rithm [36].

A holistic multi-objective optimization framework(MO-HPM) is proposed for the participation of charged electric vehicles in clear- ing the harmonic power market in a microgrid properly, and the study is presented in the field of electric machines. The proposed study focuses on the ability of harmonic balancers to simultane- ously optimize conflicting targets, including the total distortion pay function and the average of the total harmonic distortion, while meeting the constraints associated with the grid, instru- ments, and market price. In the study, a new hybrid algorithm con- sisting of whale optimization, gray wolf optimization, and differential evolution is proposed to create the new market frame- work, and it is examined whether using the algorithm for various defined situations may be the best option for solving mathematical and technical problems, especially MO-HPM [37].

In another study conducted in the same field, a hybrid heuristic swarm-based support vector machine classifier named Gray Wolf- Whale Optimization Algorithm and Support Vector Machine (GWWOA-SVM) has been proposed for early detection of breast cancer disease. The performance of the proposed model is evalu- ated on various metrics such as accuracy, precision, recall, speci- ficity, and F1 score. Our model achieves a classification accuracy of 97.721% for the WDBC dataset. This model outperforms the 92.98% validation rate obtained in the study with PSO, the 96.65 validation rate obtained with WOA, etc., showing that better results are obtained and the hybrid algorithm has better perfor- mance [39].

It is examined from the studies in which hybrid algorithms can produce better results compared to the performance of the current heuristic algorithm. According to this evaluation, the studies of hybrid heuristic algorithms used in the optimization of OTT weight, which is the main subject of the study, include the objec- tives of weight reduction-cost minimization of parameters. Of these, the optimization of the protection dimensions of oil-type transformers and the optimization of the operating cost by using firefly and ant colony algorithms are examined [41].

Unlike other heuristic algorithms (ABC, FA, ACO, etc.) examined above, Gray Wolf Optimization Algorithm can reach the result it shows quickly with the ability to reach optimum parameters in a limited number of iterations. The Whale Algorithm, on the other hand, works slower than the gray wolf algorithm, but it reaches the optimum value with maximum accuracy and gives better results in verification. It has the ability to converge. It shows that when these algorithms are hybridized with each other, they have a complementary structure.

The Grey Wolf Algorithm developed by Mirjalili et al.[16] in 2014 is one of the other common population-based intuitive algo- rithms such as the Genetic Algorithm, Particle Swarm Optimiza- tion, Firefly algorithm etc. However, this innovative algorithm has better convergence capability and can reach the optimum point in a shorter time as well as having simple and easily applica- ble features.

and most talented. Beta (b) wolves in the second layer command the other inferior wolves and communicate with alpha wolves. Beta wolves fortify the commands of the alpha, convey them to the inferior wolves, and give feedback to the alpha wolf. Wolves in the third layer are classified as delta wolves (d) which are not included in the other three layers and have to succumb to alpha and  beta  class  wolves  but  dominate  omega  wolves.  Here

are directed by these grey wolves and will perform the optimiza- tion. x grey wolves make up a large part of the population and are mainly responsible for stabilizing the internal affairs of the population and protecting and monitoring the young wolf popula- tion. This class of wolves is the most dominant group.

WOA was developed by Mirjalili and Lewis in 2016 in order to achieve good results in solving problems that could not be solved by deterministic methods [19]. WOA is an optimization approach that simulates the hunting strategies of humpback whales. The bubble hunting strategy inspires what humpback whales use when hunting. Humpback whales generally feed on small shoals of fish. They have a unique hunting strategy. They form bubble clouds by exhaling underwater. Thus, thanks to these bubbles, they gather their prey together. In these bubbles they create, they move towards the surface of the water and continue to form bubbles as they rise to the surface. This way, they ensure that preys stays

In the whale optimization algorithm, surrounding the target is considered the optimum solution to be reached. In cases where the optimum solution is not known in optimization problems, it is accepted as the best solution reached or a point around it. In the next step, the positions of the other solutions are updated using the best solution after finding the best solution. The mathe-

OTTs are electric machines that are widely used for conveying and distributing electric power. The place held by these machines in operating costs becomes permanent accordingly. These trans- former costs can be reduced by optimizing weight in an industrial manner. As a result, while operating profitability can be increased, the service life of transformers can be positively affected.

44% for 50 kVA and 100 kVA distribution OTTs and approximately 14% for 1000 kVA power OTT. It was determined that optimization methods where different prominent features were used yielded better results and the results produced more optimal values than the results obtained in other studies. These values were verified by testing through statistical analyses.

