Abstract In the past few years, many wireless sensor networks had been deployed in the real world to collect large amounts of raw sensed data. However, the key challenge is to extract high-level knowl- edge from such raw data. In the applications of sensor networks, outlier/anomaly detection has been paid more and more attention. Outlier detection can be used to filter noisy data, find faulty nodes, and discover interesting events. In this paper we propose a novel in-network knowledge discovery approach that provides outlier detection and data clustering simultaneously. Our approach is capable to distinguish between an error due to faulty sensor and an error due to an event (probably an envi- ronmental event) which characterize the spatial and temporal correlations between events observed by sensor nodes in a confined network neighborhood. Experiments on both synthetic and real datasets show that the proposed algorithm outperforms other techniques in both effectiveness and efficiency.

Distinguishing between sources of outliers is a vital matter which in turn gives an insight on how to handle the detected outlier [9]. Generally speaking if the detected outlier is an error or noisy data, it should be removed from the sensed data to en- sure high data quality and accuracy; and to save energy con- sumption by eliminating communication load. Otherwise, if the outlier is caused by an event (e.g. fire or chemical spills), eliminating the outlier will lead to loss of important hidden information about events, which may have undesired penalty [3]. However, many researches tend to deal with outliers and events as similar conditions by treating events as some sorts of outliers (i.e. events are one of the causes of outliers). Due to the fact that there exist spatio-temporal correlation among neighboring node readings, this observation enables us to dis- tinguish between events and errors. This is based on the fact that noisy measurements and sensor faults are likely to be sto- chastically unrelated, while event measurements are likely to be spatially correlated [10,11].

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature survey done. In section 3, we introduce some necessary background definitions. Section 4 presents the proposed approach and methodology. In Section 5, our ap- proach for measuring sensor trustfulness is proposed. Section 6 reports the experimental evaluation on both synthetic and real datasets. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper.

Clustering, is a popular approach in the data mining commu- nity, used to group similar data points or objects in groups or clusters with similar behavior [25]. Clustering is an important tool for outlier analysis [1]. Several clustering-based outlier detection techniques have been developed, most of which rely on the key assumption that normal objects belong to large and dense clusters, while outliers form very small clusters or do not belong to any cluster [1,25]. There are several advantages of using cluster-based approach as mentioned in [2,7,21], among them are the following:

Nearest neighbor-based approach is a widely used approach to analyze a data instance with respect to its nearest neighbors in the data mining and machine learning community [1]. It uses several well-defined distance notions to compute the distance or similarity measure between two data instance, for instance, Euclidean Distance is a popular choice for univariate and mul- tivariate continuous attributes [26,27]. A data instance is de- clared as an outlier if it is located far from its neighbors [2]. Advantages of nearest neighbor-based approach are:

In this section, the proposed approach is introduced in details. Several outlier detection techniques have been developed, however they did not take into account the interesting events. On the other hand, many recent researches were developed that are interested only in events and did not care about erro- neous data. In this paper, a new clustering-based approach combined with nearest neighbor-based approach is proposed to classify outliers, i.e. noisy data or interesting events. Our

refers to the percentage of erroneous readings to the whole readings, Noi is number of erroneous readings of sensor si, and Ni is the total number of readings (i.e. either normal or erroneous readings) for sensor si. In order to increase the accu- racy of our measure, we store the readings acquired from each sensor in the network for a period of time in a temporal data- base or in a data warehouse. Then, we use this historical data collection to determine some characteristics and features that characterize each node through analyzing those readings. This heuristic approach helps us to have more confidence in our decisions.

In this section, we investigate the effectiveness of our proposed approach when applied on both the real dataset from Intel Berkeley Research lab [31], and synthetic dataset. We compare the accuracy of our algorithm with another event detection method called CollECT method [32], which is based on a dis- tributed collaboration among neighbor nodes. We evaluate the accuracy and the scalability of the proposed method against the CollECT method on both real dataset and synthetic dataset.

(w) parameter from 0.5 to 3.0 in step = 0.5. As expected, it is observed that when the width is low, number of produced clus- ters (i.e. normal and outlier clusters) is greater and vice versa. The result of this experiment matches our expectation for the relation between the cluster width and the number of outliers. Outlier detection algorithms are usually evaluated using the detection rate and the false alarm rate. In order to define these

We evaluated our proposed approach with a set of experi- ments with both real life dataset obtained from Intel Berkeley research lab and synthetic dataset. The experimental evalua- tion shows that our approach can achieve high accuracy rate for identifying outliers, and demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach. In addition, the experimental results show that our approach can detect interesting events as well as noisy data.

For future work, we plan to evaluate the algorithm perfor- mance on larger dataset. Also, we aim to enhance the proposed approach to deal with the phenomenon in which the event en- larges or disappears as time elapses. Future studies can also ex- plore the solutions to sensor node deployment, data dissemination, and routing in WSNs.

