The paper is organized as follow. Section 2 recalls the CWC framework. Section 3 describes the goal programming methodology. Section 4 illustrates the nutrient transport model in AM symbiosis. Section 5 presents the results of this analysis expounding the methodology. Section 6 briefly discusses related work and Section 7 concludes the paper.

Sucrose Uptake. Plant-derived carbon is released into the periarbuscular space probably as Sucrose and then cleaved into hexoses which are acquired by AM fungi [37,38]. Hexoses are transported over their membrane by so far unknown hexose transporters. It is likely that these transporters are proton cotransporters as the GpMST1 described for the glomeromycotan fungus Geosiphon pyriformis [35].

where occ(H+) denotes the number of H+ atoms occurring in the P or F compart- ment. To avoid the modeling of the process of water molecules dissociation only hydrogen ions H+ is considered in the model. The set of kinetic reactions adopted for the model is shown in CWC rules (1-19). Labels: F , T and P specify the biolog- ical compartments where reactions take place, respectively: fungus, periarbuscular space, and plant roots.

Reactions (1-6) describe the flux of nutrients furnished and internalized by the plant and the fungus. Reactions (7-10) represent the chemical conversion of nitro- gen (7-8) and phosphate (9-10) in the different compartments. Reactions (11-12) describe nutrient transport from the fungus to the PAS. Reactions (13-14) models the transport of sucrose from the plant to the PAS and then from the PAS to the fungus, respectively. In the PAS, sucrose is cleaved into hexose by means of reaction

The acidity of the periarbuscular space is established by the plant/fungal H+- ATPases and other mechanisms [21,4] which provide the energy for H+-dependent transport processes. In order to model correctly chemical reactions at different pH it was important to add a formulation for H+ that was capable of reaching and keeping the right concentration in the PAS. The plant and fungus H+-ATPase pumps, transporting the protons into the interfacial apoplast, are modelled by reactions (18) and (19) which are the only rules where a special function is used to determine the rates. Simply, they increase the ions into the PAS when their concentrations is under

The comparison was performed with respect to a well known ammonium trans- porter in Lotus japonicus: LjAMT1;1. This transporter recruits from the periarbus- cular space the NH4+ ion that is deprotonated after its transport across the plant membrane and is released in its uncharged NH3 form into the plant cytoplasm. This biological model is the same as the one described in Section 4 except that the reaction (16) has been replaced by the following one.

