In [6] a concept of parametric performance contracts was presented, which models the performance of the offered services of the component depending on the performance of external services. The time consumption of the exter- nal services and of internal computations of the component is characterised by random variables with continuous distribution functions. This approach suffered from the lack of compositionality and simplicity of expressions of distributed functions.

By compositionality we refer to the fact, that the result of the evaluation of a parametric contract can be used as an input for other parametric contracts. This enables us to chain the evaluation of parametric contracts, i.e., to connect components and to consider the assembly as a component again. Thus, if a specific class of distribution functions is used for modeling the time behavior of external calls, then the result of the parametric contract should belong to the same class. But this is not always the case when using continuous distribution functions.

Additionaly the resulted distribution functions for parametric contracts had a complicated presentation and therefore a limited expressiveness. Ap- proximations with appropriate statistical distributions can be used to cope with the complexity of presentations and the non-compositionality of the re- sulted functions. But, this would lead to less precision of the performance predictions.

The paper is organised as follows. In Section 2 we introduce component contracts, and the concept of parametric contracts. We introduce the Quality of Service Modelling Language (QML) and its discrete probability distribu- tions as well as other stochastic basics we draw upon. Section 3 begins with the general discussion of dependency models and defines parametric performance contracts. Section 4 presents related work to our work. Section 5 concludes and presents open issues.

However, for modelling the dependency between contextual quality at- tributes and the quality attributes of the component, service effect automata have to be extended. In [11,12] this was done by an extension to Markov- Models for predicting the reliability of component services. In section 3 we describe an extension for linear performance metrics, such as response or re- action time.

QML can be used to specify QoS contracts for component interfaces. There is also a specialised variant of QML called CQML [13] designed for specifying component oriented QoS. It introduces the specification of exact mathematical distributions as well as the idea of compositional reasoning over several CQML contracts. Nevertheless the compositional reasoning is immature in CQML.

as we need it later in this paper. A more detailed description can be found in [16]. There, the computation of the limit is given with respect to the approximation of continuous probability density functions. First, consider the Fourier transform of the multiple self convolution:

Here we describe the extension of service effect automata to parametric con- tracts for performance. Each transition (i.e., call to an external method) and each node (internal computation) of a service effect automaton is annotated with a random variable. This random variable models the time consumption of the call, respective the internal computations. Note, that we assume those random variables to be statistically independent.

An alternative to random variables would be using mean and variance of these computation times. Although this would simplify the mathematical analysis significantly, it basically binds us to the Gaussian distribution of service times. However, service times are usually not Gaussian distributed, as their distribution is not symmetric. This is because, there is always an minimal execution time (bounded by hardware and software architecture) but there exist higher execution times, caused by processing delays.

Despite the advantages of discrete functions, the computational complexity might become an issue for functions with a large number of sampling points. The number of sampling points increases with the size of its domain and the accuracy of the sampling. Since the computations used above (convolution, Fourier transform, addition and multiplication of discrete function) have to be applied on each of those sampling points the computational complexity and therefore the execution time of the algorithm depends directly on this number.

For the application of the algorithm, the discrete Fourier transform is computed for the probability mass function of each state and external service of the service effect automaton. All further computations are performed on the Fourier transforms. Finally, the inverse Fourier transform is applied on the result.

For our model we need distributions of random variables modelling method call performance. Further on we need the service effect automata of all services involved in the calculation. Annotated to the service effect automata we need probabilities of the branches in alternatives and loop constructions.

In this paper we discuss an extension of parametric contracts under perfor- mance aspects. Particularly, we use discrete distribution functions for mod- eling the time consumptions of external service calls. Thus, our model is parametric and compositional. To specify the discrete distribution functions of external service calls on the interface level one can use QML. The precision of the computations depends on the chosen stepwidth of the QML specifica- tion.

Reussner, R.H., Schmidt, H.W.:  Using Parameterised Contracts to Predict Properties of Component Based Software Architectures. In Crnkovic, I., Larsson, S., Stafford, J., eds.: Workshop On Component-Based Software Engineering (in association with 9th IEEE Conference and Workshops on Engineering of Computer-Based Systems), Lund, Sweden, 2002. (2002)

