We introduce a modal expansion of paraconsistent Nelson logic that is also as a generalization of the Belnapian modal logic recently introduced by Odintsov and Wansing. We prove algebraic completeness theorems for both logics, defining and axiomatizing the corresponding algebraic semantics. We provide a representation for these algebras in terms of twist-structures, generalizing a known result on the represen- tation of the algebraic counterpart of paraconsistent Nelson logic.

One of the latest and most challenging trends of research in non-classical logics is the attempt to combine different non-classical approaches together, for instance many- valued and modal logic [14], [15]. Such interaction offers the advantage of dealing with modal notions like belief, knowledge, obligations, in connection with other aspects of reasoning that can be best handled using many-valued logics, for instance vagueness [18], [6] and inconsistency. If the aim is to model human reasoning, it is obvious that all these aspects have to be dealt with at the same time, therefore such study is especially interesting from the point of view of theoretical computer science and AI.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we introduce paraconsistent Nelson logic, which is the non-modal system on which we will build our paracon- sistent modal logics. We reformulate the completeness theorem for this logic in algebraic terms, which will allow us to obtain similar completeness results for the modal expansions that we are going to introduce. In Section 3 we introduce our modal version of paraconsistent Nelson logic. We see that the Belnapian modal logic of [25] can be obtained as an axiomatic strengthening of ours and prove algebraic completeness theorems for both logics. We show how these results can be applied to any extension (i.e., strengthening) of the above-mentioned logics; we introduce and axiomatize classes of algebras that provide algebraic semantics for them. In Section 4 we prove a representation theorem for these algebras that extends known representation results on the algebraic counterpart of paraconsistent Nelson logic. Finally, in Section 5 we mention some open problems and possible lines for future research.

We are now going to introduce and study our modal version of (paraconsistent) Nelson logic. We start with a syntactical definition of the logic, then look for an appropriate algebraic semantics. As mentioned above, our criterion in the choice of the logic is to define a system as general as possible (that includes all the Bel- napian modal logics considered in [25] as special cases) but still well-behaved from an algebraic point of view. In fact, the logic introduced in the following definition is somehow minimal in the sense that rules like (21) and (22) are needed (al- though they could be weakened, as we will see) if one wants to obtain an algebraic completeness result like Theorem 3.6.

As mentioned above, there are modal expansions of paraconsistent Nelson logic that are not comparable to the logic introduced in the present paper. This indicates that the problem of defining a minimal modal expansion of paraconsistent Nelson logic has not yet been solved in full generality. A related issue would then be to determine whether such logic can be endowed with an algebraic semantics that ad- mits some kind of twist-structure representation. These questions will be addressed in a future publication.

Finally, we believe that MN4-lattices also deserve further study from a purely algebraic point of view. An intriguing problem, to mention but one, is whether the representation of MN4-lattices given by Theorem 4.5 can be refined by giving a characterization of which subsets of full-twist structures correspond to universes of MN4-lattices (see [21, Theorem 3.1] and [22, Section 6], where analogous problems are solved for N4-lattices and BK-lattices).

