The challenge of discovering new ways to motivate students in active learning encouraged us to develop a new kind of web based tools. Our main goal has been to get students involved, as actively as possible, in their learning process. With this objective in mind, we have been developing several interactive Java applets, that allow visualized execution of algorithms ([13], [10] & [14]). Those applets have been designed under the eMathTeacher philosophy and are being used as complementary material for blended learning (bLearning) [13] both for teachers on classroom lectures and students when learning by themselves. This way, the power and effectiveness of face to face teaching are boosted with the flexibility and technical capabilities of eLearning, turning out the students into the protagonists of their own learning progression.

(i.e. eLearning tools that are eMathTeacher compliant) different: they only execute the current step in case the input is ok and return a customized error message, providing a tip for finding the proper answer, otherwise. This feature is specially meant for (our) novice students whose background on algorithms, data structures and programming is virtually nil in most cases. Thus, these kind of tools are aimed at helping them to learn what an algorithm is and how an algorithm works, which means to understand, for instance, how to execute an if... then sentence. The unique characteristic mentioned above provides eMathTeachers with full interactive learning capabilities, and distinguishes them from other systems so far.

PathFinder has recently been finished, which means that it has not been used by any students yet. Though there are not impact evaluations of it, based on our previous research, we have high expectations regarding its potential effectiveness on helping learning activities. As part of that research, the previous graph eMath- Teachers impact has already been evaluated by comparing the rates obtained on the graphs exercise in a Discrete Mathematics final exam. As detailed in [12], the results showed a deeper understanding of algorithms process in the study group, even considering that those tools offered neither the algorithm visualization panel nor the framework panel.

