Studies about pedagogical effectiveness of PAVs have shown mixed results. The most significant result was reported by Hundhausen et al. [11], stating that the effort dedicated by students in visualization related tasks was more important than visual contents shown by PAVs. They also identified lack of research in some areas,

Following the idea of going beyond the passive viewing of PAVs, Naps et al. [20] developed a taxonomy that identified different ways of interacting with PAVs. They called the engagement levels taxonomy, an they suggested a hierarchical structure where more engagement should produce educational improvements.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, in section 2, we describe the study we have carried out, the kind of papers included and their surveyed features. Then, in section 3 we detail the successful experiences, grouped by the engagement levels where the improvement were detected. In section 4 we analyze these experiences from two different point of views. Finally, in section 5 we draw our conclusions and future work.

Having a look at published experiments, one suspects that just visualizations are not enough to obtain educational improvements. In fact, one of the most significant studies on PAV [11] concludes that the way that students use visualizations is more important than what visualizations show to students. Also, there are successful experiences based on providing high quality contents with the visualizations [7], advanced manipulation interfaces [5], or adding visualization sessions to regular classes [19].

Kann et al. [13] made a comparative study among no viewing, viewing, construct- ing and, viewing and constructing. But they only detected significant improvements between viewing and no viewing students. It is the only viewing experience without textual or narrative contents.

The three studies of this level compare responding with no viewing level. The two first experiences detected improvements in knowledge acquisition and were sup- ported by additional narrative contents. Although Byrne et al. [3] used a plain algorithm animation, the instructor provided the students with questions that had

Lawrence studied the effect of changing input data to animations against no viewing and viewing levels. In the comparative study with the no viewing level [18] she found improvements in knowledge acquisition; the animations had narrative contents and students who worked with them had an additional lab session. She also compared this level with the viewing one [17], obtaining again improvements in knowledge acquisition without additional features.

Finally, Urquiza-Fuentes [22] studied the effect of the same construction ap- proach in a long term evaluation. He compared the constructing level with viewing and no viewing levels. He detected improvements in attitude on both comparisons; he also detected improvements in knowledge acquisition when comparing with the no viewing level.

Clearly, learning can be enhanced with PAV. The 75% (18/24) of the experiences have detected improvements in terms of knowledge acquisition, together with more than 20% (5/24) detecting improvements in attitude towards the materials used or the subjects affected by the study. Finally, programming skills can also be improved, as they have been detected in more than 8% (2/24) of experiences.

Looking at the successfull engagement levels investigated, there are two ends. Changing is the most investigated level with the 37.5%(9/24) of the experiences, while presenting is the opposite with 12.5%(3/24). Responding is present in the 20.8%(5/24) of experiences, and both viewing and constructing are present in the

When students construct their own animations, the construction interface is very important. Thus, providing the students with carefully designed interfaces, or allowing them to choose their own construction kits, have been shown to be effective 3 . Encouraging students to produce their own textual or narrative contents is also positive. Here, most improvements have been detected in attitude towards materials and subjects.

The no viewing level means that no PAVs are being used. Thus, a simple change is to move to the viewing level, where knowledge acquisition is improved. It can be a simple movement because there exist a number of PAV collections, but if one wants to generate her own PAVs, the narrative and textual contents should be taken into account.

Moving to the constructing level could improve attitude and, as a side effect, knowledge acquisition. Again, the construction process should be effortless, and narrative contents should be integrated in the animations. It can be used together with presenting level, improving knowledge acquisition, but students should be free to choose their own construction kits.

