The growing demand on online sale systems has led to the development of many web-based sale protocols. The online environment suffers from a high security vul- nerability, as it is an open medium and this can expose such a system to threats and attacks. A denial of service attack is a cyber attack in which an attacker floods a targeted victim with messages in order to temporarily or permanently prevent legitimate users from accessing resources [1].

Performance has been seen as an important aspect for evaluating such systems. Therefore the impact and cost that cyber attacks contribute to the performance of the system need to be studied. By modelling the performance of such a system, we can better understand how the system behaves in different scenarios, with and without attacks, to provide a sustainable level of performance.

The approach used to model a system under investigation in this paper is Per- formance Evaluation Process Algebra (PEPA). PEPA is a well-known Stochastic Process Algebra (SPA). A system is modelled in the PEPA formalism as a set of components which interact and engage individually or with other components in activities in order to evaluate its performance [4]. Thus, the components represent the active parts in the system and the behaviour of each part is represented by its activities.

A number of researchers have studied and measured the performance of a system under an attack. For example, Meng et al. studied the performance cost of the security mechanisms of mobile offloading systems under timing attacks in [6]. They pro-posed a hybrid Continuous-time Markov chain (CTMC) and queueing model to ex-plore the performance cost that is introduced by the quantified security at- tributes. They formulate measures that would optimize the trade-off between secu- rity and performance in the studied system. The result of their study presents the best rekeying rate that provides the optimal balance between security and perfor- mance for their system.

Furthermore, the performance of an email system under three types of attacks was explored by Wang et al. in [8]. Their study is a model based system, utilizing a queueing network approach. Wang et al. proposed a system model comprised of four queueing models to evaluate the performance of an email security system by subjecting it to attacks. One queueing model represents the email information unit and each of the remaining models represent one attack. The effects on the

system when under the following attacks was noted: mail bombs such as Denial of Service attacks, Password Cracked and a malicious mail attack that contains, for example, a Trojan Horse. The study evaluates the trade-off between performance and security system according to three-proposed metrics: system availability and information leakage probability as a security metrics and average queue length as a performance metric. The numerical findings from the study show how effective and efficient their approach is when analysing the security aspect of email systems under attack.

Gelenbe and Wang studied the performance of warehouse in the presence of a denial of service attack on its webserver [3]. They focused on the economic perfor- mance of the warehouse that sells perishable products. They predicted the income loss which results from such an attack. A queuing theory based technique was applied in their study and their approach is suggested to be used as optimization problem to such a system. Zhu and Martinez studied a resilient control problem for linear systems which is subject to replay attacks [9]. They studied the influence of replay attacks on a system stability and performance. Model predictive control method was employed in their study.

This part of the model is for timer component which is the part that count down the time life of the product in the warehouse. It has 3 behaviours starting form Timer0. In Timer0, one of three actions can happen either tick at rate t to count down the time life of the product in the warehouse leading to Timer1, action notExpired at rate w10 leading back to Timer0 or action sendOrderToCustomer at rate w12 when the product is sent to customer before reaching expiry date leading back to Timer0. Timer1 state has the same action as in Timer0. In state Timer2, one of two actions can be performed either expired when the product expired at rate w9 leading back to Timer0 or action sendOrderToCustomer at rate w12 when the product is sent to customer before reaching expiry date leading back to Timer0.

Our investigation seeks to calculate throughput of some main actions of Cus- tomer, AttackerM, Webserver and Warehouse using ODEs. These actions are re- peatOrder action of customer, destroyedOrder action of attackerM, orderSucess- fullyPlaced and forwardOrder actions of Webserver, and removeSoldObjects and removeExpiredObject actions of Warehouse. Moreover, we want to investigate on the population level of some states of the components using ODE. We assume all perishable products are fresh in the beginning of the simulation then the Timer component counts down its life time.

Clearly the rates of actions used in the model will have an impact on the effect of any attack. It is clearly therefore desirable to obtain more realistic parameter values from a real system and thereby validate the model. However, even without this, the model clearly demonstrates the impact of a denial of service attack on this system. This means that the model could be extended to explore the cost and

