analytical modeling of global software development teams and the representation of the central entity and team members. Section 3 introduces the practical case study to illustrate the scope and nature of the problem, and also presents the proposed analytical model. Section 4 presents the comparative numerical analysis of the proposed model with the actual project quantitative data. Moreover, in Section 4.3, we vary the availability and levels of support provided by the central entity to analyze the impact of these characteristics on the total project execution time. Finally, the conclusion draws an overview on future work and major contributions of the paper.

Analytical modeling formalisms are commonly applied to describe many realities in a state-based approach. Markov chains [19] and Markov-based formalisms are employed in several areas such as economics, physics, engineering and bioinformat- ics, to cite a few. More information about other formalisms, specialized tools, and applications is available in the literature [29,30,20,31,32,18,33,34,35,36].

A modular and compact Markovian formalism is Stochastic Automata Networks (SAN) [17,18]. SAN is used to model systems by small components (automata) with occasional and defined interactions among them in a structured manner. The solution of a SAN model, i.e., the extraction of numerical results, is usually per- formed by specific algorithms [22] designed to deal with rather large state spaces. For this reason, SAN facilitates the modeling of distributed development teams (in a software engineering context) by the individual description of each entity behavior, where only some activities represent synchronizations among some entities. In this context, an entity can be modeled as a participant or a whole team.

This project had also different types of challenges and impediments detected during execution phase. The distance factor and central team allocation have cre- ated certain challenges as the support quality from central team and time-zones alignment. For this particular case, central team members are also allocated as resources of other projects setting the central team support quality from medium to low. The time-zone challenge can bring difficulties to members of a given site, making them to extend or change their workday window to be available to work

The actual quantitative results about Project Alpha were assembled from com- piling project log files, informal interviews with the managers, and a survey for collecting quantitative information about participants interactions and issues found during project phases. The analytical model results were obtained using Project Alpha data to instantiate the event rates (Section 3.2).

the probability of working state (W ) for senior participants is slightly smaller than the 87.5% corresponding to the seven hours of working per eight-hour workday. Observing the working percentage of junior participants, we find a quite low value of 14.7% which corresponds to a little more than one hour of work per eight-hour workday, while most of their time (more than six hours per workday) is spent in state S (seeking solution). Junior participants do not collaborate very often with the central team (half an hour per workday), which is probably a side effect of the low availability and low quality provided support.

