Abstract A two-tier model is used in cellular networks to improve the Quality of Service (QoS), namely to reduce the blocking probability of new calls and the forced termination probability of ongoing calls. One tier, the microcells, is used for slow or stationary users, and the other, the mac- rocell, is used for high speed users. In Code-Division Multiple-Access (CDMA) cellular systems, soft handoffs are supported, which provides ways for further QoS improvement. In this paper, we introduce such a way; namely, a channel borrowing scheme used in conjunction with a First- In-First-Out (FIFO) queue in the macrocell tier. A multidimensional Markov chain to model the resulting system is established, and an iterative technique to find the steady-state probability distri- bution is utilized. This distribution is then used to find the performance measures of interest: new call blocking probability, and forced termination probability.

Handoff is the mechanism of transferring an ongoing call from the current cell to the neighbor cell as the Mobile Station (MS) moves through the coverage area of the cellular network. There are two important performance indices used in designing cellular communication systems. The first index is the blocking probability of a new call, which is the probability that a new call is denied due to the unavailability of free channels. The second index is the forced termination probability of handoff call, which is the probability that an ongoing call is ended abruptly while a handoff attempt is being made, again due to the unavailability of free channels. Typically, customers prefer having their new calls denied to having their ongoing ones ended. Suppose that the speed of MSs in a given cell

can be estimated. Then calls emanating from them can be clas- sified into three types: high speed, low speed, and stationary [1]. Usually, call is considered high speed if the MS moves at 36 km/h or higher, low speed if the motion is lower than 36 km/h and greater than 0 km/h, and stationary if the MS does not move [2].

Handoff between cells in a two-tier cellular network occurs in three cases. The first case is when a call moves from a micro- cell to a macrocell (overflow), whether the macrocell is cover- ing the microcell or a neighbor macrocell. The second case occurs when a call moves from a microcell to a microcell, whether in the same macrocell or not. The third case occurs when a call moves from a macrocell to a macrocell.

the current BS is broken. This is known as make-before-break. That is, a MS call can be connected to two or more BSs at a time. For simplicity, we assume that each MS making a hand- off call can connect to at most two BSs. It should be noted that a CDMA cell, either microcell or macrocell, is divided into two regions, Handoff Region (HR), and Non-Handoff Region (NHR). In a HR of a two-tier cellular CDMA network, one BS, which has a higher receiving power than another BS, is se- lected to demodulate the received signal. The selected BS is called the controlling BS, and the other BS is called the non- controlling BS.

In this paper, a handoff scheme based on the mobility of calls in a two-tier cellular CDMA network is proposed. This scheme is called a channel-borrowing handoff scheme. In this scheme, if there is a handoff call incoming to a cell with no free channels, a channel is borrowed from a call in the F-group of that cell, which corresponds to channel-borrowing from a call in the E-group of the current cell, and the channel is borrowed from the noncontrolling BS. If there are no channels in the F- group of the destination cell, the incoming handoff call is placed into a queue.

new call blocking probability, and the forced termination probability for the overall system for the two types of calls. Thus, the new call blocking probability for high speed call is p(2), which is given by (36). The forced termination probability for high speed call is p(2) , which is given by (41). However, the new call blocking probability for low speed call pbn_l is given by

We can see that the improvement in performance due to the channel borrowing scheme is more in the case of high speed calls that low speed calls. This can be attributed to the fact that low speed calls make less handoffs than high speed calls and thus benefit less from the channel borrowing scheme introduced in the proposed model. Recall that low speed calls can operate both in macrocells and microcells. In the former case, they understandably need to handoff less often because they reach the border of the cell slowly. In the latter case, they reach the border of the cell quickly, but then they can be overflowed to a macrocell, avoiding many future handoffs.

In this paper, we consider CDMA cellular networks of two tiers, where users with different mobility behaviors are assigned to the proper tier. Namely, high speed users are always assigned to the higher tier (macrocells), even if the speed decreases during the call to the low level. By contrast, low speed users are initially assigned to the lower tier (micro- cells), but if during their movement they reach the edge of the current (micro)cell and fail to get handed over to the neigh- bor (micro)cell, they then are assigned to the current higher tier (macrocell). For such networks a channel borrowing handoff scheme aiming at improving the quality of service without deteriorating the throughput of the system is proposed. To analyze the performance of the scheme, The system is modeled as a Markov chain, and utilize an iterative method to find the steady-state probability distribution. For validation and com- parison purposes, numerical results have been obtained for both an example system using our scheme and an identical sys- tem not using the scheme. The results show that the scheme re- duces the blocking probability of low speed calls by an average of 12%, and of high speed call by an average of 9%. On the other hand, the results shown that the scheme reduces the forced termination probability of low speed calls by an average of 0.1%, and of high speed calls by an average of 26%.

