Increasingly large-scale, geographically distributed ICT systems are being devel- oped to support human endeavour in a variety of ways. This can be considered to be the realisation of the informatics environment predicted by Milner and Weiser [10,13]. Such systems operate with human agents interacting almost transparently with computing elements. Examples include smart city applications such as smart transportation, smart grid and many modern automotive systems.

In such systems, their transparency and pervasiveness mean that it is perhaps more important than ever to investigate their behaviour from both a qualitative and quantitive point of view prior to deployment. Work is currently underway, for example in the QUANTICOL project [6] to develop modelling formalisms to capture the behaviour of these systems [5,9]. Here we start a complementary investigation into the types of measure that can be derived from spatio-temporal systems. Classic performance measures assume that there is a single locus of operation. When there is a (limited) spatial aspect to behaviour, state annotations are usually used to syntactically distinguish the different locations and regular performance measures are applied. We seek to take a more radical approach to support modelling in which space is modelled explicitly and exploited fully when characterising the behaviour of the system.

wrapped, meaning that essentially we are considering movement on a torus. Each agent moves one step at a time and at each step can move in any direction: north, east, south or west. We assume that there is one distinguished agent, the Leader who moves autonomously, performing a random walk over the grid. Any other agent is a Follower . The objective of a Follower is to mimic the movement of the Leader . However, there is a restriction that the Follower should keep a minimum distance dmin from the Leader and should definitely avoid collisions.

In the following we consider a number of scenarios of increasing complexity to illustrate our points. In particular, the model will be specified in PALOMA [5], a new process algebra that is designed for the modelling of spatially distributed collective and adaptive systems. Before describing the scenarios, we first give a brief introduction to PALOMA. For more details the interested reader is referred to [5].

of the two agents, their current states and action type involved, determines the likelihood that the induced action occurs. For example, the perception function might have value 1 when the two agents are within a communication radius r of each other, but a value of 0 whenever the distance between them is greater than r. Obviously this gives a rich set of possible styles of interaction, but note that each agent with an induced action chooses independently whether to respond or not.

Here, we put multiple Follower s in the system in order to observe some interesting collective behaviour. We assume that Follower s always try to avoid bumping into each other. Thus, we add a simple protocol to Follower s by modifying the perception functions. For example, the perception functions for n and cn are modified as follows:

where |F (l.x, l.y + 1)| denotes the number of Follower s in location (l.x, l.y + 1). This means that a Follower will only take a step north when there are no other Follower agents in that location. Again, we will not show the modified perception functions for other actions as they are changed in a similar way.

State-based: an expectation over the states of the system. In its simplest form this is the probability that a certain property holds (Boolean values attributed to states). Utilisation is an example of this type. But such measures can also be based on more meaningful values for states, such as queue length where the value for each state is the number of customers in a queue. When the probability distri- bution is the steady state distribution the derived values will the average values, where at other times they will be transient, based on the transient probability. When spatial information is also represented in the system, the states of interest may be those in which certain spatial conditions are satisfied. Thus we might think of a form of spatial utilisation, the percentage of time that a particular location or set of locations are occupied.

Rate-based: an expectation over the rates of the system. Typical examples are throughput, loss probabilities, collision probability etc. Essentially these are also calculated as expectations over the states but the rewards associated with the states are now the rate at which events occur within the given state. Again either the transient or the steady state probability distribution may be used in the calculation of the expectation. Here again spatial conditions may be used to

The first dimension is state. This is the fundamental record of the behaviour of the system. We assume that the behaviour of the agents is characterised by random variables which range over the state space. In this simple example the agents do not have any logical state beyond their current position. But in general we can imagine that agents are also fulfilling some other role in addition to their motion and so they may have other characterisations of state, orthogonal to their location.

The second dimension is time. In the simplest performance analysis we consider the behaviour of a single system or agent with respect to time. This may be tran- sient or elapsed time, or abstract time, in the sense that consideration of steady state behaviour essentially removes the time dimension by assuming stationarity. In this dimension it makes sense to consider the rate at which events occur, the probability of an event occurring within a time bound, the cumulative probability of events, etc.

Here we are particularly interested in spatio-temporal properties that incorporate both the second and third dimension. The simplest way of doing this is to consider a measure over one dimension at all points in the other. At the state level we can define for any agent A, loc(A, t) be the location of A at time t as the projection of the spatial dimension onto the time dimension. Conversely, we can define visit(A, l) to be the set of time instants in which agent A was at location l. Measures loc and visit are complementary in the sense that:

We also assume that we can detect collision. Two agents A1 and A2 are said to collide if there exists t such that loc(A1, t)= loc(A2, t). In the simple scenarios, 1 and 2, which have only a single follower, we are then interested in the cases where loc(F, t)= loc(L, t). Again, we can use simulation to calculate the probability of a collision at a particular time. We can estimate the probability of collision at time t as

In this paper we have made an initial study of the types of measures that it can be interesting to study in systems in which there are both temporal and spatial aspects of behaviour. These are important characteristics in many collective adaptive sys- tems (CAS), which are geographically distributed systems comprised of interacting but autonomous agents. We have illustrated the ideas with a simple leader-follower system studied in a number of different scenarios via simulation.

Ciancia, V., S. Gilmore, D. Latella, M. Loreti and M. Massink, Data verification for collective adaptive systems: spatial model-checking of vehicle location data, in: Proceedings of the 2nd FoCAS Workshop on Fundamentals of Collective Adaptive Systems, London, England, 2014, to appear.

