In this paper, we study the decidability of five problems on a class of extended Petri nets. The study of this class of extended Petri nets is motivated by the problem of parametric verification of multiple copies of processes that can communicate with a partially non-blocking rendez-vous. This kind of communications occurs in abstractions of multi-threaded JAVA programs.

In parametric verification, we want to verify at once an entire family of sys- tems. For example, some mutual exclusion protocols have been designed to work for any number of (identical) processes. The verification of such pro- tocols for specific number of processes is not satisfactory. We want a proof for any number of those processes. This problem of parametric verification is difficult and has been shown undecidable [2] in general. To obtain partial automatic methods, several abstractions have been shown useful. The work

notifyAll can be modeled by a broadcast communication. While transfer nets, that are able to model broadcast communications, have been studied from a theoretical point of view [9,5], this is not the case for extensions of Petri nets modeling partially non-blocking rendez-vous. We study here the decidability of five important problems in the context of Petri nets extended with non-blocking arcs. While those five problems are decidable for Petri nets, we show here that only two of them remain decidable in the extended model. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In a second section, we recall some basic notions and notations. In a third section, we introduce Petri nets extended with non-blocking arcs and the five problems that we study. In a fourth section, we show that two of the problems remain decidable on the extended model. In a fifth section, we establish the undecidability of the three

rectangles represent transitions. Plain edges from places p to transitions tr are labeled by the number of occurrences of p in the input multi-set of tr and plain edges from transitions tr to places p are labeled by the number of occurrences of p in the output multi-set of tr. Absence of edge from (to) a place p to (from) a transition tr means that there is no occurrence of p in the input (output) multi-set of tr. In the following, when there is only one occurrence of a place into a given multi-set of a transition we will only use edges without labels. Pairs of dashed edges from a place to a transition and from this transition to a place represent the non-blocking part of the transition. Tokens in the places define markings in the usual way.

5 In the case of reachability, we may simplify a little bit the construction of the widget by suppressing the capacity place K. However, to keep the proofs uniform and in particular to be able to use lemmas 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 in all our proofs, we have decided to keep the widget in its full version for this proof.

Recently, several extensions of the Petri net formalism have been proposed for modeling parametric systems, a.o. Transfer nets [4], Reset nets [3], Multi- transfer nets [7], and the extension proposed in this paper. We have defined the extension of this paper in order to model partially non-blocking rendez- vous. The other extensions have been proposed for similar reasons related to modeling issues. Nevertheless, a careful analysis of the expressive power of those different extensions of Petri net has not been done so far. We plan to compare formally the expressive power of those extensions by studying the languages that they are able to define.

and covering in [13], for reachability in [14], and action-based LTL model- checking in [10]. Several definition of extended Petri nets can be found in [4] and in [5]. Undecidability results for the class of transfer nets can be found in [5,6,8]. In [15], similar problems are studied in the context of lossy counter machines. For the practical analysis of models that subsume the class of extended Petri Nets studied here, we refer the reader to [7].

