As well as relational (or Kripke) models, one may consider as models for such logics various ordered structures, such as lattices with operators. The question then arises as to what is the simplest way of obtaining a pair of these operators. If the lattice is a Boolean Algebra and thus has negation, any join-preserving operator (such as ) immediately provides us with a meet-preserving one (such as ) by de Morgan duality. In a Heyting Algebra, the lack of De Morgan duality will cause one of these operators to preserve meets only in one direction. What if no negation is present, e.g. in a distributive lattice? The categorical notion of adjunction (aka Galois connection) is useful here: any (arbitrary) join-preserving endomorphism on a lattice has a Galois right adjoint, which (by construction) preserves meets. For example, in category Sup of sup-lattices with join-preserving maps, every such map is residuated, i.e. has a right adjoint.

We interpret our adjoint modalities as information and uncertainty and use them to encode and prove epistemic properties of the puzzle of muddy children. Due to the absence of negation, we can only express and prove positive versions of these epistemic properties. But, our proofs are simpler than the proofs of tra- ditional modal logics, e.g. those in [12]. In a nutshell, in just one proof step the

adjunction is unfolded and the information modality is replaced by the uncertainty modality; in the next proof step, the assumptions of the scenario are imported into the logic via the assumption rule. At this stage the modalities are eliminated and the proof continues in a propositional setting. Since our information modality is not necessarily truthful, we are able to reason about more challenging versions of epistemic scenarios, for example when agents are dishonest and their deceitful com- munications lead to false information. Properties of these more challenging versions have not been proved in traditional modal logic in computer science approaches, like that of [12].

Our logic may be seen as a positive version of Kt, i.e. tense logic. Thus one can deduce that a proof theory thereof can be obtained by restricting any proof theory of tense logic to rules for conjunction and disjunction, the existential past and the universal future that only satisfy the K axiom.  We are unaware of a tree-style

