Computational intelligence techniques have been employed in various IoT security solutions, including malware detection, cyber threat detection, suspicious activity monitoring, intrusion detec- tion, and cyberattack detection. The IoT may use CI approaches to improve its cybersecurity capabilities and secure IoT apps and consumers. A safe and computationally smart solution is needed to protect compassionate and secret healthcare data and deliver private communication between the User, Database Service provi- der, and Owner. [3].

There is no simple solution for bringing the decentralization notion of blockchain technology and security approaches together. There is still a great deal of work in this setting. Several researchers have looked into blockchain-based protection schemes in recent years, even though most have not proposed a structure or idea for such systems. As a result, research into blockchain-based encryption framework models with security mechanisms is mean- ingful and valuable. This research paper presents a private Blockchain-based encryption framework model for security purposes.

Several the researchers have previously worked on a Block- chain-based encryption framework model, some of which are included in this section. The authors in this research use Block- chain to secure user data, demonstrating how to leverage block- chain method in Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs). We employ blockchain technology in cloud storage design to provide a safe consumer environment. A blockchain network distributes sources, including connections, rather than focusing on one data centre or server.[6].

The authors suggest a blockchain-based data-sharing strategy that uses smart contracts and ABE to accomplish user revocation. The proposed architecture uses attribute level revocation to con- trol privileges during data sharing. It uses a trusted agency for strategic management and encodes or decrypts data, putting the security of user info at risk. Users will be unable to access their information if the key management centre fails, and the complete structure will be altered.[7].

In this research, the authors must consider many architectural difficulties in implementing blockchain for IoT and maintaining security in industrial applications. Block-chain technologies have a lot of promise for tackling security, privacy, and trust issues in multi-stakeholder applications despite the difficulties. [9].

The authors investigated how to develop the privacy of the blockchain for secrecy safety in IoT devices. They saw Zero- Information verification as a Blockchain privacy improvement solution to eliminate security concerns like personal information invasion via block inquiry. The use case being investigated is the intelligent meter control pricing for safe charging in a single- layer Block-chain-based safe architecture. [12].

The trained patterns are then checked to see if the learning cri- teria are met. If it is Yes, the trained output is stored on the cloud, and if not, it is updated, and so on. The trained patterns are then imported from the cloud for prediction purposes in the validation phase. It is rechecked that if the disease is found, a message will be displayed that the disease is found, and the method will be abandoned in case of no.

In this suggested study work, a private blockchain-based encryption framework using a computational intelligence approach is presented for the sake of encryption. The computa- tional intelligence approach is beneficial in obtaining similar attri- butes in the gathered data and identifying process. The test findings on a basic encryption framework reveal that private blockchain-based with computational intelligence scales effi- ciently as datasets develop. The findings also demonstrate that using much training data leads to better results. The detection accuracy of the resulting security system is 0.93 in the training phase and 0.91 in the validation phase, which is higher than earlier printed systems.

