The rule specifies how a clock transitions to its next state, which is either a regular operational state clock (t, c) or a broken state broken(t, c), with t the current time and c the current battery charge. As the clock ticks, its battery charge decreases. Whether the clock transitions to an operational or a broken state depends on the outcome of a Bernoulli trial with success probability of c/1000.0 used by the new variable B. Since the probability of success in a Bernoulli trial is proportional to the current battery charge, the clock will have a higher chance of failing as time elapses and the battery charge decreases.

As was discussed above, the Dolev-Yao model is inappropriate for the analysis of DoS properties. A more appropriate model for this purpose is the shared channel model [8]. In this model, attackers and legitimate clients probabilistically share a communication channel to the server. Unlike the Dolev-Yao model, an attacker does not have full control over the channel. However, an attacker may replay modified (or faked) versions of previously seen legitimate packets at some maximum rate, specified as a parameter in the model.

Client receiving an ACK [CRec, CDscrd]. Once a client receives an acknowl- edgement message from the server while in the waiting state, the client consumes the message and changes its status to connected. Accepted clients do not send new messages. If an acknowledgement is received while the client has already been accepted or failed, the acknowledgment message is just discarded.

We have used the ASV model described above to perform statistical quantitative model checking analysis of various QuaTEx formulas using VeStA, which runs Monte Carlo simulations on the model through its interface with Maude to pro- duce a point estimator of the quantity of interest for each of these formulas, given a desired confidence interval for the experiment and its maximum tolerable size. For this purpose, we specify the nature of the quantities to be statistically estimated. The quantities specified as QuaTEx formula declarations are listed below.

0.05. We also fix S, the mean server processing rate, to 600 packets per time units, the server and client timeouts, Ts and Tc, to 0.4 time units, and the initial generation delay, initDelay , to 0.2 time units, unless otherwise specified.

DoS attacks. This approach is based on probabilistic rewrite theories, quantitative probabilistic temporal logic QuaTEx formulas, and statistical model checking, and is supported by tools such as Maude and VeStA. We have applied this approach to the formal specification and verification of the ASV DoS-resistant protocol, gaining a higher level of assurance about availability properties that had been previously studied for ASV either by hand-carried analytic proofs or by simulation.

