$1trillion by the year 2020, which is up from US$1.6 trillion in 2010. Moreover, the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) has fore- casted a real GDP growth of 4.9% from 2012 to 2016 for the African continent, which is well above the average global growth [5,6]. E-commerce is playing a key role in the global economic growth and the need to keep satisfying customers cannot be over empha- sized. However, abundance of e-commerce information in recent years has become a serious challenge for shoppers, because of the inherent difficulty in information discovery. This has led to the emergence of recommendation systems to assist a user in the information discovery. A content-based image recommendation system is an application that uses image features to filter informa- tion from all the available sources and displays the appropriate information based on personal preferences that are kept in the user profile [7,8]. The origin of recommendation systems can be traced to methods in cognitive science, management science, approxima- tion theory and information retrieval, which have since been applied in various human endeavours.

In contrast to text tagging, image based product classification involves the use of images for product representation and classification model. The high dimensionality of extracting image features, limited content analysis, artefacts, inhomogeneity and other nuance factors often inhibit image-based classification per- formance [10,16,27]. A significant volume of researches have been channelled towards this direction, nevertheless, the number of image-classes investigated and accuracies reported still leave much to be desired for real-time applications. In acknowledging the complexity of these problems, an initial attempt is made to solve a simpler sub-problem of image content-based recommenda- tion by proposing enhanced product image classification architec- ture. Among the core algorithms used in the proposed architecture is the ensembles of artificial neural network trained with the Eigen-based colour features. The propose architecture is used to classify product images into 100 classes.

Specifically, effort in this work is channelled toward actualising an effective image-based classification model that majorly relies on an ensemble of Artificial neural network (ANN) and potential of efficient Eigen-based image feature representation. The extrac- tion of colour product features from a product image is performed using the Histogram of Oriented Gradient (HOG) and Uniform Lin- ear Binary Pattern (ULBP) feature extraction methods. The Eigen- based algorithm is then applied to extract a dimensionality reduced product image features. We applied data partitioning (cross validation) scheme that splits the initial data into training, validation and testing subsets in the proportion of 70%:15%: 15% (70% of the dataset is used for training the network, while 15% each of the remaining datasets is used for validation and testing), were experimentally explored on the PI100 categorization data set [28]. We chose this database because it has been widely used in e- commerce research for product image classification [25,26,29,30] and it is freely available for research purpose.

This work further stresses the fact that an ensemble of machine learning classifiers gives better results than any classifier used in isolation. The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, relevant literature is discussed. Section 3 describes in detail our proposed architecture as well as materials and methods. Then we describe the experiments carried out to validate the performance of the various methods for the tasks of product image classification in Section 4. In section 5 discussions of results are presented. The paper is finally concluded in section 6 by giving a brief discussion about the future directions.

Image feature extraction and classification methods are two important tasks in the recognition process. Artificial neural net- work (ANN) and Support vector machine (SVM) are two popular classifiers that have been applied to e-commerce product image classification and decision supporting tasks with some degree of success. Specifically, ANNs have the ability to model nonlinear relationships between a set of input variables in the user profile and corresponding preferences of the user. Large number of pro- duct data often caused overfitting when an ANN is integrated with any e-commerce applications [31,32] such as recommendation systems. To overcome this overfitting problem, cross-validation is considered to be one of the most effective methods to ensure over- fitting does not occur [31,32]. Here, available data is usually parti- tioned into three sets which are training, testing and validation. The training set is used to adjust the connection weights, the test- ing set is used to check the performance of the network at various stages of learning and training is stopped once the error in the test- ing set increases. The validation set is used to evaluate the perfor- mance of the model once training has been successfully accomplished [32]. This partitioning-based cross validation can be accomplished in recommendation systems using time, item rat- ing (which can come in the form of user preferences expressed in numeral or product-item feature), categorization and user- stratification [31,33].

To further improve image based product classification accu- racy, many researchers have investigated the technique of com- bining the predictions of multiple classifiers which is known as ensemble learning [40]. Ensemble learning has been reported to be effective in many application areas such as facial expression recognition [41], Bioinformatics [42,43], hyperspectral image processing [44], big text corpora and object detection [45]. Exper- imental results have shown that the use of ensemble learning often produces better performance than any individual classifier in isolation. An explicit example of this in recommendation system is the work in [46], in which ensemble learning methods were used for music recommendation. In addition, Freund et al.

In this paper, we have applied eigenvector-based algorithm to extract colour features from the Nx3 colour features that were obtained using colour image descriptors. The essence of the method relies on the potential of Eigen decomposition among others, to correlate even artefact corrupted features. This is a departure from conventional dimensionality reduction strategies using PCA, which operate directly on digitized raw images and the projected eigenvector [66]. In this study the following steps were carried out to compute the Eigen Colour feature (ECF) of an Nx3 feature matrix extracted from a given colour image.

An ANN is an interconnected group of artificial neurons that uses computational models to simulate the structure and function of biological nervous system [83,84]. The pattern of the intercon- nections between the input neurons and propagation of data is called the network topology of artificial neural network. The two main types of ANN topologies are the feedforward and recurrent networks. The flow of data in a feedforward neural network is in a forward direction from input neurons to the output neurons with no feedback of connections, but recurrent networks contain feed- back connections. It has been mentioned in many research based on the feed-forward ANN application that the topology of the net- work is able to approximate complex nonlinear mappings, it con- tains highly parallel, deals with noisy data and provides a model for problems which classic parametric techniques are unable to handle [85]. Furthermore, feed-forward ANN possesses the intrin- sic generalization ability that enabled it to identify and respond to patterns that are similar but not identical to the ones they have been trained [86,87].

The computational effort needed for determining the correct combination of weights substantially increases as more parame- ters or more complicated network topologies are considered [93], hence the need to select an appropriate algorithm that will handle such learning problem. One of the most popular ANN algorithms that are used for learning is the Back Propagation (BP) algorithm [94]. The BP training algorithm adjusts weights and biases of the network in order to minimize mean square error between the actual and desired outputs using the gradient descent method. The computation of weights that minimizes the error function is considered to be a solution of the learning problem. Many variants of BP algorithm have been reported among which are the Conju- gate Gradient (CG), Scaled Conjugate Gradient (SCG) and quasi- Newton BP algorithms [95]. We have adopted SCG-BP to train the designed MLP-ANN in this study so as to take advantage of its well acclaimed speed of convergence [41,96].

The SVM, which is our second choice of pattern classifier, was introduced in 1992 by Cortes and Vapnik as a machine learning model that is based on the structural risk minimization induction principle [97,98]. It is a supervised learning model that gained pop- ularity as a result of its superior performance in a wide range of applications and its ability to handle data with high dimensionality [48,99,100]. Although, SVM was originally developed for binary classification [90], it can also be extended to cater for multiclass problem [44]. The traditional way of achieving this is to decompose the multiclass problem into groups of class problem and subse- quent construction of several binary classifiers. Currently, the two techniques that are commonly used are the One-Against-One (1A1) and One-Against-All (1AA) techniques [101,102]. However, 1AA is selected for this work based on its simplicity and past liter- ature track of efficiency [103].

Many researchers have investigated the technique of combining the predictions of multiple classifiers to achieve better accuracy, a concept that is generally referred to as ensemble learning [40]. Two popular methods for creating accurate ensemble are bagging [40] and Boosting [110,111]. In [40], the author stated categorically that bagging is one of the most efficient methods that can effectively be applied in problem learning. On this background, we applied Bag- ging ensemble in this study.

Choosing the optimum data partitioning proportions for data training, validation and testing is generally essential to the perfor- mance of an ANN model [112]. In the first experiment, the cHOG- ECF was utilized to train eleven different single MLP-ANNs. Similar to what was done in [31], we experimentally determine and com- pare accuracies delivered by 60%:20%:20%, 70%: 15%: 15% and 80%:10%:10% data partitioning schemes, when the number of neu- rons in the first and second hidden layers varies from 10 to 110. The MLP-ANN structure with the best accuracy was thereafter used with a bagging ensemble procedure to obtain base classifiers for the ensemble MLP-ANN.

In the second experiment, the cULBP-ECF was used in place of the cHOG-ECF in the first experiment. All the other procedures in the first experiment were thereafter repeated for the second exper- iment. In the third experiment, the cHOG-ECF was used to train five different SVM models by varying the kernel functions, which include linear, quadratic, polynomial, RBF as well as the multi- kernel LaRBF, The model with the highest accuracy was adopted as the base classifier for the bagging ensemble operation to obtain the SVM ensemble. In the fourth experiment, the cHOG-ECF

[117] also reported that there was no improvement with the use of SVM bagging on Leukemia data set. However, MLP-ANN ensem- ble trained with cHOG-ECF gave the highest average accuracy of 87.20% in the study at hand. This result is a substantial improve- ment over existing image based product classification works

reported in the literature [25,49,50]. For instance, Jia et al. [49], combined some base SVM classifiers and realised an overall accu- racy of 86.9% using the same PI100 dataset that we extracted for the study at hand. Although the authors designated this result as state-of-the-art classification accuracy, it is not as high as the 87.2% accuracy we obtained in this study.

The proposed architecture based on cHOG-ECF and ensemble of artificial neural network as reported in this study can be readily integrated and implemented in a recommendation system for an accurate implicit profiling and personalised recommendation to resolve new user problem. Moreover, our proposed architecture can be employed by merchants for automatic product tagging in e-commerce domain. Another prospect of our approach is that it can easily be used as a pre-classification module in any product recommendation system architecture. Since no single feature is sufficient for handling diverse intra variation among broad cate- gories in the e-commerce research domain, future research will focus on the development of more discriminating features. In addi- tion, we will perform more intensive comparative studies on other state-of-the art machine learning methods to further enhance the performance of the product image classification architecture reported in this paper.

