The reconstruction of binary matrices from their row and column sums is a basic problem in discrete tomography (DT). There are several theories, al- gorithms, and applications connected with this problem. As a collection of related papers see [1]. One of the most intensively studied classes of DT is the class of hv-convex binary matrices, in which there is no 0 between two 1s in their rows and columns (in other words, the rows and columns have consecutive-1 property). This problem was posed and a reconstruction al- gorithm was given by Kuba [2]. As it was proved later by Woeginger the complexity of this reconstruction problem is NP-complete [7].

absorbing material. Accordingly, the measurements in EDT are so-called ab- sorbed projections depending on not the emitting object only but also on the absorption itself. It is known that the problem of uniqueness in EDT (in the case of certain absorption) is more complicated [3] than the same problem with non-absorbed projections.

The reconstruction problem M is too general for many applications because of the high number of solutions. It is interesting to study similar reconstruction problems in different classes of binary matrices, where binary matrices with some special properties are to be reconstructed. Such a property can be the consecutive-1 property.

Definition 4.3 A binary matrix is unique among the hv-convex binary ma- trices with respect to its absorbed row and column sums if there is no other hv-convex binary matrix with the same absorbed row and column sums. Oth- erwise the matrix is called non-unique.

Proof. One direction is trivial: If there is an elementary switching pattern as a sub-matrix of the hv-convex binary matrix A then by changing it to the other type of 2D elementary switching pattern we get a new A' hv-convex binary matrix with the same absorbed row and column sums, i.e., A is non-unique.

This algorithm starts to fill a matrix X with the initial values free, in- dicating that the variability of none of the positions is decided yet. Then, on the base of Corollary 3.4, we write 1s and 0s in the rows and columns of X indicating the invariant 0s and 1s, respectively. At most 3 free positions remain in each row and column after this step. The remaining free positions that are in a 3 3 free sub-matrix are variant positions of the class, the others can be determined from the 0s and 1s in their 3 3 neighbourhood. Formally, the algorithm is as follows.

