The raw material for the PE and PP is mostly naphtha obtained from the secondary distillation of crude oil, where the latter was formed through the deposition of organic matter over thousands of years [61,62]. Thus, it was considered that no carbon capture occurred for traditional plastics at the T1 stage [63,64]. In contrast, CO2 is absorbed by the plants that will later be used to make PLA at the T1 stage [65]. The biological carbon content of PLA is shown in

In addition to emitting GHGs, the production and waste disposal of traditional plastic products cause serious environmental pollution, such as the generation of hazardous wastes, the destruction of oceans and soils, and the emission of air pollutants (volatile organic carbon, carbon monoxide, etc.) [82,83]. More specifically, traditional plastic products rely on oil feedstock, so their manufacturing depletes fossil-fuel resources. Previous LCAs of biodegradable plastics have shown significant reductions in the depletion of nonrenewable resources when biodegradable plastics replace traditional plastics, ranging between 7% and 70% depending on the polymer, plastic item, and form of waste management [84,85]. Furthermore, the generation of waste plastic products is contaminating the oceans and soils due to the low global recycling rate of traditional plastic products. This issue could be mitigated by biodegradable plastics, which are intended to degrade faster in the natural environment [85].

biodegradability of biodegradable materials makes it possible to adopt end-of-life strategies for WBPPs such as composting and anaerobic digestion to prevent direct leakage into the environment. Composting and anaerobic digestion are considered to be preferable end-of-life disposal methods for WBPPs, along with fertilizer or CH4 energy recovery in biogas. However, these methods present the challenges of a long operating cycle and inefficient recovery of WBPPs [91].

Peng Z, Wang Z, Shu Y, Lv F, Zhang H, Shao L, et al. Fate of a biobased polymer via high-solid anaerobic co-digestion with food waste and following aerobic treatment: insights on changes of polymer physicochemical properties and the role of microbial and fungal communities. Bioresour Technol 2022;343:126079.

