We address the problem of component reuse by describing a quotient operation. Starting from the specifications of the behaviors of the component and of the desired overall system, this operation computes the residual specification characteristic of the systems that, when composed with the given component, satisfy the overall specification. This problem is solved when behaviors are given by modal or acceptance specifications and when composition allows mixed product and internalization of events. We show on an example how weak form of liveness constraint may be taken into account by this technique.

In this paper, we introduce modal specifications and acceptance specifi- cations as intuitive formalisms for behavioral interface description. From the expressiveness point of view, they allow to state some forms of liveness prop- erties. For each of this formalism, a quotient operation is defined to address the problem of behavioral reuse of a component as computing the residual specification S/S1. We study two kinds of composition between components: synchronous composition and mixed product with internalization of events. This paper is organized as follows: after short preliminaries, section 3 intro- duces modal specification. The notion of residual specification for behavioral reuse is formalized in section 4. Then, the quotient of modal specification is proposed in section 5. Expressivity is improved thanks to acceptance spec- ifications in section 6. Then, section 7 is devoted to the quotient operation corresponding to the use of mixed product with internalization of events as composition operation. An example and a hint for some line of future work conclude the paper.

This example is inspired from [3]. In this paper, component interfaces are designed via interface automata. We refine the intended behavior thanks to acceptance automata; the quotient of acceptance specifications defined in 6.9 can be adapted when the support of the specification is a regular prefix-closed language [13].

