There has been an increased interest in the creation of AI social agents who possess complex behaviors that allow them to perform social interactions. Behavior trees provide a plan model execution that has been widely used to build complex behaviors for AI social agents. Behavior trees can be represented in the form of a memory structure known as cognitive scripts, which would allow them to evolve through further development over multiple exposure to repeated enactment of a particular behavior or similar ones. Behavior trees that share the same context will then be able to learn from each other resulting in new behavior trees with richer experience. The main challenge appears in the expensive cost of retriev- ing contextually similar behavior trees (scripts) from a repertoire of scripts to allow for that learning pro- cess to occur. This paper introduces a novel application of map-and-reduce technique to retrieve cognitive with low computational time and memory allocation. The paper focuses on the design of a cor- pus of cognitive scripts, as a knowledge engineering key challenge, and the application of map-and- reduce with semantic information to retrieve contextually similar cognitive scripts. The results are com- pared to other techniques used to retrieve cognitive scripts in the literature, such as Pharaoh which uses the least common parent (LCP) technique in its core. The results show that the map-and-reduce technique can be successfully used to retrieve cognitive scripts with high retrieval accuracy of 92.6%, in addition to being cost effective.

Creating social intelligent agents (SIAs) that can behave in a human-like manner has been of interest to AI researchers. SIAs have played various roles in different domains including non- player characters (NPCs) in game environments [1], IoT assistive agents [2], narrative intelligence [3], and autonomous virtual agents or robots [4,5]. Representing and modeling complex AI behaviors for social agents has been classified as a cumbersome task for specialized researchers across multiple domains. Hence,

Many researches have been devoted to improve and develop the learning process in behavior trees using machine learning and graph theory [14] to either learn from observations [9] or learn from experience [8]. The main assumption in these works is the presence of the BTs of interest; there was no need to search for a similar BT. However, this is not usually the case as there might be situations where the SIAs need to look for similar BTs to learn from them to handle the current situation. Representing BTs as

Recently, information retrieval prominence from semantic, unstructured heterogeneous data that is delivered by multiple sources of electronic media has attracted many researchers, espe- cially in the AI domain [19], and has been considered as one of the key challenges when developing assistive technologies [2,12]. Despite many researchers have been devoted to address the pre- diction problem from BTs using machine learning techniques like behavioral decision tree, rule-based machine learning, classifica- tion technique, and reinforcement learning behavior, they all focused on easy and small-sized BTs that allows for limited and fixed pre-determined future actions for a specific application or game scene. None of these research works has considered methods to allow learning between BTs, independent from a particular domain or tree size, by retrieving and using similar BTs to predict new unforeseen actions without any limitation to a particular scene/application or the existence of pre-canned expected actions [20,21,22]. Accordingly, new existing works have shifted the focus to the use of sensors to capture user behaviors and modeling them using BTs, in addition to working out ways to optimize and refine these BTs to allow for more logical trees for future learning goals. To the extent of our knowledge, no work has been done in the area of retrieving contextually similar BTs with the goal of allowing the evolvement of a BT of interest. The representation of BTs as cogni- tive scripts facilitates this retrieval process and allows for cross- learning to take place between the BTs.

The JSON files are stored locally as contextual information asso- ciated with the scripts. This helps to lessen the retrieval time when checking this information during the retrieval process. Moreover, the corpus has general contextual information for 2000 common words in the English language that were chosen from to www. talkenglish.com website and are stored in the form of txt files. In order to reduce the error cost and increase the agility of the script retrieval process, the corpus is designed to be scalable; new con- textual information can be retrieved and stored automatically when the system receives new scripts that contain new words.

Behavioral trees (BTs) have been widely used to represent com- plex behaviors of social intelligent agents (SIAs). Many works have focused on the use of BTs with restricted set of actions to allow for socially accepted behavior by SIAs or the prediction of future behavior in a particular domain or scene. However, there was no much consideration for possible learning that can occur between similar domains, which might allow for the enrichment of these BTs and for new behaviors to emerge rather than relying on a pre-canned set of actions. Choosing the right representation for

FIRST AUTHOR Safia Abbas is an associate professor in the Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Com- puter and Information Sciences, Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University, KSA since 2019 and University of Ain Shams, Cairo, Egypt during 2016-2018. During 2006-2011, she received her Ph.D. from the Graduate School of Science and Technology, Niigata University, Japan. A strong theme of her work is in swarm opti- mizers, security in cloud, and medical diagnosis using machine learning and data mining.

