Building energy consumption is increasing in parallel with the increasing demands of people to have a high standard of living. Air- source heat pumps are widely used in buildings due to their low installation costs and ability to reduce energy consumption by using renewable energy. However, when they operate with a high-pressure ratio (low evaporation temperature or high condensation tempera- ture), the increased discharge temperature causes oil deterioration, limiting the safe operating envelope of the compressors. In addition, with the increase of compression irreversibility, volumetric efficiency and system performance decrease. For this reason, researchers are trying to increase the efficient operating limits of heat pumps.

In recent years, vapor injection systems have been the focus of attention as a solution to the problems caused by the large compression ratio. In two-stage compression with vapor injection, the vapor injected into the compressor at intermediate pressure produces an intercooling effect on the refrigerant leaving the low compression stage due to its low enthalpy. As a result, the operating temperature range is extended as the compressor discharge temperature is lower than in the conventional single-stage cycle. At the same time, heating performance and COP are improved [33,58].

models with injection ports [42]. Huang [15] showed that a vapor- injected heat pump with R407C can meet the heating capacity of a family home and its operating costs are lower than those of currently used oil heating. Wang [66] tested the flash tank cycle in cooling and heating scenarios. He reported capacity and COP improvements of 14 %

Xue [61] and Yan [74] also pointed to the same result and reported that it is necessary to switch to the non-injection cycle at high ambient temperatures in order to achieve higher performance. Vapor injection has a greater effect on the condenser than on the evaporator. Therefore, vapor injection is more beneficial for heating applications than cooling applications [60].

The most commonly used compressor for this technology is the scroll compressor [47,50]. Because the injection is relatively easy to incor- porate and the injection pressure can be adjusted by properly selecting the optimum port position [32]. Port position, which is an important design parameter for system performance, has been studied by some authors [8,21,62]. Scroll compressors also have some disadvantages. When operating conditions differ from the design compression ratio, optimum compression efficiency cannot be achieved due to the constant volume ratio. In addition, it is still difficult and expensive to design the scroll compressor with an injection port compatible with a heat pump system [58]. Therefore, other types of compressors such as rotary compressors [12,14,27,64,74] and twin-screw compressors [29,73] have also been investigated.

Tello-Oquendo [47] compared two-stage compression systems using a single scroll compressor with injection port (SCVI) and two reciprocating compressors in series (TSRC) in terms of compressor effi- ciency, volumetric efficiency, COP, and cooling capacity. R407C was used as refrigerant. From the results, it was seen that SCVI works more efficiently at points where the pressure ratio is lower than 7.5, while

Oquendo [50] compared two-stage compression systems with a single scroll compressor (SCVI) and two scroll compressors in series (TSSC) for R290. A two-stage compression reciprocating compressor (TSRC) was also included in the comparison. For pressure ratios above 5, the COP of the SCVI heat pump was lower than that of the other two compressors. Yang [75] proposed general analytical expressions to quickly calculate the upper limit of the COP improvement of the (quasi) two-stage cycle under specific working conditions with specific refrigerants. They compared the experimental results of quasi two-stage systems in the literature with the calculated upper limits.

refrigerant is the saturated liquid at the inlet of the low expansion valve and the saturated vapor at the inlet of the injection port. Whereas IHXC has the freedom to adjust the superheat of the injected refrigerant at the injection port. Therefore, the IHXC has a wider injection pressure operating range than that of the FTC [42,68].

14.4 % higher average heating capacity than the SCVI cycle. Baek [2] compared three vapor injection CO2 cycles based on heating perfor- mance. They determined that the heating capacity and COP of the optimized SCVI cycle were 12.1 % and 12.7 % higher, respectively, than

the flash tank in the intermediate stage results in a reduction of tem- perature and specific volume at the inlet of the second compression stage. This event is called de-superheating. The first effect of de- superheating is the increase in the mass flow rate through the second stage compression and condenser, thus increasing compressor work and heating capacity. The second effect is that the enthalpy difference in the condenser decreases due to the decrease in discharge temperature and therefore the heating capacity decreases. The COP decreases or increases depending on the relative increase of compressor work and heating capacity affected by mass flow rate and intercooling. The effect of inter- stage subcooling is to decrease the specific enthalpy of the refrigerant entering the evaporator. Increasing the enthalpy difference increases the two-phase heat transfer area and evaporator capacity. These phenomena have been mentioned in many studies [13,19,52,77].

[17] showed that the effect of interstage subcooling on COP improve- ment is greater for refrigerants with large specific heat (cp). Jiang [19] examined the effect of these parameters on the heating COP for 33 fluids. They also revealed the connection of COP with cp, m. Further subcooling resulted in a higher COP for all fluids. However, the effect of the de-superheating factor on the COP was different according to the fluid. De-superheating improved the heating COP (COPh) when the cp, m of the refrigerant used was less than 60 J/mol K, whereas when cp,m was

sure [49]. There is a pressure difference between the injection pressure and the intermediate pressure for both the FT system and the IHX sys- tem. It is the driving force of the injection [22]. Due to the difficulty of measuring the intermediate pressure inside the compressor, most au- thors considered the injection pressure to be approximately the inter- mediate pressure in their studies [31,34,35].

IHX systems can be controlled with thermostatic expansion valves (TXV), which use the superheating degree as the control signal, at low cost, while TXV cannot be used in the flash tank system because the injected vapor is saturated. Xu [56] suggested giving positive heat to the fluid exiting the flash tank in order to use cost-effective TXV. He put forward the idea that a heat exchanger could be applied between the injected vapor and the liquid exiting the condenser for positive heat. In their experimental work, they used an electric heater to simulate the heat exchanger. As a result of the study, they stated that the heat exchanger cost is negligible compared to the system using complex and expensive electronic expansion valve (EEV) control, and if that the su- perheat can be controlled within 6 K, the performance decrease will be within 1 %.

Ideally, the liquid and vapor separated in the flash tank are consid- ered to be a single phase when leaving the flash tank. However, the separation of liquid and vapor is not ideal in practice. Due to the dy- namic conditions in the FT, two-phase currents can often occur at the outputs of the FT and cause problems [58]. The liquid level in the flash tank must be high enough to prevent uncontrollable injection of liquid into the compressor. Therefore, the liquid level can be controlled to

Chen [7] studied the effect of refrigerant leakage on the performance of a flash tank vapor injection heat pump. They concluded that a vapor injection heat pump is more sensitive to refrigerant leakage than a conventional heat pump. Wei [71] studied the frosting which causes the rise in the discharge temperature and the rapid decline in the coefficient of performance. They stated that vapor injection is beneficial to shorten the defrosting time. Chen [6] proposed a novel vapor injection auto- cascade heat pump to enhance the heating performance for high- temperature water heating applications. The proposed system improved the COP and heating capacity by an average of 51.8 % and

A quasi-two-stage compression system using only one compressor has the advantages of a simpler system, better reliability, lower cost, and easier control. However, it cannot reach the efficiency of two- stage compression under extreme conditions. The widely used compressors for the refrigerant injection technique are scroll, rotary and screw types. For better performance, the studies are focused on the design of the injection ports for scroll compressors and on the back-flowing problem of injected refrigerant for rotary compressors.

Two-phase injection heat pumps have energy-saving potential with reduced discharge temperature in extreme weather conditions. Since direct measurement of injection quality is extremely difficult in actual heat pumps, a direct control strategy is still not available for practical applications. For this reason, its application is limited due to wet compression.

There is not yet a general expression for the optimum pressure that can be used for all conditions and fluids. For convenience, the re- searchers have related the optimum pressure to the geometric mean pressure. The relative injection pressure (RIP), defined as the ratio of the injection pressure to the geometric mean pressure, has been widely used in studies.

There has been relatively limited research on control strategies for vapor injection systems with a flash tank. The model-based control strategies are valid for limited operating conditions. Whereas, model-free real-time control strategy such as ESC can well track the optimal operating under highly variable ambient and load conditions without elevating the superheat and without additional devices. The ESC strategy therefore promises to be a successful solution for a cost- effective, optimal control method for the FTC cycle.

