Chitosan/polycaprolactone (Ch/PCL) semi-natural polymeric blend containing gradient concentrations of CdSe quantum dots (QDs) dopant were synthesized via hot injection method. Synthesized samples con- taining different concentration of CdSe QDs were characterized by X-ray diffraction and FTIR absorption spectroscopy. FTIR experimental data of synthesized samples shows the maintenance of characteristic vibrational band with a marginal variation in both intensity and position related to the increase in dopant concentration. XRD patterns reveal amorphous nature of prepared virgin blend and blend samples that contain small amount of QDs. Samples with higher QDs concentration, namely (0.008, 0.016) wt% show appearance of crystalline bands related to the (1 1 1) reflection plane and in agreement with JCPDS card no. 19-0191. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) indicates that morphology of synthesized bio- composites is critically affected by addition of CdSe QDs.

biological cell as alternative fluorescent probes in recent years. It uses in biological imaging, bio-sensing and intracellular detection and targeting, solar cells, quantum computing, transistors, LEDs and diode lasers [20]. Density function theory (DFT) is computa- tional quantum mechanical method utilized as a part of physical science, material science to research the electronic structure (the ground state) of numerous body system, specifically particles, and atoms. It is a standout amongst the most well-known and effective quantum mechanical ways to deal with matter.

The present work aims to introduce a routine characterization for a novel semi-natural polymeric blend containing gradient con- centration of CdSe QDs. FTIR, density functional theory (DFT) and XRD was employed to approve the reaction mechanisms between both constituents of organic matrix and that with inorganic dopant. In addition, the antimicrobial tests were performed to study the effect of CdSe QDs on different gram-positive, gram- negative and fungi.

The antimicrobial activity of the synthesized of CdSe QDs doped with different concentration in polymer blend were tested. Thus the antimicrobial activity of the compounds was evaluated against two gram-positive (Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus subtilis) and two gram-negative bacteria (Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Escherichia coli) as well as against the pathogenic fungus Candida albicans (C. albicans). The samples were seeded in petri dishes containing agar

No antibacterial activity was found at 0.008 wt% CdSe QDs except for Staphylococcus aureus and Candida albicans they show a moder- ate index activity and small inhibition zone. Among all, Bacillus subtilis exhibited maximum susceptibility, while Pseudomonas aeruginosa was found to be least susceptible to CdSe QDs. Increasing the synthesizing concentration of CdSe QDs resulted in significant reduction of antibacterial activity of CdSe may be due to increase in particle size of CdSe QDs. The difference of the sizes of zone of inhibition between the CdSe QDs synthesized at differ- ent concentration could be correlated to the difference in nanopar- ticles diffusion tendency in cells due to the difference in their sizes producing different amount of reactive oxygen species (ROS).

characterized through X-ray diffraction and FTIR absorption spectroscopy. DFT approach was employed to investigate the reac- tion mechanisms of both polymer blend and samples that doped with the QDs filling material. Both FTIR experimental and experi- mental data shows the maintenance of characteristic vibrational band with a marginal variation in both intensity and position related to the increase in dopant concentration. XRD patterns reveal amorphous nature of prepared virgin blend and blend sam- ples that contain small amount of QDs. Samples with higher QDs concentration, namely CdSe8 and CdSe16 shows appearance of crystalline bands assigned to 111 reflection plane reported previ- ously and in agreement with JCPDS card no. 19-0191. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) indicates that morphology of synthe- sized bio-composites is critically affected by addition of CdSe QDs. Antibacterial tests reveals different inhibition zone related to increasing concentration of CdSe QDs and sort of bacterial strain under investigation. Evaluation of The activity index % were also studied.

