The usage of Knowledge Discovery in the Database (KDD) for the growing databases is essential for facing the challenge of the great growing size of data and its developed complexity. KDD seeks to gather knowledge by identifying relations between data attributes for predictions. In addition, knowl- edge discovery techniques based on rule induction are impor- tant for the growing size of data [1].

The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 reviews related work of knowledge discovery models. Section 3 demonstrates the structure of knowledge discovery models for classification of medical datasets. The evaluation performance measures are demonstrated in Section 4. Section 5 describes the used medi- cal datasets, the experimental results, and comparison with other models. Finally, the conclusion is illustrated in Section 6.

Rough-Mereology as an extension of Rough Set Theory is used in different application areas in knowledge discovery. For example, Zheng and Zhan [6] explored a model that Granular Computing can improve the performance of rule-based classi- fication using Rough Mereology. However, the model was not extended more classifiers and working to develop it based on minimum length principle.

Badria et al. [10] proposed a Rough based Granular model using the fundamental concepts of Rough Sets to discover dependencies between the attribute, discrete-continuous attri- butes, and the dynamic reduct for reduction. Then, they gener- ated set rules for classifying HCV.

A comparative study was introduced by Ding et al. [12]. Between two models based on the concept of Granular Com- puting the concept of Rough Neural networks RNN and fuzzy neural networks FNN is used, and then the models are com- pared for making future development to improve the perfor- mance of them.

Finally, Rough-Mereology model is demonstrated as an extension of Rough Sets in frame of Granular Computing that replaced the indescribability relation with similarity relation Rough inclusion relation. Rough-Mereology is dedicated to the concept of Granular Computing in constructing elemen- tary information granules. It finds the relationships between information granules and building granules network. This model is applied also through a case study of HCV and CAD datasets.

The limitation of the proposed models can be summarized in two points. First, the complexity time of the models espe- cially in pre-processing phase is high. Second is the data incon- sistency problem. These limitations will be considered as a future work to reduce time complexity during pre-processing

