Advances in science and technology have led to the use of various robots in the field of medical application. In recent years, surgical robots have been widely applied in different types of orthopedic surgery, such as laminectomy, total knee arthroplasty, artificial disc replacement [1e3], etc. Spinal surgery is believed to be high-risk since any damage to the spinal cord may cause paralysis or even death to the patients. Traditionally, the spinal surgery is performed manually, and the long duration time will cause surgeons' fatigue, reducing the surgery quality.

Laminectomy has been widely used to treat patients with lumbar spinal stenosis [7,8], to release the oppressed spinal nerve and recover the function of spinal cord. The key to the success of Laminectomy is to ensure the proper amount of lamina remained. Too small amount of residual volume may cause harm to the spinal canal and spinal nerve, and too large amount cannot achieve the effect of spinal nerve decompression [9].

has developed a spinal surgical robot and successfully recog- nized the different states during the pedicle screw insertion process with a real-time force sensing algorithm [13]. For the vertebral lamina milling task, some safety control strategies have been studied. Wang et al. [14,15] milled the vertebral layer by layer from the outer cortical bone to the inner cortical bone at a constant depth. Based on the analysis of typical characteristic parameters of the force profiles, the cross- correlation to the standard profiles are adopted to judge the milling status. Because this method was unable to adapt to the complex surfaces of the vertebrae, the profile pattern is in close relation to the three-layer structure, which is to the disadvantage of milling status distinguishment. Zhang et al.

In this paper, we firstly describe the anatomical structure of the vertebral lamina and the milling procedure. Then, the fuzzy force control theory is introduced. The milling force in the horizontal direction is controlled constant, and the milling force in the vertical direction is used to distinguish the struc- ture of the bone layer. The principle of milling state dis- tinguishment is established through six groups of vertebral

In order to show the advantages of fuzzy force control strat- egy, two groups of experiments have been conducted on the same bone sample, which is a vertebra bone of pig with thickness of 57 mm. The rotating speed of the bone drill is set to be 15000 r/ min. In the first experiment, the milling depth remains constant; the bone drill mills down 0.5 mm layer by layer, until the inner cortical bone. In the second experiment, the milling depth is adjusted with the tangential milling force based on fuzzy control strategy, keeping the tangential force a constant value.

To ensure the safety of milling operation, the bone drill needs to stop when it gets to the inner cortical bone. To obtain the relationship between the axial force and the state recog- nition, the experiment below has been conducted. Three kinds of bone samples including vertebra of pig, vertebra of sheep and vertebra of cattle are used in the experiment, with bone drill rotating speed of 15000 r/min and 20000 r/min separately. The initial milling depth is set to be 0.5 mm, and the tangential force during the milling operation is controlled to be constant with the fuzzy logic. The mean value of the axial force is

When the average milling force of the i-th layer is less than Fo/2, S = 2. Bone drill is located in the cancellous bone, the milling operation continues. When the milling force is larger than 0.9*Fo, S = 3. The bone drill is located in the inner cortical bone, the milling operation stops immediately.

China, in 2013and he is currently pursuing the M.S. degree in mechanical engineering from Harbin Insti- tute of Technology, Shenzhen, China. He is currently a guest student in Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (Shenz- hen, Guangdong, China). His research interest is surgical robots.

gineering from Tongji University, Shanghai, China, in 2011. He completed the Ph.D. degree in me- chanical engineering and applied mechanics at the University of NebraskaeLincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA in 2015. He is currently a postdoctor in Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Acad- emy of Sciences (Shenzhen, Guangdong, China).

Shenzhen, China, in 1998 and 2007, respectively. She is currently a Professor in the Center for Cognitive Technology, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Tech- nology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen. She is the author or coauthor of more than 60 scientific papers published in refereed journals and conference proceedings. Her research interests include parallel

Department of Computer Science, Institute of Real- Time Computer Systems and Robotics, University of Karlsruhe, Karlsruhe, Germany, in 1994. He is currently a Professor and Head of the TAMS Group, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany. His research interests include multimodal perception, robot learning, and mo- bile service robots. In these areas he has published more

