Recently, combining RGB and depth data for computer vision applications becomes more and more popular [37], because recent emergence of depth sensor (e.g., Microsoft Kinect) has made it feasible and economically sound to cap- ture in real-time not only color images but also depth maps with appropriate resolution and accuracy [33]. The introduce of depth data provides more information from the third dimension which reduces troubles which are caused by the ill- posed problem in 2D image processing. Moreover, the depth data is seldom affected by bad illumination conditions which are common in indoors environments, which can be a com- plementary cue of RGB data.

Therefore, in order to handle more practical challenges and achieve a time-critical indoor multi-tracking system, depth data is adopted in our work. Previous works adopt depth data for motion detection [32], background subtraction [38] and 3D body pose estimation [34], which provides robust and various target detection schemes. Many depth-based features are also proposed by previous works [35,36] for both target detection and representation. In this work, based on depth data various depth-based cues are used for target representation, such as 3D position, 3D motion and 3D spatial layouts of basic features for appearance modeling. The introduction of these depth- based features increases diversity of features, which provides more reliable features for target representation. This highly improves robustness of the system in practical application with problems of cluttered environment, bad illumination condi- tions and scale variation on 2D image plane.

symmetry of human body to hand view variation. Although previous works try various spatial layout schemes for better introducing spatial information, they have essential defects because the spatial information they used is purely based on the image patch on 2D image plane. But in practical situations detected regions always exhibit dislocation, truncation or oc- clusion, caused by unsatisfied detector performance in complicated environments. Therefore, in order to handle this problem, we propose a novel depth-invariant part-based

Unfortunately, this is the case for almost all feature repre- sentations in practical application. This indicates that if even non-trivial observation errors exist under several feature rep- resentation, they will accumulate when multiplying feature affinities, as the classic works did in Formula (2). Therefore, the final link probability Plink in Formula (2) may not reflect the real affinity between detection responses and tracklets. Even there exists reliable and discriminating feature repre- sentations with less observation error, their discriminating power can be considerably reduced due to observation error accumulation. On the other side, if true variation under a

As mentioned above, combining a bunch of features may not contribute to a better association between detection re- sponses and existing tracklets. On the contrary, features have lower reliability or discriminating power can bring adverse effect on other reliable and discriminating features, and also unnecessary computational cost. These problems are relatively severe in indoor multiple objects tracking for two reasons: first, the most commonly used features in classic methods such as position, size, color and appearance model are easily affected by partial occlusion, view-truncation and bad illu- mination, which are common situations in indoor scenes, so this may bring larger observation errors to targets represen- tation; second, under these complicated situations, even detection responses belong to a same target may exist larger variation. In order to handle these problems, a novel hierar- chical data association scheme is proposed as follows:

Obeying two rules proposed in Section 3.2.1, to construct the hierarchical feature space, features with higher reliability should be selected first. It is based on the observation that reliability of a same feature varies a lot in different scenes, but a reliable target representation is vital for an accurate data

Besides some low level features mentioned in Section 3.2.3, such as color, motion, etc., appearance is one important high-level feature for target representation, which is widely used in pedestrian-related applications, such as person re- identification [30,39], pedestrian detection [40e43], multi- target tracking [4,29,28], etc. Low-level descriptors are generally used in existing works, but they do not take full advantage of body structure information and result in low

In this section, we conducted several experiments for observation, comparison and analysis from the following three sections to verify the effectiveness of the proposed framework: First, we verify the necessity and effectiveness of scene- adaptive feature selection framework in Section 5.2, based on analyzing the reliability differences of features on various scenes, and compare the proposed scene-adaptive hierarchical data association framework with non-scene-adaptive frame- work in various scenes on both RGB-D datasets and RGB datasets, to evaluate the generality of the proposed framework. Then, we conduct a series of experiments to evaluate perfor- mance of the depth invariant part-based appearance model (DIAM) in various scenes, which is given in Section 5.3. Third, we analyze advantages and disadvantages of the pro- posed hierarchical data association framework and non- hierarchical framework, conducting experiments on RGB-D datasets and combining various features, which is elaborated in Section 5.4.

given in Section 3.3. Due to its statistical nature, occasional id- switches can be overlooked in data association. The variation reference Ufk in Formula (14) can be obtained by averaging variations of each feature fk during association in several se- quences in different scenes. It is a constant value based on prior statistics which is scene-independent. The weighting factor ur is empirically set to 0.5 to control the impact of mfk

where gt is the number of ground truth detections, mt the number of miss-detections, fpt is the false positive count and mmet the number of instantaneous identity switches [12]. Here, we adopt MOTA to to evaluate performance of multi- tracking performance. In addition, taking into consideration of evaluating real-time capability of algorithm, we also compute the frames per second (FPS).

Besides the whole performance evaluation given in Section 5.2, in this section we will conduct more detailed experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of the HDA scheme. We organize the experiments from two aspects: First, we analyze how hierar- chical feature space construction influence the performance of HDA. Second, we compare hierarchical data association (HDA) scheme with non-hierarchical data association (non-HDA) scheme while applying the same hierarchical feature space.

tional Aero-space Award, Wu Wenjun Award on Artificial Intelligence, Excellence Teaching Award, and Candidates of Top Ten Outstanding Pro- fessors in PKU. He is an IEEE member, vice president of Chinese Association for Artificial Intelligent (CAAI), and vice chair of Intelligent Robotics Society of CAAI. He has served as keynote speakers, co-chairs, session chairs, or PC members of many important international conferences, such as IEEE/RSJ IROS, IEEE ROBIO, IEEE SMC and IIHMSP, recently also serves as re- viewers for many international journals such as Pattern Recognition, IEEE Trans. on Signal Processing, and IEEE Trans. on PAMI.

Yuan Gao received the B.E. degree in intelligent science and technology from Xidian University in 2012. Then he obtained the M.S. degree in computer applied technology from Peking University in 2015. Currently, he is working toward the Doctor degree in Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Germany. His research interests include object detection, 3D recon- struction, facial expression and gender recognition. He has published articles in IEEE International Confer- ence on Image Processing (ICIP).

