The advancement in battery management technology has increased the demand for the sustainable development of Electric Vehicles (EVs) [1, 2]. Government policies for clean energy have further contributed to the rise in demand for EVs. Research shows that more than 3 million electric vehicles were sold globally in 2020, with more than 3.8 million sold in 2021, indicating a significant demand for electrical power in the near future. With the increase in the demand for electric vehicles, the demand for charging stations also increases. The International Energy Agency estimates that only 8% of public EV charging stations are available for the total number of EVs sold. The government has already taken steps to install and increase the number of charging stations in both AC and DC forms by the end of 2022.

Ghanbanzadeh et al. [4] proposed a hybrid particle swarm optimization and an ant colony optimization approach to evaluate the demand for charg- ing stations. They conducted a sensitivity analysis on the reliability level of vehicle-to-grid (V2G) systems and addressed the unit commitment problem related to the charging demand patterns of EVs. An important observa- tion from their research is that operating costs increase when compared to reliability limits.

Tan et al. [12] applied distributed optimization to reduce electricity bills and flatten demand response. Xydas et al. [13] proposed a fuzzy model and a data mining model to predict the demand for electric vehicle charging in various geographical regions. Yagetekin and Uzunoglu [14] developed a smart charging management algorithm strategy to avoid overloading trans- formers, which in turn reduces charging costs and demand for electric vehicles charging.

Luo et al. [15] used the Monte Carlo technique in their research paper to forecast EV charging demand in the long term. They tested their algorithm on different types of electric vehicles, such as electric buses and taxis, for the years 2015, 2020, and 2030. By simulating the load demand at charging stations, they identified the need for a proper demand profile for peak and off-peak vehicles. In a similar vein, Xing et al. [16] relied on ride-hailing trip data to predict EV charging demand at charging stations. They took into account both driving and charging characteristics to create their model.

Li and Zhang et al. [17] used a probabilistic power flow model to simulate the energy pattern of electric vehicles over a certain period of time. They also applied queuing theory to estimate the overall demand for EV charging facilities. Similarly, Bae and Kwasinski [18] used fluid dynamics to evaluate charging demand patterns at highway charging stations, also utilizing queu- ing theory. They studied simulation results to help vehicle owners optimize their planning for charging infrastructure. The model captures both spatial and temporal dynamics of charging demand.

Louie [19] and Buzoa et al. [20] investigated the performance of a seasonal autoregressive integrated moving average model in predicting the demand for EV charging stations in San Diego, California, and the Netherlands, respec- tively. They demonstrated that the geographical location and characteristics of EV charging stations are crucial factors to accurately predict demand.

Compared to the statistical way of forecasting EV charging demand for a charging station, demand forecasting enabled by Machine Learning (ML) is more accurate. ML algorithms can be used for both short-term and long-term forecasting. Therefore, many researchers have investigated the application of ML, specifically Support Vector Machine (SVM), Decision Tree, and K- Nearest Neighbour (KNN), in predicting charging demand. However, one drawback associated with this technique is that it lacks the ability to simulate the temporal correlation between data, which ultimately leads to inaccurate predictions.

Xi Chen et al. [24] introduced a two-fold approach to enhance electric ve- hicle (EV) usage and promote renewable energy (RE) utilization. First, they developed a prioritization ranking algorithm for EV drivers based on their driving and charging patterns. Second, they proposed a secure, anonymous, and decentralized blockchain-based EV incentive system involving utilities, EV drivers, charging service providers, and RE providers. This system guides EV users to charge during periods of higher RE generation.

In [25], Xi Chen et al. discussed the modeling of the EV charging net- work as a cyber-physical system integrating transportation networks and smart grids. They introduced an EV charging station recommendation al- gorithm and emphasized the importance of deploying a charging scheduling algorithm. This approach transforms EV charging from burdening power grids to serving as a load-balancing tool, facilitating energy transfer within unbalanced distribution grids.

NNAR model is a type of Artificial Neural Network (ANN) model, where lagged values of time series data will be fed into the system for its analysis. It uses some complex algorithms to find the relation between input to output variables. The model tries to build a vectored output as a linear combination of the previous results. Again for a free flow condition, the density of the vehicle near the charging station is a function of car and the time. When they raised the token for charging the vehicle i.e. the output u(t, p) can be modelled as

any blank data for repetition. Whenever data is not available back casting method has been applied to fill the cell. In a similar way forward casting was also applied to validate the back-casting operation. In order to train the model the entire data sheet was split into two parts a training set and a testing set. As per the standard norms of the machine learning algorithm, the data set was divided into an 80:20 ratio. Spyder-platform in Python has been used for analysis. Similarly, the tense flow-enabled Spyder platform has been chosen for deep neural network analysis.

