In this paper we consider a very basic network function, node discovery, in ad-hoc networks, where a node with limited network information would like to establish a session with a given number of other nodes in the network (of which the node may not be aware about). We formally define correctness, security and efficiency properties of node discovery protocols, and investigate the problem of designing such protocols under appropriate network topology assumptions. Here, the security of these protocols is against Byzantine adversaries that can corrupt up to a limited number of nodes in the network and make them arbitrarily deviate from their protocol. After presenting some secure node discovery protocols, we show their application to secure service architectures in ad-hoc networks.

1 Prepared through collaborative participation in the Communications and Networks Consortium sponsored by the U.S. Army Research Laboratory under the Collaborative Technology Alliance Program, Cooperative Agreement DAAD19-01-2-0011. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation thereon.

G, where each node in G is associated with a different party, and an edge between any two nodes implies that the two associated parties are within radio range of each other (for simplicity, we only consider the case of bidirectional connectivity). In addition, graph G can vary in time according to party mobility or unavailabil- ity, due to factors such as geographical changes, power disruption or low battery. These events trigger changes in graph G modeled as failure and creation of nodes and edges; therefore the structure of graph G varies according to such changes (for notational simplicity we omit a time-dependent subscript in the notations related to G and we assume without loss of generality that n is an upper bound on the number of parties). We also make the simplifying assumption of absence of contention or transmission errors, as these can be dealt with in a modular fashion and at different layers.

networks crucially depends on the topology assumptions on the network graph. Proving properties of a protocol under stronger topology assumptions makes such property less likely to hold in real-life ad-hoc networks, even more so in the presence of node mobility. We are therefore especially interested in minimizing the topology assumptions under which node discovery protocols are proved correct and secure.

NS = {N1,... , Nu' } into two sets NSy,1 and NSn,1, where NSy,1 contains the set of neighbors in NS that forwarded to N identities of 2 distinct nodes with which the session establishment with N was successful, and NSn,1 is defined as NS \ NSn,1. In this first phase, N has received |NSy,1| distinct identities.

