Subjects and methods: The study recruited 50 subjects, 30AA patients and 20 controls. All patients were subjected to detailed history taking and examination to detect pattern, severity (SALT score) of AA. Blood samples were taken from all subjects to do complete blood count and to assess serum levels of 25(OH)D, parathyroid hormone, random blood sugar, and calcium.

Results: There was significant decrease in serum 25(OH)D level in AA patients in comparison to controls. Serum 25(OH)D level showed significant decrease in males than in females in patients. Levels of serum calcium were significantly lower in patient group compared to control group with. Regarding blood pic- ture; the only significant difference was in the count of RBCs which showed significant lower levels in AA group compared to control group. Positive linear correlation was found between serum vitamin D and serum calcium in the patients group. Strong positive correlation was found between SALT score and dura- tion of the disease. All patients with total scalp hair loss and body hair loss had duration of disease more than six months, while most of patients with duration of disease less than six months had low SALT scores.

1,25(OH)2 D3 has an important role in hair follicle biology. Vita- min D receptors (VDR) expression in epidermal keratinocytes and the mesenchymal dermal papilla cells were detected [5]. Expres- sion of the VDR in keratinocytes is necessary for preservation of the normal hair cycle [6]. Lack of the VDR is associated with reduced epidermal differentiation and hair follicle growth. In addi- tion, patients with 1,25(OH)2 D3-resistant rickets type II and VDR knockout mice exhibit phenotypes that include AT [7].

Patients with AA showed significantly lower concentrations of both 25(OH)D and 1,25(OH)2 D3 with higher mean values of parathyroid hormone (PTH) than controls [5,9]. In addition, vita- min D supplementation might have a preventive role in human autoimmune diseases such as AA [10]. Furthermore, it was sug- gested that activation of regulatory T cells can explain the possible efficacy of vitamin D analogs in the treatment of AA [9].

This work was designed as prospective case control study and was approved by the ethical committee in the faculty of medicine, Mansoura University. This study included 50 subjects, 30 AA patients and 20 age- and sex matched healthy controls. They were selected from outpatient clinic of Dermatology, Andrology and STDs department in Mansoura University Hospital. Informed writ- ten consents were obtained from all participants. All participants were from Dakahlia Governorate.

A venous blood sample of 7 cm3 was withdrawn from each par- ticipant. One millilitre was collected in an EDTA tube for complete blood count (CBC) using automated blood count machine (Sysmex, BM Egypt Company). The rest of the sample was collected in a plain tube and left to clot. Serum was separated, and divided into 3 ali-

An ELISA principle was used, in which; standards, controls, or patient samples were simultaneously incubated with the enzyme labeled antibody and a biotin coupled antibody in a streptavidin- coated microplate well. At the end of assay incubation, the microwells were washed to remove unbound components and the enzyme bound to the solid phase was incubated with the sub- strate, tetramethylbenzidine (TMB). An acidic stopping solution was then added to stop the reaction and converts the color to yel- low. The intensity of the yellow color was directly proportional to the concentration of intact PTH in the sample. A dose response curve of absorbance versus concentration was generated using results obtained from the calibrators. Concentrations of intact PTH present in the controls and patient samples were determined directly from this curve [13]. The kits were supplied from Cali- biotech Inc., Spring Valley.

Blood levels of 25(OH) D were assessed using ELISA kits (SunRedbio, Shanghai). 25 (OH) D was added to monoclonal anti- body enzyme wells which were coated with human 25 (OH) D antibodies labeled with biotin, and combined with streptavidin- HRP to form immune complex, then incubation and washing again to remove the uncombined enzyme. Chromogen solutions A, B, were added. The color of the liquid changed into the blue. When acid was added, the color finally became yellow. The chroma of color and concentration of 25(OH)D of sample were positively cor- related. Results were obtained after plotting the standard curve.

In the present work, levels of serum Ca were significantly lower in patients compared to control group. In agreement with this, it was found that as a patient becomes vitamin D deficient, there is a decrease in intestinal Ca absorption which lowers Ca levels [24]. As regard PTH level, there was no significant difference between patient and control groups in the present work. Yilmaz et al. [5] found no significant difference between the AA patients and controls for PTH level. In addition, it was found that when serum 25(OH) D is low, serum PTH is relatively high, but often still in the normal range, and the increase of serum PTH is blunted in many patients as in the present study [25,26].

There might be several explanations for this inconsistency between these studies. There may be methodological variations. Serum25 (OH) D exhibits great seasonal variation. The present research and that of Yilmaz et al. [5] were conducted on small number of cases and during summer while in Cerman et al. [23] study much more cases were enrolled and it was during the winter period. Second, most of the patients in the current study and that of Yilmaz et al. [5] consisted of patients with SALT scores <25%, making it statistically difficult to investigate the association with serum vitamin D levels.

Lastly, the number of studied patients was low. This may be due to the nature of the studied disease as the approximate prevalence of AA is 0.1% worldwide [29]. So, it is not so common disease and number of available cases coming to dermatology outpatient clinic at Mansoura University Hospital varies from time to time. In addi- tion, the selectivity of the studied group in the course of the dis- ease also decreased the number of cases. Due to strict inclusion and exclusion criteria of the study, many cases were not included. Furthermore, the high cost of the studied investigations made a limitation.

However, it is possible to extrapolate for larger group of cases. Although the study group was small; it is representative for the studied disease. It included mild, moderate and sever cases as well as different grades of scoring of AA were nearly represented in the patient group. In addition, a large group study is warranted with longer study duration, different modality of recruitment (e.g. in co-operation with other clinics), more funds and facilities as well as vigorous statistical methods.

There are some additional limitations to the present study. A subgroup with vitamin D supplementation to assess the implica- tion on disease severity and extension was not included. Finally, vitamin D levels were measured once, regardless of ethnicity, skin color or sun exposure, which may bias the results.

