Research on realism is often based on cognitive load theory (Sweller et al., 1998, 2019) which assumes a limited working memory capacity that can be filled with relevant (intrinsic) and irrelevant (extraneous) cognitive load. In this model, learning can be enhanced by minimizing extraneous cognitive load so that mental capacities can be used to engage with intrinsic cognitive load. Therefore, the question arises whether re- alism needs to be considered to be a form of extraneous cognitive load (see Scheiter et al., 2009).

Since it has been found that learning about the process of mitosis does not benefit from more realistic visualizations (Scheiter et al., 2009), it has been argued that the effects of realism will be stronger in tasks in which learning about the shapes of objects is the main objective (Skulmowski et al., 2022). However, while learning about a process using detailed microscopic photographs resembling cross-sections of cells did not pro- mote learning, learning about the shapes of objects presented as dimensional entities rather than cross-sections consistently benefits from realistic details, at least for specific variables (e.g., Skulmowski, 2022a, 2022b; Skulmowski & Rey, 2021). Therefore, it might be possible that realism primarily has a positive effect if the dimensionality (i.e., whether an object is presented as a cross-section or in its complete form) of a visualization is high. Given the previous findings, emphasizing the dimensionality of a visualization should enhance performance when learning with realistic visualizations.

segmentation of visual content, and the coding of different information in order to establish connections between them (Pett & Wilson, 1996). In the context of realism research, Skulmowski and Rey (2018) conducted a study using a realistic computer-generated model of a fictional bone in which color coding increased retention scores if the shading component included a high number of (arbitrary) details in the form of small bumps and ridges on the surface. However, color coding lowered retention performance for a smooth version of the model without such details, leading to an interaction effect between color coding and the level of detail (Skulmowski & Rey, 2018). An explanation for this result came from color coding lowering cognitive load in that study. Using a similar method, Skulmowski (2022c) found that color coding is particularly effective for transfer performance if visualizations contain color coding both in the learning and testing phases, but that color coding can also be detrimental if color cues are only presented during the learning phase. In these last two studies just summarized, color cues were primarily used to facilitate the visual segmentation of an otherwise complex object without clear boundaries between the different components.

The first two experiments were conducted to investigate whether an alignment between the level of realism and the visual design factors of dimensionality and perspective leads to a higher retention score and a lower cognitive load. This alignment hypothesis is based on the idea that the cognitive costs of realistic details are only worth risking if a specific advantage is to be expected (see Skulmowski & Xu, 2022). In Experiment 1, realism should be particularly helpful when learning using visualiza- tions featuring objects that make use of realistic shading and rendering through their dimensionality. Experiment 2 was conducted to assess a similar relationship between perspective and realism.

In addition, the third experiment examined whether two components of realistic visualizations, namely geometry and shading, will lead to advantages during learning. The dimension of geometry was manipu- lated by varying the shape distinctness and the effects of shading were tested by defining the boundaries of object components using color coding. As a result the first two experiments deal with more subtle visual design choices, while the third experiment is focused on the effects of including more semantic cues using the geometry and shading of the depicted object.

Experiment 1 investigated whether the dimensionality of objects depicted in visualizations has an effect on cognitive load and retention performance. It was hypothesized that an alignment that builds on the specific strengths of realistic and schematic visualizations should lead to the lowest cognitive load and highest retention scores. For this particular study, an interaction effect between the factors realism and dimension- ality was assumed in which dimensionality enhances learning with a realistic, but not with a schematic visualization. On the flipside, a flat cross-section may be easier to process and memorize with a schematic visualization style.

Despite the strong differences in the visualizations of Experiment 2, no significant interactions or differences were found. However, the retention data follows the pattern of the alignment hypothesis on the descriptive level. Nevertheless, the first two studies presented in this paper suggest that the dimensionality and perspective of visualizations have little impact on learning and cannot be used to reliably predict whether realism will have a positive or negative effect. Both studies have in common that the differences in the visualizations that were compared are of a primarily graphical nature that does not necessarily affect how the information is processed at a semantic level. In other words, super- ficial changes in shape and perspective do not appear to have a strong influence on learning despite the considerable visual differences they can cause. An experiment was conducted to assess whether visual features that communicate semantic knowledge are a superior way of improving learning with realistic visualizations. It was expected that a higher shape distinctness and color coding (or rather, color segmentation) will lead to higher learning outcomes. In addition, it was hypothesized that learning with nondistinct shapes will be facilitated using color coding in a compensatory effect (see Skulmowski & Rey, 2018), leading to a hy- pothesized interaction effect. Importantly, inverted results were hy- pothesized for cognitive load responses.

(without vs. with) using block randomization. There were 41 participants who learned with the visualization featuring a low shape distinctness and without color coding, 38 participants who used the version with a high shape distinctness and without color coding, 37 who were presented with a model with a low shape distinctness and with color coding, and 36 utilized a visualization with a high shape distinctness and with color coding.

Three experiments were conducted to investigate how visual design features affect the cognitive processing of realistic visualizations. The first two experiments assessed the alignment hypothesis claiming that realism is particularly useful in situations that use the specific advantages of realistic imagery. In Experiment 1, the dimensionality of the objects presented in a visualization was manipulated together with the level of realism and revealed that subjective cognitive load was indeed highest if there is a mismatch between realism and dimensionality (e.g., if a flat cross-section is presented using realistic details) and lowest if there is an alignment (e.g., if a cross-section is presented in a schematic style). The retention data followed an inverted trend of this pattern on the descriptive level that did not reach significance, potentially due to a slight ceiling effect. However, Experiment 1 provided partial support for the alignment hypothesis.

Experiment 2 again tested the alignment hypothesis, but using the factor perspective instead of dimensionality. It was hypothesized that the realistic rendering would particularly help learners with the perspective view, as this layout could benefit from the availability of depth cues, while the schematic version would potentially suffice for memorizing the side view. On the descriptive level, the retention data follow this pattern, but this interaction effect did not reach significance.

The results of the first two experiments suggest that the alignment hypothesis may be correct as indicated by the cognitive load ratings in Experiment 1 and the general pattern of the results, but also indicate that this effect is not strong enough to explain the divergent results con- cerning realism found in the literature. Additional studies with far greater sample sizes are needed to precisely ascertain how strongly an alignment between realism, dimensionality, and perspective will impact learners. However, these promising results suggest that the design of visualizations will probably benefit from such an alignment, at least to a limited extent. Given some of the negative results of realism found in the

Experiment 3 was conducted to get a clearer perspective on how to support learning with realistic visualizations by implementing semanti- cally meaningful designs. While the other experiments primarily varied the shading and rendering dimensions of the GSR model, the last study assessed the effects of variations in the geometry and shading of realistic visualizations. Furthermore, the interaction between these two di- mensions was tested. The experiment demonstrated that a geometry featuring a higher level of shape distinctness facilitates learning by lowering cognitive load. A higher shape distinctness also led to higher retention scores than a visualization showing a nondistinct shape. Simi- larly, separating elements of the model using color coding positively affected retention and indicates that shading can be used to lower cognitive load and enhance learning (thereby also confirming previous

advantage, but the magnitude of such effects appears to be rather small. Nevertheless, it might be advisable that visualizations should be designed with an alignment optimization in mind, at least when in doubt. How- ever, Experiment 3 provides solid evidence for the claim that the design of realistic visualizations should emphasize distinct shapes and provide visual guides for segmentation. This does not necessarily be achieved through similarly bright colors as in the study, as the use of different shaders (such as muscle shaders displaying fibers and fat shaders high- lighting glossiness) might be sufficient to make different parts in a visualization stand out from each other.

The results of the present studies will be helpful for designers of static visualizations, but can also be the starting point of investigations of alignment factors in XR. For instance, when designing an application that primarily displays flat, orthographic cross-section views, it may be advisable to include less detailed models. However, for situations in which the models may be seen from different perspectives emphasizing their dimensionality, a higher level of realism may be advisable. Given the rather small impact of dimensionality and perspective on cognitive processing found in the present studies, it will be interesting to assess whether these effects increase as soon as learners are confronted with a multitude of different models in XR. Since learners in more compre- hensive XR application are likely to go through the (cognitive) processes involved in the studies multiple times if several models are being pre- sented, the advantages of an alignment between dimensionality,

As there have been instances of age-related differences in how much learners can benefit from realism (Menendez et al., 2020, 2022), the aspect of age should be considered in future studies. While the present studies used a homogeneous sample of university students aged between 18 and 30 years, the studies should be replicated with different samples and age groups.

