transcript abundance in a comparison of two inbred strains. Since CpG methylation in general suppresses transcription, we expected mutations that abrogate a methylated CpG site to in- crease the relative amount of transcript and found this to be so. Consistent with our predictions from how CpG density re- lates to methylation, we found that the impact of mutations de- pended on the CpG density. In regions of low CpG density, we were unable to detect a significant effect of mutation on tran- scription, despite the very large number of sites analyzed. By contrast, in regions of high CpG density, the far fewer mutations we found made a highly significant contribution to variation in transcript abundance (though the overall effect is small, less than 1%). We also found that in high-density regions, CpG muta- tions are enriched in chromatin states that mark enhancers.

parison of two strains). While still large, this number is easily within the range of massively parallel reporter assays.48 Further- more, when interest is focused on a single locus, identified for example from fine mapping of behavioral phenotypes, there will be far fewer candidate variants to consider: approximately three candidate variants will lie within a 5-Mb locus, mapped in a comparison between B6 and D2 strains (this does not take into account the non-random distribution of variants across the mouse genome).

most methylated sites. We cannot be certain that results found for the high-coverage cell types will apply to others, though as explained in the supplemental information, we think this is un- likely. Third, we cannot be certain we have identified all cell types. Cell types that we inadvertently believe to be homoge- neous may confound our analysis, as the effects of mutations in cell-type-specific methylation sites will be obscured. We may also be missing cell types in which mutations have different effects from those documented here. Finally, our analysis is limited to CpG sites and to one region of the brain, the hippo- campus. It is possible that mutations affecting non-CpG methyl- ated sites behave differently. It is also possible, though we think unlikely, that different findings will emerge from analysis of different brain regions.

All quality control and preprocessing were done under the Seurat package framework.57 Per biological sample, we filtered out cells that (1) fall below the 5th percentile of the total UMI counts (nCount_RNA) or the 5th percentile total number of unique genes ex- pressed (nFeature_RNA) or 700 unique genes expressed, whichever was more stringent; (2) are over the 95th percentile quantile in either the total UMI counts or the total number of unique genes expressed; (3) have larger than 5% mitochondria fraction (percent.mt).

Principal component analysis was run using Scanpy61 default parameters followed by k-nearest neighbors (knn) using only the top 16 principal components by amount of variance explained and k = 15. Divergences between strains were evident in initial unsupervised clustering so Harmony62 was used to correct the batch between strains and unbias clusters arising from strain differences. After Har- mony was applied, iterative clustering was performed with a combination of leiden unsupervised clustering and UMAP dimensionality reduction, identifying clusters as cell types by marker gene hypomethylation.16

Gene counts were normalized using SCTransform,63 and regressed out percentage of reads from mitochondrial genes. We then in- tegrated cell from all samples using reciprocal principal components analysis (rPCA) implemented in Seurat 4.0.557 on the top 5000 integration genes and top 30 reciprocal principal components. For clustering, we standardized the integrated data, performed PCA on all integrated genes and ran de novo Louvain clustering algorithm in the top 15 principal components space with resolution set to

