Bio-PEPA is a recently defined language for the modelling and analysis of biochemical networks. It supports an abstract style of modelling, in which discrete levels of concentration within a species are considered instead of individual molecules. A finer granularity for the system corresponds to a smaller concentration step size and therefore to a greater number of concentration levels. This style of model is amenable to a variety of different analysis techniques, including numerical analysis based on a CMTC with states reflecting the levels of concentration.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives a brief introduc- tion to Bio-PEPA, a description of the definition of discrete levels and transition rates in the language. In Section 3 the CTMC with levels is defined. The map- pings from Bio-PEPA to ODEs and CTMCs with levels are described in Section 4 and the relationship between these models is discussed in Section 5. In Section 6 the repressilator model, a genetic network with oscillating behaviour, is considered to illustrate and test our approach. Finally, in Section 7, some conclusions and directions for future work are reported.

The context of application is biochemical networks. A biochemical network is composed of n species that interact through m reactions in o compartments. The dynamics of reaction j is described by a kinetic law fj. The stoichiometric coefficients of the reactions are assumed to be integer and bounded. We make the following assumptions:

If we allow creation reactions, it could happen that some species do not have a maximum concentration. In this case it is necessary to assume a maximum level also for the species that grows infinitely in order to guarantee a finite CTMC. Note that this is an approximation and we have to pay attention to the results obtained from the analysis (e.g. model checking). However, in many situations, unbounded network may have a pragmatic (average) bound value because of the quantitative relations between the molecules and the reactions composing the network.

The result in Section 5 confirms that, in the limit, the agreement between the ODEs and the CTMC with levels derived from a Bio-PEPA system is complete. However it does not tell us about the relationship between the two models for a given finite h. In [4] the authors showed experimentally that in some pathways the two models are indistinguishable for just few levels, for example when h =1 and h = 7, but these results are not generalised. Here we investigate the relationship between the step size h of the CTMC and the agreement with ODEs. In [14,15] Kurtz reported some estimates for the probability of convergence between the two models. However the estimation is complex and offers a poor guide for choosing h. In the following we propose a measure of distance between the two models. There are various possible ways to define this measure. One possibility is to define it in terms of the difference between the ODE simulation trajectory and the expected value (numerical solution) of the CTMC, for all the species in the biological network, with respect to a time interval. This gives the following definition of distance:

In both the definitions, the distance between the two models generally decreases with the step size h. However, note that for very small h the number of states becomes large and even the simulation of the CTMC may become prohibitively expensive. Thus there is a trade-off between accuracy (in terms of both number of runs and step size) and tractability. The resolution of this trade-off is left to the modeller.

The reactions are: the transcription of the three mRNAs with inhibition by one of the proteins (reactions tr1, tr2, tr3), the translation of mRNAs into the proteins (trl1, trl2, trl3), degradation of both mRNAs and proteins (di with i = 1, ..., 6).

The parameters and the initial concentrations are defined as in [9] i.e. the initial levels are defined according to the initial values of the model. There are no com- partments defined explicitly in the model. So we consider the default compartment vCell : 1. The step size, the number of levels, the initial concentration and location of species are declared as:

Definition A.5 Let P be a Bio-PEPA system and let P be the associated model component. Let Pu, Pv be two derivatives of a model component P with Pv a one- step derivative of Pu. The set of action types associated with the transitions from

