The aim of Spatial CLS is to enable a more accurate description of those bio- logical processes whose behaviour depends on the exact position of the elements. This high level of accuracy is especially useful for cell biology, where there can be a high degree of spatial organization and molecular species may be distributed in the space not uniformly [5]. Such descriptions can then be used to simulate the system, so as to obtain a faithful representation of their evolution. As example applications of the calculus, we present a model of cell proliferation, and a model of the quorum sensing process in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. We show the result of the simulation of the former model, obtained with an ad hoc simulator.

tic motions, such as Brownian motion. However, it can be extended to allow pseudo-random motion (that is still deterministic) by introducing another param- eter for movement functions. This parameter represents a seed used to initialize their pseudo-random behaviour, similarly to the initialization of a pseudo-random number generator. The (multiset of) possible values for the seed could be specified in the spatial information of positional elements. In this way, we could define a movement function which realizes, depending on the parameter, a different trajec- tory for the stochastic motion. Because of lack of space, we cannot actually show this extension of the calculus, but in the examples we will assume it to be available.

The function SpaceCheck takes as parameters the radius r of the looping se- quence, and the spatial descriptions of the elements inside it (I2) and of those on the brane (I1). It can use that information to determine, approximately, if there is enough space for all the elements. For example, the simplest, but the least ac- curate, definition of the function is the constant function that always returns tt , namely SpaceCheck(r, I1, I2)= tt . However, more accurate definitions can be used, if needed.

The rearrangement is accomplished by the Arrange algorithm (described in Section 3.2), which may fail to determine a well-formed term: if such is the case when trying to apply a rule to a group of elements, then it is assumed that the considered group of elements cannot react (so the rule cannot be applied). If the rearrangement fails after the phase of movement, then for the current step the elements are not moved. Before defining the semantics, we need to introduce some auxiliary definitions.

Given a rewrite rule R and a term T1, function Appl computes a set of tuples of the form (Tr, c,T ',T ''), where Tr identifies the subterm of T1 to which R is applied (i.e. the reactants), T ' is the term transformed by the application excluding the rearrangement, and T '' is the rearrangement of T '. We consider two reactions to be different if they involve different reactants Tr or different resulting terms T ''. Finally, the number m(R) of different reactant combinations enabled in state T , for a reaction R, and the total number mT of reactions considering a set of rules R, are defined as:

The use of this mechanism is not the only solution for dealing with space conflicts among the elements of a system. We could represent the elements as points, which means that they do not occupy any space. However, this assumption would be reasonable only if the elements are small with respect to the environment, and this is not always the case in biological systems. Another option would be allowing the application of a rule only if it would not create a conflict. Unfortunately, this option would lessen the modeling capacity of the calculus; for example, it would not be possible to model a membrane that, increasing its size, pushes contiguous elements.

At low cell density, the autoinducer is synthesized at basal levels and diffuse in the environment where it is diluted. With high cell density both the extracellular and intracellular concentrations of the autoinducer increase until they reach thresh- olds beyond which the autoinducer is produced autocatalytically. This autocatalytic production results in a dramatic increase of its concentration.

Rule R1 describes the basal production of the autoinducer, modeled as 3oxo. The value k1 is chosen according to its basal rate of production. Rules R2 and R3 describe the formation of the complex autoinducer/R-protein, modeled as 3R , and its decomplexation, respectively. To keep the model simple, we do not describe explicitly the R-protein. The next two rules, R4 and R5, model the binding and unbinding of the 3R complex to gene lasO of the DNA. Rule R6 describes the increased rate of production of the autoinducer, due to the binding of the complex

3R to the DNA. The promoted production of 3oxo can be modeled using a rate k6 much higher than the basal rate k1 used in rule R1. Rules R7 and R8 describe the ability of the autoinducer to cross the membrane, in both directions. An autoinducer inside the bacterium is modeled as a non-positional element, while autoinducers outside have an associated position, radius r3oxo and movement function mB. The movement function mB models Brownian motion, which describes the diffusion of the autoinducer in the environment. Finally, rule R9 models the degradation of the autoinducer, which can happen both inside and outside the bacterium.

This Spatial CLS model of the quorum sensing process is more accurate than other stochastic models (such as the Stochastic CLS model given in [7]). In fact, other stochastic models are usually based on the assumption that biological entities are homogeneously distributed in the environment, and in a quorum sensing process this is not true for the autoinducer proteins outside the bacteria. Note that taking into account the spatial diffusion has a particular significance when reactions are comparatively faster than diffusion rates [26].

