Boolean networks are discrete dynamical systems extensively used to model biological regulatory networks. The dynamical analysis of these networks suffers from the combinatorial explosion of the state space, which grows exponentially with the number n of components. To face this problem, a classical approach consists in deducing from the interaction graph of the network, which only contains n vertices, some information on the dynamics of the network. In this paper, we present results in this topic, mainly by focusing on the influence of positive and negative feedbacks.

This paper is structured as follows. Sect. 2 presents the main definitions used in this paper. Sect. 3 details the major results extracting dynamical properties of a BN from the topology of its interaction graph. Finally, we discuss these state-of-the-art approaches, and mention other static analysis techniques for BNs in Sect. 4.

Example 2.5 [Running example continued] The attractors of aig(f ) and gig(f ) are the fixed point 000 and the cyclic attractor {001, 011, 101, 111}. The attractors of sig(f ) are the fixed point 000 and the cyclic attractor {011, 101, 111}.

Inherent to the notion of Boolean network is the one of interaction graph. Such a graph depicts, in a very coarse way, the qualitative interactions between components, and is usually represented as a directed graph with [n] as vertex set. An arc from j to i then means that the evolution of the ith component depends on the evolution of the jth one. Here, we consider two kinds of interactions: the positive and negative ones. This hence leads us to consider signed directed graphs.

In other words, there exists a positive (resp. negative) arc from j to i if, in at least one state x, an increase of xj induces an increase (resp. decrease) of fi(x), i.e. the appearance of the jth protein turns on (resp. off) the ith gene.

at least one attractor, we deduce that aig(f ) has an attractor of size one, which is a fixed point of f (cf. Proposition 2.4). In [16], Goles and Salinas provide an algorithm with running time O(n2) to compute, under the absence of negative cycle in G(f ), a fixed point of f (in the general case, the problem of finding a fixed point is NP-complete).

Since the number of possible states of a BN increases exponentially with the number n of components, it is interesting to try to reduce the system, typically by removing components, without losing too many dynamical properties. The following theorem, stated with other notations in [21], shows that if the nth component does not inter- act with itself, it can be suppressed in a natural way, without affecting the number of fixed points, the reachability by asynchronous paths, and the main features of the interaction graph. (For sake of simplicity, this theorem only deals with the sup- pression of the nth component, but it can be very easily adapted to the suppression of any component.)

For the sake of simplicity, we restricted ourself to the Boolean case and results concerning the global interaction graph. However, Theorems 3.1-3.5, 3.7 and 3.12 have extensions to the non-Boolean discrete case and/or generalizations in terms of local interaction graphs [34,36,5,38,37,28,33,29,30,31,32].

Overall, a large variety of properties can be statically derived from BNs. The extension of the presented topological analysis of the interaction graph to other modelling frameworks for biological regulatory networks is yet challenging. While, as mention above, several important results have already been extended to discrete networks, the new degree of freedom brought by discrete modelling prevents the straightforward extension of many results on BNs without imposing constraints on possible logical expressions (such as Theorems 3.6 and 3.8). Finally, the efficient quantification of dynamical properties within hybrid models extending discrete net- works with time or stochastic features [39,1,50] calls for innovative static analysis techniques.

