Internet auctions are an attractive mechanism for the exchange of goods at a non-fixed price point. The operation of these auctions can be run under a variety of parameters. In this paper, we provide a theoretical analysis of fixed time forward auctions in cases where a single bid or multiple bids are accepted in a single auction. A comparison of the economic benefits and the corresponding buyer and seller surpluses between the auctions where a single bid is accepted and the auctions where multiple bids are accepted is made. These models are verified through systematic simulation experiments, based on a series of operational assumptions, which characterise the arrival rate of bids, as well as the distribution from which the private values of buyers are sampled. Decision rules for optimising surplus under different auction fee structures are also given.

The prevalence of the Internet has ushered in the friction-less dissemination of data, though, in more recent times, this free and centralised information is increasingly being monetised and distributed. The use of Internet auctions has become the prominent method of exchanging goods between consumers due to the primary advantage that it affords: the selling of goods of unknown value for which a variable price-point model is advantageous. In this paper, we i) develop mathematical models and characterise the properties of different algorithms that may be found in or may be built into Internet auction mechanisms, basing these models on a series of operational assumptions including the arrival rate of bids as well as the distribution from which the private values of buyers are sampled, and ii) construct and run simulation experiments in the context of the mathematical models, checking the validity of the mathematical models and using the same assumptions.

While many eBay users believe sniping to be problematic, eBay has always maintained the policy that a bidder should bid his private value. Since the winner pays the second price, there is little reason for a bidder to shade his bid. In order to counteract sniping, other online auction websites, such as Amazon, have employed auctions with a soft close, automatically extending the length of the auction. The investigation of different types of auction terminations has been undertaken in [3], where it is found that late bidders of eBay type of hard close tend to be associated with highly experienced bidders, whereas those of Amazon type tend to be relatively inexperienced bidders. In [4], it is found that sniping often leads to winning, and it observes that many sellers tend to set the starting bid price unrealistically low to stimulate bidder participation.

[12] to empirical investigations [13] where eBay auctions of coins are conducted. It makes use of regression models to estimate the price of items and examines the influence of seller ratings (which measures the reliability and services provided by the seller) on the final price. It has also found that the effect of positive and negative ratings is not symmetrical, with the latter having a much greater (adverse) influence on the price. This will be addressed in future work. It also suggests that longer auctions tend to have a beneficial effect in achieving a higher price.

In this paper, we describe the economic benefits to buyers and sellers when there are multiple identical lots available for sale and when multiple bids are accepted in an auction. In Section 2, a stochastic framework for analysing Internet auctions is described, which is then extended to include multiple accepted bids from an auction. Section 3 introduces the concept of allocative efficiency, using the buyer and seller surpluses to compare the performance of a multiple accepted bid auction with that of a singularly accepted bid auction. Finally, these theoretical findings are verified by way of simulation in Section 4, and the conclusions presented in Section 5.

To enable the comparison between observed and theoretical values and to validate the mathematical models, an auction process simulator that implements the pseudo- code for the auction algorithm, has been constructed in C++. In order to sample values from the uniform and exponential distributions for the private value of bidders and the rate of bids respectively, the Boost C++ Library is used. In particular, we use the variate_generator with the uniform_01 and exponential_distribution headers, which is implemented on top of the mersenne_twister psuedo-random number generator. The result is outputted as a space-delimited text string that states lambda, which is the incoming rate of bids and usually the variable we change, the duration of that auction, and the revenue generated from that auction. Ten thousand trials are run for each arrival rate, which is sampled in 0.01 intervals in the units concerned over the desired interval.

and auction income per unit time are derived. It is found that the auction income critically depends on the number of competing bids, so that as the number of bids increases, the auction income increases, and it climbs relatively sharply at the be- ginning but gradually does so slowly, while the income rate tends to favour shorter auctions. Both exact expressions and approximate formulae are given, with the latter providing a good estimate when the number of bids is large.

Analysis of surplus for buyers and sellers in Internet auction processes are given, and by suitably adjusting the different parameters, bidder collusion and seller shilling behaviours may be represented. Compared with other means and chan- nels for the exchange of goods, the aim of the sellers selling items through auctions is to increase the transaction price. Appropriately controlling the auction process would be effective in raising the surplus for the seller, who can optimise this by adjusting the auction duration and the number of bids accepted per auction. The exact optimal auction duration may be obtained through numerical methods, while closed-form results are obtained for an approximate solution. Depending on the auction fee structure and seller utility, it may sometimes be advantageous to ac- cept two or more bids per auction. Throughout the analysis, it is found that the average number of bids is key determinant of performance. Simulations have been performed and close agreement with theoretical analysis is observed.

