Losses caused by cyber-attacks are considerably increasing each year. The need for an optimal security assessment methodology that combines mathematical foundations with practical and user-friendly repre- sentations has become imperatively crucial. In this paper, we propose a stochastic security assessment methodology that adopts attack-defense trees model to represent security scenarios, and stochastic models to perform both qualitative and quantitative assessment. We illustrate our approach with a simple but realistic example study.

Moreover, there is a considerable paucity of qualitative underpinnings supporting ADTrees analysis. Thus, our second contribution in this work will consist in inter- preting the behavioral qualitative properties of Petri-nets in the context of security in general, and ADTrees in particular. Thanks to the isomorphic relation between finite continuous time Markov chains and bounded stochastic Petri-nets [16], we can perform both quantitative and qualitative security analysis by shifting from one model to another. In fact, to perform qualitative security analysis, we apply the well-known structural and behavioral analysis of Petri-nets. For quantitative analysis, we generate the corresponding finite CTMC (Continuous Time Markov Chain) of a given bounded Petri-net model and apply the classical analytical ap- proach for probabilistic and time-based security analysis. Finally, to our knowledge, ADTrees do not specify any refinement operator describing actions to be performed in parallel. Therefore, we propose a new refinement operator expressing parallel actions, which we call disjunctive parallel refinement. In addition to that, coun- termeasures in ADTrees are quite abstract and general from the execution aspect, inspired by [18], who proposed one class of countermeasure called delayed-type coun- termeasure, we propose an other class of countermeasures that we call blocking-type countermeasures.

trees, and provide formal framework for it. In section 5, we present then report the results of the qualitative and quantitative analysis performed on a simple but realistic example study. We discuss related works in section 6, and conclude the paper in section 7.

It has been widely recognized that parallel actions are crucial in security, as they constitute the main key of cyber-attacks performed on large scaled systems. How- ever, abide the different existing types of refinements operator used in ADTrees, there is no refinement operator expressing parallel actions execution. Moreover, the use of only disjunctive refinement is not enough to capture such security scenarios.

Recent works [5, 9, 12, 13] considered disjunctive refinement as a refinement op- erator where an attacker has to execute at least one refinement action among many, which means that the attacker may have all the refinements executed. This sounds to be a kind of parallel refinement operator, however, we define the disjunction as a choice operator, where among all refinements, only one will be executed by the attacker. In fact, the disjunction operator assumes the refinement actions to be mutually exclusive.

Therefore, we introduce a new type of refinement operator to represent parallel execution of actions. We name this operator parallel disjunction refinement. This new type of refinement will allow an attacker/defender to perform more than one action at the same time, expecting that the successful termination of at least one action is enough to proceed to the next action. We use dots to graphically represent this type of refinement.

In this work, we have presented a stochastic operational semantics for ADTrees based on stochastic Petri-nets. This allowed us to perform both qualitative and quantitative security analysis. We have shown through a simple example that the proposed solution is useful in the sens it can help system designers to start security by design, or strengthening already existing infrastructure. This is a first attempt, that of course needs further improvements. In particular we plan to extend the framework to consider new types of countermeasures, qualitative properties to out- put a complete security assessment tool [17].

