In this paper, we examine whether stochastic rule-based modelling captures multi-step molecular interactions. As biochemical interactions are non-uniform and occur at different rates, they are characterized by stochastic fluctuations, non- Poisson time dynamics and decay of particular biological events. For this purpose, we model transcription, which is a typical molecular multi-step interaction. As the first phase of gene expression, transcription involves a tiny minority of the molecules reacting in cells. Thus, for modelling transcription, a rule-based stochastic method is preferred over the deterministic method of mass action laws. Rule-based mod- elling directly describes the stochastic and discrete nature of chemical reactions in transcriptional elongation. The primitive agents are the hundreds (or thousands) of base pairs contained in a single gene, and a similar number of nucleoside triphos- phates (NTPs) that join the transcript via RNA polymerase. The present author applied a similar nucleotide-based modelling concept to multiple branching pro- cesses in RNA interference [15].

Elongation is the polymerisation step, which adds a nucleotide to the 3j end of the nascent RNA. This reaction is catalysed by the active site of RNAP. After the polymerisation, TEC immediately enters the pre-translocation state, and translates forward along the DNA template until the active site is correctly positioned to catalyse the next nucleotide addition. Pre-translocation is the state immediately

The forward polymerisation of the RNA transcript is disrupted by pauses of the RNAP (known as transcriptional pausing [18]). The major cause of pausing is back- track, in which the active site of RNAP moves backward along the DNA template and RNA transcript without depolymerising the transcript. The opposite movement is forward-track (also called hyper translocation) towards the 5j end of the template DNA.

extends the RNA chain. In other words, OH indicates that the r site of N is not bounded. In the pre-translocation state, the line joining N and NOH designates a phosphate bond between the r and l sites respectively of N and NOH.

We start this subsection with a convention imposed by the locality of the rules: The agents Ws at the back (m > 2) and forward (m < 0) tracked positions are sufficiently determined by their counting states at site (n, m) of Wm. Similarly, in the main reaction pathway, we stipulate that m = 1 (resp. m = 0) designates pre-translocation (resp. post-translocation) as follows:

