The performance of large structures (concrete bridges) generally decreases over time and when a certain performance threshold is reached the structure may no longer be used according to governing regulations. In the process of design and during oper- ation, environmental stressors should be considered as one of various performance- reducing factors. Environmental loading is always connected with uncertainties. Two major groups may be distinguished: data-based and knowledge-based uncer- tainty. It is not always possible to reduce data-based uncertainty, although a vari- ety of models may be used for the evaluation of available data, thus reducing the knowledge-based uncertainty group.

This work focuses on the nontraditional numerical representation of selected processes relevant to the assessment of environmental exposure, using a cellular au- tomata (CA) technique with several stochastic modifications. The numerical mod- els presented were constructed with respect to the data available and completed by heuristic estimation within a project concerning a degrading bridge in South Tyrol. Before the bridge was dismantled samples were taken for further chemical analysis to obtain the spatial properties of the concrete at various depths, in particular the chloride concentration.

The material we are interested in, concrete, is generally effective in protecting embedded steel from corrosion. However, the protective environment is destroyed when the chloride concentration reaches a certain level: the so-called critical level (CEB 1992). The explicit quantification of environmental stressors such as de-icing salts is essential for a category of tasks which include performance based design (Teply 2006) and the prediction of the service life of reinforced concrete structures.

The desired stochastic effects should exhibit natural heterogeneity within the simulation as observed in the real world by introducing several modifications of the updating mechanism. The visualization of the simulation state within a certain time period offers a visual comparison of the resulting concentration (Cact) patterns for the different methods. When formulated by a simple numerical condition (1), crucial information on the critical concentration (Ccr) region, i.e. areas with possible corrosion of steel reinforcement, is provided.

During their life cycle, constructions undergo a number of events of which a few have a critical effect on their structural health. In this article an existing bridge has been chosen to demonstrate some of the key features of diffusion-based cellular automata simulation. Regarding the bridges, seasonal de-icing salt application may be considered in certain areas noting that diffusion also takes place inside the con- crete structure even when there is no external chloride feed, e.g. in summer. During

Maintaining the proper safety level of concrete bridges under gradual degradation due to traffic and environmental actions during their service life is an expensive and problematic task. Chloride ion ingress is an important aspect of durability design and maintenance, especially in regions where winter salt application for traffic safety is common, e.g. for highways. This case study utilizes the proposed CA approach to analyze possible chloride-induced deterioration using the example of a real highway bridge. The presented numerical simulation, which as we should recall is yet an imaginary concept outside time and space, serves as an illustrative rather than an application example. However, future utilizations may enable the engineer to focus on the modeling or prognosis of reinforcement corrosion in most jeopardized locations, namely to assess the initiation time, i.e. the durability limit state; and thus support decision making in the design process or maintenance planning.

Randomness in physics can be modeled by mechanisms of simple programs, as demonstrated on the proposed stochastic modifications of cellular automaton. In the local modeling section method A exhibits not only stochastic noise, but also an irregular trend without any implicit definition of irregularities. From this point of view the proposed methodology brings the CA concept closer to the diffusion pro- cesses observed in reality. Such irregularities may emerge due to e.g. the concrete casting and/or curing procedure. The resulting estimation of the chloride concen- tration pattern in time may be useful while estimating the service life based on time to initiation reinforcement corrosion caused by the presence of chloride ions.

