called double negative feedback, since the two negative effects bring together a positive loop) can create bistability and hysteresis in the system [4]. Furthermore it has been proposed that this simple module can be responsible for the irreversibility of the Start transition of the cell cycle [20]. Experiments proved the existence of bistability in the cell cycle of budding yeast cells [6], but the irreversibility of this transition was never tested yet.

In this paper we present an analysis of this module by application of both prob- abilistic model checking and stochastic simulations on a simple budding yeast cell cycle model. More specifically we show that irreversibility can be removed from the system by weakening the positive feedback loop. The remainder of the paper is organised as follows: we first briefly describe a model of the budding yeast cell cycle (Sec. 2) concentrating, in Sec 2.1, on one of its basic mechanism, namely the Cdk/CycB-Cdh1/APC interaction, which is what we focus our irreversibility study on. In Section 3 we present probabilistic model checking and describe a quantitative analysis of the stochastic model obtained through verification of probabilistic logical queries. In Section 4 we discuss results obtained through stochastic simulation of the detailed model of the cell cycle that is containing the core mechanism analysed in the previous sections. We summarise our contribution in the conclusive section.

The resulting BlenX code obtained through the translation of the ODEs in [12] is contained in Appendix A. A detailed description of the BlenX language and of the model building procedure is out of the scope of this paper; here we just summarize the sub-set of the BlenX language needed for the understanding of the code of the presented model. We refer the reader to [8,9] for a detailed description of the language and its modeling approach.

Rate functions can be declared using real numbers that will be used as base rate for the elementary mass action law, or arbitrary functions (e.g. a sigmoidal response) that are useful when a box represents an aggregated process or when the precise mechanism of interaction between entities is not known.

numbers obtained with the leap-frog technique [10] by splitting linear congruential generators. Such a seed guarantees that the resulting trajectories are approxima- tively uncorrelated. So doing, more observations can be collected during a given time interval than running a single replication on one computer within the same period of time [11,13,7].

BlenX code for the [12] cell cycle model. The model is composed by three files: the first defines the model, the second declares the functions and the third defines the types definitions. Each element is defined through the let constructor. In the model file, each protein is represented by a bproc and its dynamic behaviour is coded by a series of events (coded with the when constructor). The rates of the different reactions are recorded in the function definition file, as constants (const), variables (var) or more complex mathematical functions (function). For a more detailed description of the translation from ODE to BlenX, we refer the reader to [21].

