functions in different growth media. Units of the 14 model variables are expressed in: numbers of molecules per 108 units of proteic mass. One unit of proteic mass corresponds to one amino acid polymerised within a protein. Four classes of genes are represented. Housekeeping proteins q, the function of which is not represented in the model, account for roughly half of the cell proteic mass across different growth conditions [19]. This relatively constant level of expression is achieved in the model through a negative auto-regulation of their gene expression. Ribosomes r are the sole proteins capable of protein production and are thus necessary in order to repli- cate the mass. We show now the different reactions taking place in the cell model and their associated rate functions.

Transporters t import extracellular nutrients s into the cell. Metabolic enzymes m transform imported nutrients si into a metabolite a with a stoichiometry ns. The stoichiometry represents the quality of the medium, i.e. the yield of a from s. A biological interpretation of ns is that it is a measure of how many metabolic steps or anabolic effort are/is needed by a cell to turn the nutrients present in the envi- ronment into protein precursors. The higher ns, the less metabolic work is needed. This translates in the model into a higher yield of a from si for the same metabolic enzyme number. The transport and metabolic reactions write respectively as:

Cells adjust their resource allocation depending on which medium they grow in. In bacteria for example, the ribosomal content increases as the medium gets more favourable to growth [8]. These adjustments are necessary in order to adapt biomass production in different growth conditions [19,22]. But the reallocation of cellular resources to different functions is not instantaneous, as it is constrained

Reallocation of internal resources to different cellular functions is not instan- taneous. Indeed, allocation arises from competition between different mRNAs for ribosomes. Since mRNAs have non-zero lifetimes, rewiring mRNA produc- tion to one cellular function does not result in a direct update of the mRNA repartitioning to different cellular functions. This motivates the use by liv- ing systems of post-transcriptional regulation mechanisms that are able to act directly at the translation level rather than only tuning transcription.

Default values were used unless otherwise stated. Adapted from [22]. Parameters that have  left of their name have been obtained in [22] by fitting the model to data from [19]. We denote by aa the protein precursors, Amino acids or a in the growth model.

