The infrastructures used in cities to supply power, water and gas are consistently becoming more auto- mated. As society depends critically on these cyber-physical infrastructures, their survivability assessment deserves more attention. In this overview, we first touch upon a taxonomy on survivability of cyber-physical infrastructures, before we focus on three classes of infrastructures (gas, water and electricity) and discuss recent modelling and evaluation approaches and challenges.

We note here that the concept of survivability is not restricted to just this class of infrastructural systems. It is also known for military devices, for example, air- craft combat survivability, and even in agriculture [39]. The literature is abundant with different definitions of survivability. For an overview see for example [33,41]. Distinct definitions stress different aspects of survivability, be it the detection of faults, the defence against attacks or the recovery from various types of disasters. We will focus on the behaviour of a system after a disaster has occurred. Note that we do not introduce a new definition of survivability but state a slightly generalised version of the one in [19]; it reflects an intuitively appealing view on survivability of systems but is therefore also quite informal:

The above definition of survivability does not give at all a precise recipe how to decide whether a system is survivable or not. To overcome this, many approaches have been followed in the literature for the quantitative determination of survivabil- ity [38,40,41,45,63]. Most of them are model-based and suggest some measure on the system (model) behaviour and study its evolution after the occurrence of a dis- aster. It, thus, is the deliberate decision of the person performing the survivability evaluation to choose an appropriate measure.

Note that the definition of survivability in essence addresses the evolution of the system of interest after the occurrence of a disaster. This implies that the process leading to a disaster, does not have to be included in the evaluation of the survivability. This is actually very favourable, as the exact occurrence process and probabilities are mostly very difficult to establish. In this context, we speak of so-called GOOD models for survivability, for Given the Occurrence Of Disasters [63]. In contrast, models in which the disaster occurrence is explicitly modelled, are called ROOD models, for Random Occurrence Of Disasters.

The three approaches have quite a lot in common, however, also have remark- able differences. Two of them (that for gas and electricity) are based on a form of behavioural decomposition [56] in which the failure (or disaster) handling process is modelled separately from the performance of the system, through a combination of a stochastic process describing the failure handling mechanism and steady-state performance measures of interest, much the same as done in performability evalu- ation using Markov-reward models [28]. In contrast, in the approach taken for the water system is truly hybrid, in that the failure handling process and the water transportation and storage are combined in a single integrated model.

To tackle the issue of scalability, a new approach based on Hybrid Petri nets [17] has recently been proposed, where the deterministic evolution is separated from the stochastic evolution of the system [25], by exploiting the quasi-deterministic be- haviour of the system under study, given that failure and repair events are stochastic. Therefore, there are relatively few stochastic transitions, which allows for separating the deterministic from the stochastic evolution of the system, using a conditioning- deconditioning argument. This will speed up the reachability analysis and will allow for a large number of continuous variables in the model, as opposed to previous ap- proaches.

To compute more complex measures of interest over time, the so-called Stochas- tic Time Logic (STL) has been proposed in [23], together with efficient model check- ing procedures that recursively traverse the underlying state space of the hybrid Petri net model. STL allows to formulate intricate state-based and time-bounded- until-based properties; the notion of survivability can easily be expressed using the until operator. Even though the current analysis approach is limited to a single general one-shot transition, it has been shown in [22] that one can effectively model and analyse a real sewage treatment facility, as will be shown next.

Waste water treatment facilities clean sewage water from households and industry in several cleaning steps. Such facilities are dimensioned to accommodate a maximum intake. However, in the case of very bad weather conditions or failures of system components the system might not suffice to accommodate all waste water. We show the model of a real waste water treatment facility, situated in the city of Enschede, the Netherlands, as HPNG and analyse under which circumstances the existing

that settles at the primary and secondary sedimentation tank is accumulated and forwarded to the sludge treatment stage. There it is thickened to reduce its volume for easier off-site transport. The sludge from the primary tank is pumped out and forwarded to the fresh sludge thickener. This is also modelled by an overflow place, denoted Pft. Sludge is pumped out of the place with a small rate and discharged to the digestion tank which is considered a very large tank. The overflow is directed to the filtrate basement. The same procedure is repeated for the accumulated sludge in the second sedimentation tank.

The recently proposed approach in [11] addresses quantitative evaluation of the transient behaviour of a gas distribution networks after the failure of a network element, i.e., again addressing a so-called GOOD model. Notice that the HPNG model cannot directly be used in the context of gas networks; the HPNG model does only address the fluid volume, and (piecewise) constant pump rates; for gas networks, next to the volume also the pressure should betaken into account. Based on pressure, also the pumps speeds can change. Temperature is taken to be constant. Overall, a more advanced modelling and analysis approach is needed for modelling gas distribution networks.

The approach of [11] supports modelling and evaluation of the transient behaviour of a gas distribution network after a pipe failure. As a salient feature, the approach allows the use of non-Markovian transitions that overcome the limits of previous modelling approaches. This section only shows a small example, however, larger cases have been addressed in [32,12]. Future work includes relaxing the assump- tion that recovery actions do not overlap with variations of the network operating conditions.

Therefore, the opportunity for improvement of the reliability of power systems by the deployment of computer and communication technologies has been a topic of interest to system dependability researchers, see, e.g., [10,20,60,47,21,42]. The survivability assessment of power grids was first performed in [8,35,46].

(SAIDI). Pievatolo et al. [50] presents a model where the components fail according to independent semi-Markov processes and the restoration times can follow non- exponential distributions. Using the model, the authors obtain the steady-state outage duration distribution. Elmakias [20] reviews available applications of Markov models in power system reliability assessment, focused on steady-state metrics.

Several studies [60,64,58,62] study the impact of adding Distributed Generation (DG) as a backup source in a power system on reliability metrics such as SAIDI. Martins and Borges [44] present a model for active distribution systems expansion planning and assess expansion alternatives using steady state metrics such as SAIDI. Chopade and Bikdash use graph-theoretic techniques to carry out structural and functional vulnerability analysis for a smart grid [13]. This study indirectly ad- dresses survivability through the analysis of vulnerability. On the communication technology side, Wang et al. [59] evaluate the reliability of wide-area measurement systems (as part of the monitoring infrastructure of the smart grid) using Marko- vian models. However, none of these approaches considers transient measures for survivability. Resilience, defined as the ability of a system to bounce back from a failure, is a quantitative metric related to survivability. Decision support for phased recovery of a power grid, based on an analysis of the resilience of the grid throughout restoration efforts, has been presented in [6].

to be a failure state, i.e., the use of GOOD models; (ii) state space factorisation: modelling the system behaviour after the failure of a single given section; and (iii) state aggregation: aggregating the state of the sections outside the faulty section.

A final assumption in our model is that the failure of communication and the load in the sections are independent of the failed section. Additionally, the model presented here supports a single faulty section only. In ongoing work [46], we are extending this to multiple failures.

The presented method allows us to quantify how various input parameters affect the EAENS. In other work, cf. [36,35], we show how these input parameters can be derived for existing power grids and how investments can be optimised. We have also applied the approach to a distribution automation benchmark derived from a German medium voltage distribution network [35].

The results obtained in the case study indicate that the integration of demand response with failure recovery results in a significant reduction in the amount of energy not supplied after a failure. In the future our models can serve to quantify the trade-offs between investment cost and reliability gains. The presented method is a step towards an holistic approach to guide investment decisions on different parts of a smart grid infrastructure.

aster) handling process is modelled separately from the performance of the system, much the same as done in performability evaluation using Markov-reward models [28]. In contrast, in the approach taken for the water system is truly hybrid, in that the failure handling process and the water transportation and storage are combined in a single integrated model. This fully integrated approach has the advantage of avoiding the approximation due to the behavioural decomposition, however, this comes at the price of a more limited use of stochastic variables (only one general stochastic event can be modelled).

