The communication systems over the past have been changed by rapid advances in Wireless and mobile networks. Addi- tional demand for high speed wireless internet access, voice and multimedia applications has revolutionized growth of Internet. This ever increasing need had led to the popularity of technologies like 3GPP, LTE, 3GPP2, and IEEE 802.16 that provide broadband data rates to wireless users.

This paper is organized as follows. Following this introduc- tory part section two discusses about Quality of Service in Wi- MAX and section three is devoted to studies available in literature. These studies are appropriately divided into differ- ent types so as to enable the readers have a fair understanding about problem of scheduling from different prospective. Fol- lowing this part analysis and inferences are specified and some thoughts that may lead to new future directions in the current field are discussed. Although attempt has been made to explore all possible studies as per the understanding of the authors but this study shall not be in any sense considered exhaustive.

Scheduling is the method by which data flows are given access to system resources (communications bandwidth in this case). This is usually done to load balance a system effectively and/or achieve a target quality of service. In theory, there are 3 sched- ulers needed for IEEE 802.16, one for outbound transmission scheduling at the Base Station for downlink another for uplink burst scheduling at the BS and last is the outbound transmis- sion scheduling at the SS. The goal of this section is to provide better understanding about the issues for the design of sched- ulers. Since WiMAX has to deal with heterogeneous traffic therefore the major design issues concerning the development of schedulers may be stated as under

WiMAX has two modes of operation: Point to Multi Point (PMP) mode and Mesh mode. PMP mode consists of one BS and multiple SS, communication between different SS takes place only through BS whereas in mesh mode SS have the ability to communicate among themselves i.e. every node may be treated as BS. A central node connected to outside world may be consid- ered as mesh BS. In Mesh mode the scheduling is either central in which the mesh BS schedules all SSs or distributed scheduling in which transmissions in two hop neighborhood are coordinated to avert collisions. This study focuses on PMP mode for the majority of time. The approaches as applied to scheduling in PMP mode may be divided into following sub categories:

DRR scheduler as proposed by Shreedhar et al. [18] associ- ates a fixed quantum and a deficit counter with each flow/queue. Deficit counter is incremented by a fixed amount after each round for every flow. A comparison between deficit counter and length of packet decides whether the head of the (queue)i will be de-queued or not and if de-queued, counter is decre- mented by length of packet. It puts a limitation that only one packet at most can be sent for each flow. It provides fairness for variable length packets but the major problem in DRR is calculating the size of head of queue packet which was not pos- sible for uplink traffic and i.e. why DRR had been implemented for downlink and SS schedulers in most of the studies.

Wongthavarawat et al. [26,27] were the first to introduce the concept of hierarchal schedulers for scheduling problem of Wi- MAX. They performed the scheduling of different service clas- ses using different algorithms. UGS was allotted fixed time slots, rtPS was scheduled using Earliest Deadline First (EDF), nrtPS uses Weighted Fair Queuing (WFQ) while BE class was scheduled using Round Robin(RR) algorithm. The inter-class scheduling follows fixed priority with UGS having highest prior- ity followed by rtPS, nrtPS and BE. Every SS is made to follow a traffic contract to avoid starvation and this contract is included in each SS however only uplink scheduling has been considered. Sun et al. [28] proposed two different schedulers for BS and

Maode Ma et al. proposed in [31] a three-tier scheduling framework in which DL and UL respective loads could be left unbalanced. They divided scheduling scheme into 3 tiers, Tier 1 scheduling scheme exists at BS only. It performs bandwidth allocation coarsely across service class and across SS. Tier 2 scheduler determines the number of time slots granted by the BS for different connections within each service class at each

One more cross layer mechanism that communicates with application layer has been proposed by Triantafyllopoulou et al. [39,40]. The proposed scheduler works at BS and SS and it communicates with application layer as part of optimi- zation process. Although the technique benefits in terms of QoS and system capacity but it adds a lot of complexity at BS.

Jin-Yup Hwang et al. [43] divided traffic models into two types namely NRTV for real time and FTP for non real time traffic and stated another adaptive traffic allocation scheduling scheme that provides priority to a traffic class group and to SSs belonging under that class group. This priority is based on traf- fic type and maximum allowed delay time. The Real time traffic is scheduled using RR and non real time using Proportional Fair algorithms, similarly real time packets are preferentially allocated. Ruangchaijatupon et al. [44] tried to impart fairness to the adaptive scheduling scheme by using the concept of pri- ority queuing and deficit queuing and used an adaptive deficit quantum to handle priority queue. This quantum was based on current queue size and channel capacity and the algorithm assigns this quantum to a particular flow depending upon whether the traffic is in burst or non-burst state.

One of the most recent work in the field of dynamic schedul- ing has been done by Fathi et al. [48] where a joint scheduling and CAC method is proposed. The whole process is divided into two stages, in stage one weighted fair queuing is used to assign initial weights to different traffic classes in the order rtPS > nrtPS > BE and bandwidth allocated is calculated as function of packet dropping probability, average arrival and departure rates of a class. Law of moving averages was employed to calcu- late new arrival and departure rates. New portion of bandwidth was allocated to any flow at stage II and then an appropriate scheduler was employed to schedule packets.

This category of scheduling strategies tends to formulate scheduling problem as an optimization problem that aims to optimize resource allocation to different SS/service flows. Since soft computing techniques like Genetic Algorithm, Neural Networks, game theory etc. are potential candidates for solv- ing such problems therefore these techniques have been succes- sively applied to solve such problems.

Neural networks have also been proposed to solve band- width allocation and scheduling problem by [54]. A feed for- ward neural network with a single scalar output had been chosen to make the decision of allocating bandwidth needs of different users. The authors of [55,56] have used the neu- ro-fuzzy based methods to provide QoS and solve scheduling problem. They divided the scheduling problem in two stages. In first stage fuzzy logic is used to provide priorities to differ- ent services based on queue size and second stage uses a multi layer neural network for scheduling. The input to the first layer of neural network is the output of fuzzy network while layer two and three comprises of Kohenen and Grossberg neural layers respectively.

Effect of different routing schemes on scheduling algo- rithms need to be studied. There has been negligible work in this direction. One of the few studies in this direction has been by Stephan Nosh et al. [58] who has used Interference Load Aware Routing (ILR) and Inter- ference Load Aware Multipath Routing (ILMR) rout- ing to improve acceptance ratio of flows that are served and class based scheduling to improve through- put and acceptance ratio.

Pricing issue has not been studied by any of the research- ers. To the best of authors knowledge no paper has been found that could have considered scheduling with pric- ing issues to achieve optimization of revenue and resources. All commercial implementations need this issue to be considered.

The problem of scheduling in NP-hard and therefore a soft computing technique like GA, Fuzz Logic and Neu- ral Network is applicable whereby the given technique might be helpful in estimating, predicting or shaping the traffic patterns. This is one of the hottest area of research in WiMAX currently. Although enough studies are available but still it would be interesting to see how AI techniques perform in the field of scheduling.

This paper at large discussed various issues of schedulers and explored various techniques presently available in literature. Although a number of methods are available but still there are some of the areas which are not quite explored namely the application of soft computing/optimization techniques like Genetic Algorithm, neural networks, fuzzy logic etc. Using these approaches together with information from higher layers can act as a major contributor in the field of scheduling. The issue of pricing into current or new techniques is still an open area. The ongoing popularity of WiMAX in developing coun- tries is an indication that the future belongs to WiMAX tech- nology. In the light of above it can be argued that scheduling and bandwidth allocation schemes are the heart of Quality of Service support and WiMAX performance. A lot of investiga- tions had been made in this area however gaps in studies pre- sented in this paper show that there is still strong scope for improvement.

