Besides its practical agility for statistical analysis [7,9,21], the main advantages of rule-based modelling in our work are its compactness for describing rules and its model refinement to incorporate less-compact details. Our aim in this paper is to show that a certain property of the evolution of RNAi is sufficiently captured by this compact modelling to allow polymerization to synthesize dsRNA. To ensure this, the model is refined in such a manner that the property obtained in the compact model is shown to be invariant under some appropriate class of model refinements.

We show that, with only primer-dependent synthesis, the population of each type of siRNA becomes extinct. Hence, RNAi ceases to be sustained. The probability of these extinctions is proved to be 1 by the compact description of the rules, and the probability is shown to remain invariant under plausible classes of model refinements, which globalize the compact rules by incorporating contextual traits of the complexes. Then, as soon as primer-independent synthesis is augmented, RNAi is shown to become sustainable because the extinction probabilities become less than 1.

In this section, we model RNAi syntactically using kappa calculus [10]. In our rule- based modelling of RNAi, each siRNA is considered a primitive agent, denoted by Sk, where the index k (called the type) designates the position inside the dsRNA from which the agent originates. (In this paper, siRNA stands for single-stranded one.) Types are natural numbers 1, 2,...,m from downstream to upstream (3j to 5j of mRNA). T denotes the set of all types. Each primitive agent has three sites

condition that the hydrogen (res. ligation) bond must connect to the template mRNA (res. to the predecessor of Sk). This rule is compact in that only the local part of the domains and ranges of the rule are specified. The contextual siRNA so far produced (i.e., Si with i < k) and the template mRNA (i.e., the upper strand mRNA having the complementary site for the hydrogen bond h of Sk) are not relevant to this rule.

Proof. In primer-dependent synthesis, it is directly observed that no children of type Sk with k < n are produced by a parent of type Sn. In contrast, in primer- independent synthesis, every type of offspring is produced immediately, thus this process becomes irreducible.	2

problem of combinatorial explosion. The results of this paper can be seen as the exactness of abstraction employed by local descriptions of rules. A theoretical for- mulation of the dual notions may characterize the exactness of an abstract model in terms of some invariance under appropriate model refinements.

