We introduce a potential application of two-dimensional linear algebra to concurrency. Motivated by the structure of categories of wirings, in particular in action calculi but also in other models of concurrency, we investigate the notion of symmetric monoidal sketch for providing an abstract notion of category of wirings. Every symmetric monoidal sketch generates a generic model. If the sketch is single-sorted, the generic model can be characterised as a free structure on 1, with structure defined coalgebraically. We investigate how these results generalise results about categories of wirings given by Milner and others, and we outline how the constructs may be extended to model controls and dynamics.

In this section, we investigate categories of wirings and their structure. Our leading example arises from the work on action calculi and its semantic models (see [10,11,25,26,27] and the papers cited therein). A fundamental part of the definition of an action calculus was that of its underlying wiring category. Assuming, as was the case in the leading examples, that the set of primes was

The idea is as follows. In action calculus, composition in the category of actions is used to model data-flow, and tensor product is used to model parallel composition. Given a piece of data, one can copy it or one can discard it. Parallel composition is, by its nature, symmetric. Thus one has symmetries, diagonals, and discards. The following fact was recognised, although perhaps not explicitly stated, in the action calculus work.

We can give a further characterisation of the category of wirings, involving some more sophisticated category theory as follows. In the definition of strict monoidal category, one has a monoid Ob(C) of objects of the category. But one also has a notion of monoid in a monoidal category. We shall restrict attention to commutative monoids in a symmetric strict monoidal category.

For this paper, we shall simply refer to these as models rather than strict models. One can routinely define the notion of a map of models between two models of S in a strict symmetric monoidal category C: a map of models is a natural transformation that respects the structure of S. Models and maps of models yield a category M ods(S, C). For small strict symmetric monoidal categories B and C, there is a homcategory SMs(B, C) as usual. The central result of [23] yields

So far, we have focused on the freeness of our constructions, in particular in considering the generic model. But freeness is quite a common phenomenon when dealing with categories with given structure. Typically much more pro- found, and a phenomenon that is distinctive of linear algebera as opposed to universal algebra in general, is the situation where one has not only freeness but also cofreeness, i.e., one has coalgebraic structure. So we explore that now.

In the earlier sections of the paper, we have given a category theoretic founda- tion for wiring. But concurrency involves far more than wiring. Specifically, we need to add accounts of controls and dynamics. There are several choices here, and it is not entirely clear to us which will prove to be definitive. But

