This paper discusses an approach to combining user and system models within a common mathematical framework, to yield an integrated view of human-system interaction. As- pects of systems that affect usability can be described and reasoned about in terms of the conjoint behaviour of user and computer. The paper outlines the basic ideas behind the approach through a case study. The paper then reviews what has been achieved so far in this endeavour and concludes with a discussion of prospects and open questions.

This paper describes the origins of syndetic modelling, gives an overview of what has been achieved so far and concludes with some thoughts on future directions. The work originated in an EU-funded project, Amodeus II (Esprit Basic Research Action 7040) which brought together researchers from a number of disciplines, including computer science and cognitive psychology, with a common interest in developing methods for designing and analysing interactive systems [5]. In the main the Amodeus project looked at integrating the results of HCI modelling. Such an approach, where the underlying theory is used only by experts in a limited do- main, and is then discarded, may be reasonable in certain design contexts, where the technology or human aspects are relatively well understood. This is not the

The basic idea of syndetic modelling is to bring together an approach to computer system modelling and an approach to cognitive modelling within a common frame- work. Syndetic modelling as presented here is based on a commitment to a particu- lar system modelling approach (interactors) and a particular approach to describing human cognition (ICS - Interacting Cognitive Subsystems). There is also a com- mitment to a particular mathematical framework, in this case Modal Action Logic (MAL) [20,28,22] (or to be more precise, an early version of MAL). These choices are to some extent arbitrary. They were motivated by the context in which synde- tic modelling was developed (the approaches represented in the Amodeus project) and a sense that these pieces could be drawn together in a useful way. Other au- thors [9] have explored the use of other formal notations - LOTOS and the interval temporal logic Mexitl, for describing aspects of ICS. The choice of an appropriate mathematics is a question to which we return later in this paper.

principles embodied within ICS can be formulated as an axiomatic model in the same way as any other information processing system. This means that the cogni- tive resources of a user can be expressed in the same framework as the behaviour of a computer-based interface, allowing the models to be integrated directly. As we have used the interactor framework to model devices and interfaces, it has been convenient to use the same structure and to represent aspects of the cognitive model. Once cognitive and device models are in the same form, we can use the expressive power of the formal representation to describe and reason about how the cognitive systems of a user are deployed in performing tasks with the system. In principle, there is no need to use any one specific technique for modelling ICS; the schema notation of Z, PVS theories, or indeed, as Bowman and Faconti [9] have shown, the concept of process could all be used. However, in a recent paper [4], the con- cept of an interactor has been shown to have value as a generic building block for capturing the behaviour of structured systems, and as always there are trade-offs in how explicitly the structures in such a model are mapped onto the constructs of a specification language. We will return to this issue in the final section of this paper. The model of ICS we have developed to date is based around the main re- sources described above - transformation processes and mental representations. A full discussion of our model can be found elsewhere [14,15]; here we provide an

MATIS includes the capability of the system to handle deictic input. Deixis is a feature of human-human interaction, so one can make an informal case that it represents a potentially useful tool for human-computer interaction. To explore whether this is in fact the case, we construct a syndetic model by combining the MATIS specification with the model of ICS, allowing us then to conjecture about the conditions under which deixis will be possible to a user of the system.

cessing cycle referred to as a PMP loop. That is, propositional information pro- duced by mpl may be used by processes in prop to construct new mpl representa- tions. The PMP loop and PIP loop needed for speech indicate a cyclic interchange of representations between two or more processes, as described in [14].

Although the image records of the subsystems can also be seen as a resource, they are somewhat more problematic. Image records contain an episodic record of all input arriving at a subsystem, and through a principal of revival, incoming data at the input array may lead to a process operating on a revived representation from memory. This raises a number of issues.

adopted in ICS builds on these results. However, the scale and complexity of these theories is such they have not been incorporated into the model to date. A key prob- lem is that the operation of memory is linked intimately to the structure of mental representations and the actions of the transducers within the overall system.

Sophisticated mdoels of audition and auditory scene analysis have also been set out, again with strong links to practical application in signal generation and processing [12]. There seem to be some common factors between the approaches developed in these two areas and those used in the wider context of signal process- ing. Whilst this might not be unexpected, it is of particular interest in our context since one of the fundamental assumptions underpinning the ICS framework is that the human information processor can be viewed as a distributed collection of sub- systems which are each based on a common architecture. While each subsystem receives particular kinds of mental representations, operationally the systems are the same. So, for example, the operations that the visual system carries out on visual representations should correspond at some level to those that the acoustic system carries out on sound. One of our long-term goals could thus be re-stated as the discovery of mathematical models for these fundamental operations. That these operations also reflect processing at other, in particular, higher, levels of mental processing remains to be validated.

Secondly we note that increasingly computer systems are used not by single users, but by groups of users. Emergency vehicle dispatch systems are just one ex- ample. In order to understand the behaviour of such systems, we need to be able to consider the behaviour of groups of users, not just single users. We are a long way from being able to do this formally within the context of syndetic modelling, but we may note that a long term goal is to evolve a framework within which emergent group behaviour can be considered as well as individual behaviour.

