The goal of the ongoing KeY Project [1] is to make the application of formal methods possible and effective in a real-world software development setting. One of the main products of the KeY Project is the KeY Tool, which allows the specification and verification of JAVA CARD [16] programs. The KeY Prover is an integrated interactive and automated theorem prover that is used in the KeY tool to reason about programs and specifications.

As program verification cannot be done fully automatically for realistic programs, it was important to make the interactive user interface of the KeY prover intuitive and powerful. In this paper, we describe the KeY prover from a user interface perspective, without going to deeply into technical details. We will however present the idea of taclets, which are at the basis of interactive and automated proof construction in the KeY prover.

The right pane contains a list of opened proofs. In this case, only one problem file demo.key is opened, but in general there might be a number of proof obligations from a program verification task here. It seemed preferable to allow switching between proofs this way to opening one window for each of a possibly large number of proofs.

taclets are different from many systems based on higher-order logic, where the justification of a derived rule is done in some meta-logic. Proof obligations for taclets are in the same logic as the one the taclets act upon. See [3] for a detailed description of how proof obligations are computed.

No provision is currently made in the user interface for the interactive construction of taclets. They are given in the textual form shown above and read into the system by a parser. In future versions, a possibility to define taclets within the user interface might be added to the system.

The KeY system has repeatedly been used in undergraduate education, and students have been able to show simple properties of JAVA programs using the prover. We take this to be an indication that our user interface is good enough to allow it to be used by non-experts after a reasonable amount of coaching. Some larger case studies conducted by more experienced members of the KeY group are presented in [1].

