Summing up, wireless networks raises many issues that intrinsically involve several quantitative aspects that must be taken into account in the computa- tion. In general, those aspects are considered separately and studied within a mathematical setting that models the physical characteristics of devices and external environment with respect to routing algorithms. As far as we know, a formal framework for expressing the above discussed phenomena in a uniform framework is still lacking.

Graph-based techniques can be adopted for modelling inter-networking sys- tems. Indeed, edges can be used to represent components of the system, while nodes model the synchronisation ports of the components. Two (or more) edges sharing a node represent components connected on a communication port; adjacent edges can synchronise. Graphs can be opportunely synchro- nised by means of an operational semantics. Graph rewriting based on edge replacement and synchronisation was introduced in [2,5] and related to dis- tributed constraint satisfaction problems in [14]. Mobility has been recently considered in [9,10,6,16] where synchronised hyperedge replacement (SHR) has been investigated.

for expressing computations in wireless networks and modelling the physical environment. As will be more clear later (Section 5) the environment resembles a luxuriant vegetation of a tropical jungle with lianas where Tarzan (a wireless device) swings and yells looking for Jane (his partner). Even though we do not address wireless protocols design, this approach can also help designers in correctly specifying their protocols.

Structure of the paper. Section 2 briefly discusses the difficulties that traditional models of distributed computations have when wireless communi- cations are under consideration. Section 3 gives an intuitive interpretation of SHR. Section 4 reports the formal definitions of hypergraphs and produc- tions; moreover, an intuitive operational interpretation of SHR is given in Section 4.3 by means of an example. In order to maintain the presentation as simple as possible, we relegated the formal definition of SHR in Appendix A. Productions for Tarzan are defined in Section 5. Final remarks are in Section 6.

SHR is obtained by graph rewriting combined with constraint solving. More specifically, we use context-free productions labelled with actions useful for co- ordinating the simultaneous application of productions. Coordinated rewriting allows the propagation of synchronisation all over the graph where productions are applied. Determining the productions to synchronise at a given stage cor- responds to solving a distributed constraint satisfaction problem [14].

Only signals with non-null intensity can propagate. The intuition is that Sf,d acquires from the environment the node w which is the next node along the direction d and the node z where a device is possibly connected. After the synchronisation, the weaker signal edge Sf,d is attached to w and the informa- tion edge S accounts for interacting with the devices (possibly) encountered in that direction. The productions for S-edges are:

The first production considers the case where the information reach a de- vice connected to z, while the second production states that the message can disappear without being received 2 . This models the case that no device is connected to z. Action m in general depends on the messages that must be ex- changed. Here, we do not consider the informations that are relevant because they depend on the applications one wants to describe.

Similarly to signal edges, device edges have arity 1. The main character- istics of devices we are interested in are: (i ) the energy level, and (ii ) the transmitting capacity. We consider constant the transmission power of a de- vice 3 , while the energy level is dealt with as done for the intensity of signal edges. Device edges are labelled by Dr; r is the carrier sense radius of the device, and b represents the residual energy of D (for simplicity we can assume that b is a positive integer).

Production (3) states that the energy level of a device can non-deterministically decrease. Condition b' = b captures the case of D representing a plugged in devices. Production (4) can appear strange at a first glance; it states that a discharged device suddenly acquires some energy. Basically, this models the fact that a device is turned on, at a given time.

first one, the second being analogous. If a device attached on z wants to move toward x2, then the environment edge asks for the z-node of its neighbour. On reception, the device will attach itself on that node. Notice that, apart from the labels, this is exactly the same mechanism described in Section 4.3, indeed, in order to commit device movements, environment edges must perform the complementary actions of l:

Traditional models of distributed systems assume that the addresses im- plicitly contains informations on the position of remote resources with respect to each component. Namely, the address of a resource implicitly describes how to reach it. A paradigmatic example of this addressing mechanism being IP-addressing. This is a strong assumption in wireless communicating systems and probably is one of the main difficulties for formally modelling them. A component that knows the address of a wireless device has no information on the position of that device.

