Non-intrusive appliance load monitoring (NIALM) aims at reconstructing the electricity consumption of household appliances based only on the cumulative consumption data collected via a smart meter. Various approaches have been proposed to perform NIALM including various types of Hidden Markov Model (HMM) offspring. Most do not consider the explicit duration of an appliance activation. Virtual stochastic sensors (VSS) and their underlying Hidden non-Markovian Models (HnMM) can include explicit process durations. This paper tests whether VSS can solve the NIALM task, and analyzes the methods reconstruction accuracy on the publicly available SMART* data set. Models of the household appliances with different inherent states are automatically extracted from the appliance data. The combined model, including a subset of the appliances, is then used to disaggregate the cumulative energy consumption data. Experiments show a reconstruction accuracy of up to 90% with appropriate method parameters, showing that VSS can compete with existing NIALM approaches.

Declining reserves in fossil fuels and an increasing energy demand put a strain on the future energy market. Developing alternative energy sources is one way of countering that problem. Another approach, that should not be disregarded is the potential in energy saving, not just in industry, but also in private households. In order to do that, consumers first need to be aware of their consumption patterns.

Virtual stochastic sensors (VSS) were built to reconstruct hard-to-obtain mea- sures of interest from measurable quantities, where the relationship is not a closed analytical expression, but can be represented by a discrete stochastic model, e.g. a Hidden non-Markovian Model (HnMM). These models can by construction rep- resent non-Markovian state holding times, arbitrary states numbers and multiple parallel processes. A Masters thesis was conducted in order to test the applicability of VSS and HnMM to NIALM. [23] We were able to build and apply models with up to three states per appliance and non-Markovian state holding times, reaching competitive reconstruction accuracy. This paper summarizes the thesis and points to future research to provide a general approach using VSS for NIALM.

The next section will present related and previous work on non-intrusive appli- ance load monitoring and on virtual stochastic sensors in the next section. Then we elaborate our case study of NIALM through VSS on the SMART* data set. In the experiment section we evaluate the capabilities and limitations of the approach, followed by conclusions and a outlook.

Applying VSS to the problem of non-intrusive appliance load monitoring seems promising for several reasons. HMM and several related modeling paradigms have been successfully applied to NIALM. HnMM enable the modeling of explicit state holding times, which was shown to improve accuracy for NIALM. Furthermore, our method does not inherently restrict the number of states per appliance, making realistic load modeling and reconstruction possible.

The Smart* data set contains circuit level energy consumption data, where a circuit can represent a single appliance (e.g. Dryer, DuctHeater ) or a set of appliances (e.g. Master Outlets, Kitchen Lights). Both will be treated the same and used synonymously in the following.

The single appliance ASPNs were combined into one ASPN representing the com- plete set of household appliances with their usage states and respective energy consumption behavior. Each appliance model contained one token in the place rep- resenting the current state of the appliance. The state space of the model is then the set of currently active states of the different appliances, represented in the marking of the ASPN through the distribution of the tokens.

The emissions of the currently active tangible appliance states were summed up to result in a cumulative energy consumption. This combined model contained 25 consumers or circuits with three to seven states each, resulting in over 3E11 possible discrete model states. This model was unfortunately too large, both in memory consumption and computational effort to process even one step of the Decoding algorithm.

The accuracy of the path reconstruction was 0.95 for measure 1 and 0.78 for measure 2. The deterioration in Version 2 being solely due to a degradation in reconstruction accuracy of the Dryer states. Overall, this test demonstrated that recontructing energy consumption from cumulative data using VSS is possible.

Dryer on the chosen test day. Longer traces of 3 600h to 36 000h improve the accuracy, and hold practical value. A trace length of several days yields no further improvement in accuracy, and therefore trace lengths of 3 600s and 36 000s will be tested in the performance experiment.

Most appliances could be reconstructed with an accuracy of 0.9 or better. The Master Outlets and the Duct Heater show the least accurate reconstructions. For the Duct Heater this was probably due to the extremely noisy data produced by the device, which make it inherently hard to reconstruct. A related reason is also that the noise could not be accurately represented in a three state model, and that a model with more appliance states for the Duct Heater could improve its reconstruction accuracy. This is however a topic for future research. The Master Outlets represent not a single appliance, but a variable set, where probably the actual appliances plugged in and used differed from training to test data.

