Abstract Location-based routing protocols use position information for making packet forward- ing decisions, assuming perfect location information. Unlike topological routing algorithms, they do not need to exchange and maintain routing information. They work nearly stateless. However, in practice there could be significant errors in obtaining location estimates.

In this paper, the power consumption of two routing proto- cols will be investigated. The first one is GeRaf, which is one of the location based routing protocols [4]. It is designed for wire- less ad-hoc and sensor networks. In this protocol, at any hop, the sender node chooses the neighbor that is closest to the des- tination as next relay. While in the second protocol, MECF [5], at any hop, the sender node chooses the neighbor that is closest

In this paper, a new mathematical model for localization errors in wireless sensor networks will be developed. This mod- el is based on Gaussian distribution to comprise all the sources of location errors in WSN. Using this model, the impact of localization errors on the power consumption of location based routing protocols will be investigated. Finally, the model will be verified by simulating the power consumption of two location based routing protocols.

There are many sources of location errors in the localization process. One of them is inaccurate measurement of distance or bearing due to sensing technology limitations or environ- ment noise. Also, localization algorithms may cause errors due to the resource limitation of the sensors [11]. There are many other factors that contribute to the final error in the localization process such as network density, uncertainties in anchor locations and anchor density. Therefore, a Gaussian distribution is more appropriate to model location errors due to the many uncertainties involved in localization process. In this study, it will be assumed that we have large number of sen- sors deployed randomly in Euclidean plane. The location error at each node is modeled by a Gaussian distribution [12], with zero mean and finite standard deviation. The zero mean assumption follows the law of large numbers:

Location based routing protocols assume that the obtained location information is perfect. However, in reality there are errors in the location information. These errors are produced by the localization process. Many researches focused on this fact. [8] Introduces an analysis of the errors impact on location based routing in wireless ad hoc networks. This analysis is based on the assumption that the localization algorithm has an error characteristic that is circularly symmetric, i.e., the localization algorithm would localize a node anywhere within a disk around its actual position. The researchers analyzed and simulated only specific protocol description and observe the packet delivery ratio and the power consumption of that

To evaluate the power consumption of location based routing protocols, we simulate two protocols GeRaf and MECF using matlab in two cases. First, the power consumption of the two protocols in case there are no locations errors will be com- pared, and then the power consumption of them when location errors exist will be compared as well. It is worth pointing out that GeRaF is an integrated MAC/routing protocol. It is a receiver initiated protocol in which nodes nominate themselves as potential relays, depending on their location. Since our study focuses on power consumption of routing protocols, we omit the complex mechanism associated with MAC layer and only present the routing operation in a GeRaF. In this study, we monitor only power consumption and its relation with location errors, and other performance metrics (such as packet delivery ration, delay, throughput) may be included in future work.

Mohsen Kadi is a master student at Informa- tion Technology Engineering Faculty, Damascue University. He holds Bachelor degree in networks and operating system from Information Technology Engineering Faculty at Aleppo University in Syria 2010. He is a senior Net developer and Linux system administrator.

