Machining is one of the fundamental processes in the production of critical components for automotive and aerospace industries. Despite the emergence of new manufacturing technologies, broaching remains the most reliable and precise process for many applications because of its simultaneous productivity and precision [1]. The broaching process involves significant costs, so the main objective is to minimize the force applied, the temperature generated, tool wear and the risk of damaging the surface of the workpiece.

One direct effect of the tool wear is the increase in temperature. Simulation techniques allowed researchers to learn about difficult-to- measure variables such as cutting temperature. Several researchers studied the behavior of cutting forces and temperature during the broaching process using 2D simulations. In this regard, Vogtel et al. [6] reported changes in cutting force and temperature in response to vari- ations in the rake angle and cutting speeds. However, there is limited research regarding the impact of cutting-edge radius (microgeometry) on these variables. This aspect was explored in works such as [11,12] for milling and turning operations, respectively, where sensitivity analyses, simulations, and high-speed experiments have corroborated the signif- icant effect. Even Rodriguez et al. [13] tested the influence of cutting edge radius after drag-finishing polishing before applying coatings. They further concluded that the coating technique is strongly affected by both the pre and post-cutting edge treatment.

Works, such as those by Childs [21] and Jaspers [22] experimentally verified the Zorev shear stress distribution [23], which divides the tool- chip contact into two zones: the adhesion and the sliding friction zones, each with their respective friction coefficients. Grzesik [24] also showed analytically that the apparent coefficient of friction consists of an adhesion component and a deformation component. Furthermore, considering the practical importance from an engineering standpoint, the reality facing broaching component manufacturers is that friction is not only in the tool-chip interaction. It also occurs in the tool-workpiece interaction and is present dynamically around the cutting edge radius [10]. Therefore, all these interactions directly affect chip formation, tool life, surface quality and process energy consumption, respectively.

In machining, the coefficient of friction in the tool-workpiece inter- action is directly related. The coefficient of friction increases as the flank wear rate increases [4]. Works like [22] focused on determining the friction in the presence of flank wear during the machining of titanium Ti-6Al-4 V and nickel-based IN-100 alloys. This work concluded that the coefficient of friction differs with the change in workpiece material and slightly with the leading-edge geometry. However, the reported results

all cuts made. The stiffness of the machine is well known [27] and provides excellent rigidity, minimizing vibrations. All orthogonal broaching experiments were performed under dry conditions. The tool used in the experiments was an uncoated sub-micro grain tungsten carbide tool with a 6 %Co composition and an 8 mm cutting width.

[30] proposed quasi-stationary friction and an average friction coeffi- cient value, while Arrazola et al. [10], showed that the friction coeffi- cient is not constant and recommended a variable friction coefficient empirically obtained from cutting tests. Furthermore, the authors showed that rake angle, clearance angle, and uncut chip thickness are parameters affecting friction.

facture and the favorable results found in previous research on machining Inconel 718 [11,33,34]. Moreover, the results demonstrated that as the planning time Tm increased, the radius obtained also increased, while the average roughness of the cutting edge decreased. It is worth noting that due to the nature of the contact between brush bristles and cutting edge, this preparation technology has limitations in controlling the microform variation and symmetry/asymmetry.

