Arsenic is a neurotoxic substance that makes the brain susceptible to free radicals. Thymoquinone (TQ) is a potent antioxidant extracted from Nigella sativa seeds. It scavenges free radicals and prevents the cell damage resulted from oxidative substances. In this study, the ameliorative effect of TQ in arsenic-induced neurotoxicity was investigated. Rats were treated for 21 days with: distilled water, 20 mg/kg sodium arsenate, 10 mg/kg TQ, and arsenate followed by TQ. Cerebral cortex, cerebellum and brain stem were removed for the measurements of different physiological parameters. Cerebelli were prepared for histopathological studies. Arsenate treatment caused a decrease in the levels of norepinephrine (NE), dopamine (DA), acetylcholine esterase (AChE) and Na+-K+-ATPase activities in cerebral cortex, cerebel- lum, and brain stem of rats. Similarly, the levels of glutathione (GSH), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), glu- tathione reductase (GR), superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT) were declined. In contrast, serotonin

and CAT, in the cerebral cortex, cerebellum, and brain stem. Likewise, AChE and Na+-K+-ATPase activities were increased after TQ post-treatment. In conclusion, TQ ameliorated the neurotoxic effect of arsenate and suppressed the oxidative stress induced in the nervous system through its antioxidant mechanism.

Neurotoxicity is caused by the exposure to certain chemicals that affect the nervous system. It results from the degeneration of the neuronal cells [10]. Symptoms of neurotoxicity may include brain damage, dementia oramnesia, anxiety, depression, limb weakness and blurred vision [11]. Neurotoxicity occurs upon the exposure to natural or synthetic toxic substances, called neurotox- ins. Neurotoxins such as: aluminum, mercury, copper, arsenic, lead and manganese are characterized by their abilities to alter the nor- mal activity of the nervous system causing neuronal damage [12,13].

Arsenic is an environmental contaminant found naturally in ground water [14]. Other less common sources of arsenic exposure are incineration of arsenic preserved wood products, inhalation of indoor air polluted with coal combustion, consumption of tainted foods, ingestion of kitchen dust, and tobacco smoke [15]. It is ranked the first among toxicants posing significant potential threats to human health [16]. Arsenic exposure makes the brain tissue of rat vulnerable to free radical attack resulting in abnormal apoptosis of neural cells [17]. It could pass through the blood-brain barrier, invade the brain parenchyma and induce brain toxicity. Brain toxicity includes, altered cholinergic and monoaminergic

Sodium arsenate (E.C. No. 231-547-5) and TQ (EC No. 207-721- 1) were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA). TQ was first dissolved in DMSO then was diluted with normal saline to a final DMSO concentration of 0.1%. The solution was then given orally.

The assay of nitrite/nitrate (NO) in brain homogenate was done according to the method of Berkels et al. [26]. In acid medium and in the presence of nitrite the formed nitrous acid diazotises sul- phanilamide, which is coupled with N-(1-naphthyl) ethylenedi- amine. The resulting azo dye has a bright reddish-purple color, which was measured at 540 nm.

compared with control values. After the treatment with TQ, a sig- nificant increase in the level of NE in all the tested brain homoge- nate was observed as compared with As-treated group. Similarly, the concentration of DA declined significantly (P < 0.05) in As- treated group as compared with the control group in all studied brain areas. The greatest decrease was found in brain stem. The

in the body resulting in nucleic acid damage of the nerve cells [28]. In the present study, treatment of female rats with 20 mg/kg arse- nate for 21 days induced a decline in DA and NE and an elevation in 5-HT in cerebral cortex, cerebellum, and brain stem. This result agrees in part with Mejia et al. [29] who studied the effect of arsenic on discrete brain regions of rats. The study revealed a decrease in norepinephrine levels and an increase in levels of dopa- mine, serotonin, and their metabolites. In another study, exposure to moderate levels of arsenic (1, 2, and 4 mg/L) for 60 days reduced the levels of NE, DA, and 5-HT in both the cerebrum and cerebel- lum of 7-weeks old mice. Similarly, mRNA levels of monoamine synthetases (including dopamine b-hydroxylase, tyrosine hydroxy- lase, and tryptophan hydroxylase) were reduced after arsenic exposure [30]. High levels of arsenic cause insufficiency of dopaminergic and serotonergic signaling in the corpus striatum, hippocampus, and frontal cortex [19,31]. It could be concluded from those previous studies and the present result that the levels

[39]. Treatment of rats with TQ after exposure to arsenate in the present study, decreased the elevated levels of 5-HT, MAD and increased the lowered levels of NE, DA, and GSH. The enzymatic antioxidant system, GPx, GR, SOD, and CAT were also increased in the cerebral cortex, cerebellum, and brain stem. Similarly, Safhi

[42] investigated the effect of TQ on NO production by macro- phages after lipopolysaccharide stimulation. They found that TQ suppressed NO production by macrophage. It mediates its inhibi- tory effect on NO production via reduction of iNOS mRNA and pro- tein expression which might be important in ameliorating the inflammatory and autoimmune conditions. Likewise, TQ decreased

Locomotion is affected by arsenic exposure in rodent models. Early studies demonstrated impaired motor coordination and delayed spontaneous alteration in rats administered with arsenic (36 mg/L) for four months [8]. Low levels of arsenic seem to induce hyperactivity in male mice, while high levels induce hypo-activity [37,45]. In the present study, female rats were hypoactive after arsenate treatment.

Altered motor coordination and locomotion could arise from abnormality in cholinergic functioning. In this study, AChE activity declined in cerebral cortex, cerebellum, and brain stem of female rats treated with arsenate, which may be the reason of the hypo- activity observed in rats. The study of Yadav et al. [46] performed on female rats exposed to 20 mg/kg arsenic showed a reduction in AChE activity and ChAT labeling in the hippocampus and frontal cortex. Exposure to less arsenic (5 mg/kg body weight) also inhib- ited AChE activity in the brain and was associated with poorer per- formance in operant learning [47]. Another study demonstrated that AChE activity decreased with increasing arsenic concentra- tions in male rats after five days of exposure [48]. Administration of TQ after arsenate exposure in the current study, increased the AChE activity in all the brain areas studied, indicating the amelio- rative effect of TQ on locomotion and motor coordination. Like- wise, TQ improved the muscle coordination and spontaneous locomotor activity of rats pretreated with chlorpromazine [40].

Neurons are also susceptible to arsenic toxicity. In the present study arsenate caused a decrease in neuronal cell number of cere- bellum and shrinkage of Purkinje cells with a loss of their axons. It is well known that Purkinje cell regulates and coordinates motor movements. These results are in agreement with other studies of rats [49,50] and mice [51]. Sodium arsenate reduced cerebellar neuron viability and induced DNA degradation and nuclear frag- mentation in cultures of rat cerebellar neurons [50]. In cultured mouse neuronal cells, sodium arsenate led to neuronal apoptosis, necrosis, and inhibited neurite growth in a dose-dependent man- ner [51].

Arsenite like any other metal toxins, such as lead, cadmium and mercury, can affect mitochondrial oxidative enzymes. It is possible that this toxin interferes with energy coupling process by altering the redox states of cytochrome C enzyme. The resultant ROS formed will in turn induce peroxidation of membranes and loss of its ion channels. Other studies also show that the sodium and

TQ protects slightly cerebellar neurons from degeneration and increase the activity of Na+-K+ ATPase after arsenate treatment in the present study. In the same manner Ullah et al. [53] revealed an ameliorative effect of tymoquinone from the apoptosis trig- gered by ethanol in rat during early development. The mechanism involved the down regulation of caspase-3, cytochrome-c, cleaved caspase-9 and upregulation of Bcl-2. Bcl-2 protein family plays an important role in apoptotic signal transduction by regulating mito- chondrial function [54]. This finding implied that TQ potentially prevents apoptosis by regulating the mitochondrial path way [53].

