Since automatic reasoning is one of the purer forms of human, intellectual thought, the automation of such reasoning by means of computers is a basic and challenging scientific problem [17]. One of the fundamental problems in automatic reasoning is the propositional entail problem. This last problem is a relevant task in many other issues such as estimating the degree of belief, to review or update beliefs, the abductive explanation, logical diagnosis, and many other procedures in Artificial Intelligence (AI) applications.

It is known that logic entail problem is a hard challenge in automatic reasoning due to it is co-NP-Hard even in the propositional case [12]. However, some fragments of propositional logic allow efficient reasoning methods [4]. One of the most relevant cases of efficient reasoning is the fragment of Horn Formulas. We present a novel method to solve the entail problem between conjunctive forms and we show how to apply this method for solving the incremental satisfiability problem (ISAT) that consists in deciding if an initial knowledge Base K keeps its satisfiability anytime a conjuntion of new clauses is added.

Let F be a 2-CF formula and s a partial assignment of F . If a pair of contradic- tory unitary clauses is obtained while F [s] is being computed then #SAT (F [s]) = 0. Because under no circumstances, a pair of complementary unit clauses can be set to true at the same time. Thus, F [s] does not have models.

Different methods have been applied to solve ISAT, among them, branch and bounds procedures as variants of the classical Davis-Putnam-Loveland (DPL) method, denoted as IDPL methods. In IDPL procedures, when adding new clauses, those procedures maintain the search tree generated previously for the set of clauses K. IDPL performs substantially faster than DPL for a large set of SAT problems [10].

Mahajan Y S., Zhaohui F., Sharad M. ZChaff2004: An Efficient SAT Solver, In Holger H. Hoos and David G. Mitchell, editors, Revised Selected Papers of 7th Int. Conf. on Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing (SAT), Vancouver, Canada, LNCS Vol. 3542, (2004), pp. 360-375.

