Proof. By structural induction in the initial BCF. The only non-trivial case is for ( x:e1)@ e2. It follows by monotonicity of bound and free (but not cap- turing) variables under 9 9 Kp res . The BCF-condition ensures that no changes to e1 can block the redex as capturing variables are included in bound variables.2

 -rule could be avoided for the purposes of the above result. The conclu- sion would then be that all marked redexes can be contracted. However, this would greatly complicate the proof of Lemma 3.4 as the transitive, re exive induction no longer would be straightforward. The reason is that the consid- ered property would need to be formulated with, say, BCF-initiality which is not preserved along the inducted relation. As it stands, the only enforced re- striction is that 9 9 Kp res must be well-de ned in any non-trivial cases (of which there are some, cf. Lemma 3.3).

We call the result we prove the S(F)DP in that it excludes the niteness of developments. In contrast to conventional wisdom, 12 we show that even without niteness of developments, the SFDP (that is, the S(F)DP) can be used to conclude con uence. The proof method is a hybrid of the standard SFDP method and the Tait/Martin-Lof/Takahashi method which we review in Section 6. It seems to be combinatorially less complex than both of these because it relies on a `weaker' -commutativity lemma. On the other hand, it might also be a bit longer because it uses more auxiliary lemmas. The proof appears to be new.

We refer the interested reader to [15] for a comprehensive, mechanised account of the residual theory of the -calculus represented with de Bruijn terms. The aim of [15] is a theoretically robust and stand-alone treatment of residual theory which is essentially categorical. Informally, Huet's results are to ours as the original Tait/Martin-Lof con uence proof using parallel reduction is to Takahashi [25], cf. Sections 5 and 6.2.

With a danger of causing confusion, we retain e as a meta-variable over real as opposed to raw terms (and occasionally use M and N for raw terms instead). We also use, e.g., the raw notion of unMarked( ) at the real level. On the other hand, we strictly distinguish raw and real relations by the use of dashed respectively full-coloured arrows. This convention disambiguates our notation.

The original justi cation for considering residuals is the fact that develop- ments (as opposed to unrectricted -reduction) can be proved nite [4,22]. By using Newman's Lemma, 14 the development relation can thus be proved con uent merely by proving it weakly con uent. In turn, this can be used to prove the -calculus proper con uent, as we will detail in Section 5.2.

Proof. As for the rst result, the !dev-relation is a witness of the quanti - cation in Lemma 5.1 according to Lemma 5.3 and Proposition 5.5. The second result follows from the rst and an adaptation of Lemma 4.4 by Lemma 2.3.2

In this section we give an overview of the diagrammatic reasoning of [27,28]. The (formats of the necessary) commutativity lemmas have already been pre- sented. We stress that [28] introduces the m-calculus, a calculus of linking with rst-class primitive modules. The m-calculus is vastly more expressive than the -calculus in terms of the computational paradigms in can simu- late directly [28]. Among other things, it contains mutually recursive binding amongst sets of elements. For uniformity, we frame both results in terms of the	calculus.

