We introduce the Generalized Dependency Constrained Spanning Tree Problem (G-DCST), where an edge can be chosen only if the number of edges chosen from its dependency set lies in a certain interval. The dependency relations between the edges of the input graph G are described by the input digraph D, whose vertices are the edges of G. The in-neighbors of a vertex of D form its dependency set. We show that G-DCST unifies and generalizes some known spanning tree problems that apply conflict constraints over edges or lower and upper bounds on vertex degrees. We show that the feasibility version of G-DCST is NP-complete even under strong restrictions on the structures of G and D as well as on the functions that define the minimum or maximum number of dependencies to be satisfied. We also show that this problem keeps an ln n inapproximability threshold under tight assumptions over G and D. On the other hand, we spot a polynomial case via a matroid intersection argument.

The next sections develop results concerning G-DCST and G-DCMST. Section 2 es- tablishes relations between the present problems and generalized versions of span- ning tree problems found in the literature. Section 3 exposes complexity results for G-DCMST(G, D, l, u, w), parameterized either by G and D or mainly by l and u. Finally, Section 4 ends the paper with comments and directions of future work.

This section exposes relations between G-DCST and other spanning tree problems. We show that it unifies and generalizes a number of known problems. As of partic- ular interest, we establish a relation between G-DCST and the Conflict Constrained Spanning Tree Problem, which could be seen as its counterpart where the digraph D is replaced by an undirected graph.

In this subsection,  we analyse the complexity of G-DCST(G, D, l, u) and G-DCMST(G, D, l, u) as a function of the input graphs G and D. We show NP- completeness results for G-DCST. Also, we establish an inapproximability threshold for G-DCMST.

It is remarkable that, since G-DCST is NP-complete, G-DCMST is inapproximable. The same holds for L-DCMST and A-DCMST. Actually, in [15] we prove that L-DCMST and A-DCMST keep an ln(n) inapproximability threshold for very restricting assump- tions. This result is presented here in the following theorem.

In this subsection, G-DCMST(G, D, l, u, w) is examined by mainly focusing on the functions l and u. By following this approach, we attempt to obtain a deeper understanding on the hardness of G-DCMST and spot cases where this problem could be treated in a reasonable amount of time. In particular, a polynomial case for G-DCMST is identified via matroid intersection.

In [7], the problem of finding a maximum weight common independent set of two weighted matroids M1 and M2 is shown to be solvable in polynomial time. Since a solution T for G-DCMST(G, D, l, u, w) corresponds to a basis of the graphic matroid of G, say M1, and also to an independent set of a partition matroid related to D and u, say M2, T corresponds to a common independent set of M1 and M2. As both M1 and M2 can be weighted according to wj, this leads to the following theorem.

We believe that G-DCMST(G, D, l, u, w) under l = 0 is a promising particular case to explore. It generalizes CCMST, which is a recently studied problem, and we have the impression that some results of CCMST can be generalized to this particular case of G-DCMST. We intend to tackle G-DCMST via integer linear programming and develop a polyhedral study of the dependency constraints. We also plan to use defective coloring results to obtain heuristic methods and approximation results for G-DCMST(G, D, l, u, w) under l = 0.

