This paper is devoted to search for Cartesian closed category of quantitative domain categories. Firstly, inspired by the method of constructing L-frames, the meet-continuity on L-semilattices is built and char- acterized, which generalizes the meet-continuity on crisp semilattices. Then, it is shown that a complete L-lattice is an L-frame iff it is distributive and meet-continuous. In particular, it is shown that the category L-MC of meet-continuous L-lattices is cartesian closed.

The content of the paper is arranged as follows. In Section 2, several basic no- tions that will be used throughout this paper are listed. In Section 3, firstly, the meet-continuity on L-semilattices is built and characterized. Then, the relation- ship between meet-continuous L-lattices and L-frames are discussed. Moreover, the cartesian closedness of the category of meet-continuous L-lattices are investigated. Finally, several conclusions are presented in Section 4.

The condition (L-MCL) could be called the L-meet-continuous law of binary meets over joins of arbitrary directed L-subsets, which is the L-counterpart of (MCL). Clearly, for L=2, (L-MCL)=(MCL). We can easy to check that if (X, e) is a meet-continuous, then X0 is a crisp one.

The condition (L-DL) could be called the L-distributive law of binary meets over joins of arbitrary finite L-subsets, which is the L-counterpart of (DL). Clearly, for L=2, (L-DL)=(DL). We can easy to check that if (X, e) is a distributive L-lattice, then X0 is a crisp one.

Taking complete residuated lattices as the structure of truth values, we proposed the notions of meet-continuity and distributivity on L-lattices and showed that a com- plete L-lattice is an L-frame iff it is distributive and meet-continuous. Moreover, we proved that every mapping between L-ordered sets, preserving joins of directed L- subsets and finite L-subsets, preserves joins of arbitrary L-subsets. Additionally, we investigated the cartesian closedness of the category of meet-continuous L-lattices. Based on the existing results in fuzzy domain theory ( e.g.[12,13]], we claim that fuzzy domain is not an isolated field, it unites lattice-valued topology and algebra theory closely. Further attempts can be made to study interrelationships between fuzzy domains, lattice-valued topology, lattice-valued order, and lattice- valued algebra. In this paper, we consider a fuzzification of the well-known notion of meet-continuity for meet semilattices. Although the obtained results are similar to those in classical domain theory, some proofs are different from them. These re- sults also indicate that the coordination between many concepts of classical domain

It should be emphasized that the theory of fuzzy domains is not a straightfor- ward generalization of its classical counterpart. In fact, since the structure of truth values L is much more complicated than that the Boolean algebra 2, many easy problems in the classical case turn out to be much complicated in the many-valued setting. For example, an ordered set is tensored iff it has a least element, but it is difficult to find such simple description for fuzzy domains. On the other hand, in fuzzy domain theory, many properties depend on the logic property of L, the structure of truth values. Therefore, looking for the new properties is a challenging issue for future research.

