It is often the case in modeling biological phenomena that the structure and the effect of the involved interactions are known but the rates of the interactions are neither known nor can easily be determined by experiments. This paper deals with the estimation of the rate parameters of reaction networks in a general and abstract context. In particular, we consider the case in which the phenomenon under study is stochastic and a continuous-time Markov chain (CTMC) is appropriate for its modeling. Further, we assume that the evolution of the system under study cannot be observed continuously but only at discrete sampling points between which a large amount of reactions can occur.

The parameter estimation of stochastic reaction networks is often performed by applying the principle of maximum likelihood. In this paper we describe how the Expectation-Maximisation (EM) method, which is a technique for maximum likelihood estimation in case of incomplete data, can be adopted to estimate kinetic rates of reaction networks. In particular, because of the huge state space of the underlying CTMC, it is convenient to use such a variant of the EM approach, namely the Monte Carlo EM (MCEM) method, which makes use of simulation for the analysis of the model. We show that in case of mass action kinetics the application of the MCEM method results in an efficient and surprisingly simple estimation procedure. We provide examples to illustrate the characteristics of the approach and show that it is applicable in case of systems of reactions involving several species.

studied phenomenon can be very complex with several reagents interacting through many reactions. Moreover, it is often unrealistic to consider the process as per- fectly and continuously observable. In particular, the measurement techniques are often unable to observe the system behaviour as a continuous process and provide observations of the system state only at a limited set of time instants. Moreover, consecutive time instants can be so far from each other that a considerable amount of reactions occur between them. This means that we have to face an optimisa- tion problem with incomplete data in hand. A method to maximum likelihood estimation in case of incomplete data, namely the Expectation-Maximisation (EM) method, has been presented by A. Dempster in [3]. The basic idea of EM method is to rebuild the missing data in expectation and apply optimisation to find param- eters that maximises the probability of the reconstructed complete data. It is often the case that the exact reconstruction of the missing data is a hard task. In these cases, as proposed by Wei and Tanner in [15], simulation can be used to complete the data and this approach is called the Monte Carlo EM (MCEM) method.

i occurs in state x then the next state is xj = x + ei. The transitions of the CTMC represent the reactions and their intensity depends on the state of the system. By fi(x) we denote the function providing the intensity of reaction i in state x. Throughout the paper we assume that the intensities are of the form

As we are given N + 1 samples, we need N subtraces to connect the observation time instants. As the CTMC is huge and the current set of parameters can be far from the real set of parameters, it is very unlikely that a single simulation run arrives exactly (or even close) to the observed states. For this reason the E-step is composed by the following two phases.

