An incompressible Oldroydian viscoelastic fluid layer heated and soluted from below in the presence of suspended (dust) particles and uniform vertical magnetic field to include the effect of Hall currents in porous medium is considered. Following the linearized stability theory and normal mode analysis, the dispersion relation is obtained. For the case of stationary convection, Oldroydian viscoelastic fluid behaves like an ordinary Newtonian fluid. Dust particles and Hall currents are found to have a destabilizing effect on the thermosolutal convection, whereas magnetic field is found to have a stabilizing effect on the thermosolutal convection. Medium permeability has both stabilizing and destabilizing effect on the thermosolutal convection under certain conditions. Graphs have been plotted by giving numerical values to the parameters to depict the stability characteristics. The case of overstability is also considered.

fluids. An experimental demonstration by Toms and Straw- bridge [2] revealed that a dilute solution of methyl methacry- late in n-butyl acetate agrees well with the theoretical model of the Oldroyd fluid. Sharma [3] studied the problem of the ther- mal instability in a viscoelastic fluid layer in hydromagnetics. The problem of thermal instability of a Maxwellian visco- elastic fluid in the presence of magnetic field is studied by Bhatia and Steiner [4]. The effect of magnetic field on ther- mosolutal instability of an Oldroydian viscoelastic fluid in porous medium is considered by Sharma and Bhardwaj [5]. They found that magnetic field has a stabilizing effect on the system while medium permeability has dual effect. In thermal

and thermosolutal convection problems, the Boussinesq approximation is used, which is well justified in the case of incompressible fluids. Usually the magnetic field has a stabi- lizing effect on the instability. A numerical study of the hy- dromagnetic thermal convection in a viscoelastic dusty fluid in a porous medium is discussed by Goel and Agrawal [6].

The Hall Effect is likely to be important in many geophys- ical situations as well as in flow of laboratory plasma. There is growing importance of non-Newtonian fluids in chemical technology, industry and geophysical fluid dynamics. The Hall currents have relevance and importance in geophysics, MHD generator and industry. Hall effect on thermosolutal insta- bility of Rivlin-Ericksen fluid with varying gravity field in

The problem on a couple-stress fluid heated from below in hydromagnetics has been studied by Kumar and Kumar [10]. They found that magnetic field has both stabilizing and destabilizing effects on the thermal convection under certain conditions. Singh and Dixit [11] considered the stability of stratified Oldroydian fluid through porous medium in hydro- magnetics in presence of suspended particles. Vikrant et al.

Wang and Tan [15] considered the stability analysis of Soret-driven double-diffusive convection of Maxwell fluid in a porous medium. Bishnoi and Goyal [16] studied the problem of Soret-Dufour driven thermosolutal instability of Darcy- Maxwell fluid and found that the Dufour number enhances the stability of Darcy-Maxwell fluid for stationary convection as well as overstability. Kumar and Mohan [17] included the double-diffusive convection in an Oldroydian viscoelastic fluid under the simultaneous effects of magnetic field and suspended particles through porous medium.

In the past studies, instability in an Oldroydian viscoelastic fluid layer in porous medium heated and soluted from below has been investigated including the external constraints such as magnetic field and/or rotation. During the survey it was noticed that effect of Hall currents is completely neglected from the studies of Oldroydian viscoelastic dusty fluid in porous medium. Further, magnetic field and medium perme- ability have dual character. Therefore, an attempt has been made to study the effect of thermosolutal convection in an Oldroydian viscoelastic dusty fluid in presence of Hall cur- rents in porous medium.

