To study systems whose dynamics changes with time, an extension of timed P systems is introduced in which evolution rules may vary with time. The proposed model is a timed automaton with a discrete time domain and in which each state is a timed P system. A result on expressive power and on features of the formalism sufficient for full expressiveness is proved and, as an application example, the model of an ecological system is given.

Many variants and extensions of P systems exist that include features to increase their expressiveness and that are based on different evolution strategies (for instance, different forms of parallelism). Among the most common extensions we mention P systems with dissolution rules that allow a membrane to disappear and release in its environment all the objects it contains. We mention also P systems with priorities, in which a priority relationship exists among the evolution rules of each membrane and can influence the applicability of such rules, and P systems with promoters and inhibitors, in which the applicability of evolution rules depends on the presence of at least one occurrence and on the absence, respectively, of a specific object. An introduction to P systems in which all the variants we mentioned are described can be found in [10]

P systems, originally defined as a model of computation inspired by biology, have also been used to model biological systems, in particular biomolecular sys- tems. Recently, in [3], P systems have been used to model ecological systems in the framework of conservation biology. The population dynamics of the Bearded Vulture of the Catalan Pyrenees, and of five subfamilies on which the vulture feeds on, is studied.

To describe such systems, we introduce an extension of timed P systems in which evolution rules can change over time. This is expressed by means of a timed automaton [1], with a discrete time domain, in which each state (location) is a timed P system. Timed P systems in different locations of the automaton have the same membrane structure, but possibly different evolution rules. As usual in timed automata, a transition of a timed P automaton may have conditions on the value of clocks and may reset some clocks. The execution of a timed P automaton starts from a location designated as the initial one. The timed P system associated with this location is executed and the passage of time in the timed P system coincides with the updates of the clocks of the timed P automaton. When such clocks take values that satisfy the condition of some outgoing transition of the current location of the automaton, such a transition can be performed.

The possibility of changing rules when moving from a location to another al- lows us to model changes of dynamics determined by changes in the environmental conditions. As an example, we could have locations corresponding to seasons and population dynamics could be different in different seasons. Moreover, the possi- bility of adding and removing objects in the skin membrane allows us to model changes of the population composition determined by changes in the environmental conditions.

In [5] a class of contents-timed P systems is defined in which timed evolution rules are used and their execution times may vary as the timed P system evolves, depending on the state of the system itself. This work is related to ours as it also defines a variant of P systems in which the reaction rules can change dynamically. However, the changing is limited to the execution times of the rules, which remain fixed. In timed P automata, instead, the rules can be entirely rewritten, depending on time passing (but not on the state of the timed P system).

An evolution step of a timed P system can be described as follows. Rules in a membrane can be applied only to objects in the same membrane, and they cannot be applied to objects contained in inner membranes. The rules must contain target indications specifying the membranes where the new objects, obtained by the rule application, are sent. The new objects either remain in the same membrane, or can be sent out of the membrane, or can be sent into one of the inner membranes precisely identified by its label.

The defined system computes the least common multiple of n1 and n2, namely lcm(n1, n2). The idea is to let an object a and an object b appear in membrane 1 for one time unit every n1 and n2 time units, respectively. The first time when a and b appear together is exactly after lcm(n1, n2) time units. It is hence sufficient to count the time units until a and b appear together to obtain the results. The

The transitions specify also a clock reset set and a multiset of objects, that we call inserted objects, to add in the skin membrane of the received timed P structure. In the target location the clocks are reset to zero and the inserted objects are put in the skin membrane of the timed P structure. Then, this is completed with the timed evolution rules associated with the location, yielding a new timed P system with the same membrane structure but a different set of rules. This system starts its running in the new location, as time restarts to elapse, taking into account the pending evolution rules of the previous location to be completed.

Let us formally describe timed P automata. Clock variables, or simply clocks, are ranged over by x, y, z, . . . and we use X, X',... to denote sets of clocks. A clock valuation over X is a function that assigns a natural number to every clock. The set of valuations of X , denoted by VX , is the set of total functions from X to N.

Our model is non-deterministic and there is no notion of probability. This is not a good assumption for a biological model in which events have different probabilities. We plan to add, in the future, probabilities to timed P automata, in order to obtain a stochastic model and to allow more accurate specifications.

In the model in [2], females are partitioned in two classes, the first-year females and the older females. The two kinds of females are considered to have different fecundity rates, which correspond to a different number in the fledglings produced over a breeding season. There are different survival rates for juveniles and adults. In particular, there is a probability for fledglings to reach the first month of life, and there is a different probability to survive a whole year either for juveniles (older than one month) or adults.

An extension of timed P systems has been introduced to study systems whose dynamics changes with time. The proposed model is a timed automaton with a discrete time domain and in which each state is a timed P system. A result on expressive power and on features of the formalism sufficient for full expressiveness has been proved and, as an application example, the model has been given of an ecological system.

