Currently, newer and better technologies and devices are being created in order to capture a large amount of information about Earth. Nowadays, GPS (Global Positioning System) technology is so common that it is spread all over around such as in cell phones, cars, etc. All of this geographic information is analyzed and stored at different levels of detail in Geographic Information Systems (GIS), possibly distributed on the Web. Then, a fast search for geographic information on the Web will return several links representing different parts of our World. But, what does happen when someone needs information that is divided into more than one system? For example, information about rivers in Patagonia can be obtained by querying

two or more different systems. Even distribution of information is one of the prob- lems, there are some others: these systems have been developed by different entities with different points of view and vocabularies, and here is when we have to face heterogeneity problems. They are encountered in every communication between interoperating systems, where interoperability refers to interaction between infor- mation from different sources involving the task of data integration to combine data.

In this work we focus on the last problem, semantic heterogeneity, during the schema integration of different but related information sources. Generally speak- ing, two essential tasks are involved in the semantic integration process: semantic enrichment and mapping discovery [34]. The main goal of Semantic Enrichment is to reconcile semantic heterogeneity, so it involves adding more semantic informa- tion about the data. Various proposed approaches add extra semantic information through the use of metadata or ontologies. We are particularly interested in those using ontologies because, by definition, they provide a vocabulary to represent and communicate knowledge about the domain and a set of relationships containing the terms of the vocabulary at a conceptual level. Ontologies are actually extensively proposed as tools to face heterogeneity problems. For example, different proposals are using formal ontologies to enrich the conceptual schema and thus to improve the integration process [7,8,14,15].

The semantic enrichment task is essential to reach the second task, Mapping Discovery. Several surveys [16,18] have been presented analyzing different proposals related to semantic matching, i.e. building of mappings. As we build our process upon finding of mappings, we further describe some of these proposals in Section 2.

This paper is organized as follows: next Section presents related works in the literature together with relations to our approach. Then, an overview of the ar- chitecture briefly describing the main components of our proposal is presented in Section 3, followed by a description of our integration process. Then, a case study illustrating the application of our method is shown in Section 4. Future work and conclusions are discussed afterwards.

Mapping discovery by using ontologies has being extensively investigated during the last years. Various approaches have emerged proposing processes and tech- niques to find similarities between elements of different but related ontologies. Some approaches [4,21,24,25,10] involve non-specific information systems and oth- ers [14,30,31,34,36] are specifically oriented towards geographic information. Both groups complement each other because solutions proposed by some of them can be used by others. For example, the similarity functions proposed in [31] have been applied in [4].

Additionally, examples of semantic matching methods are described in [4,21,24,10]. For example, [10] and [24] propose two similar ontology-merging tools. On one hand, the PROMPT tool described in [10] proposes an interactive tool that guides the user through the merging process. However the main problem with the PROMPT tool is that it is highly dependent on the names of the concepts in the ontology. On the other hand, Chimarea [24] provides support for merging of ontological terms from different sources, checking the coverage and correctness of ontologies and maintaining ontologies over time. Except for several situations refer- ring to structural aspects of the ontologies, Chimarea does not make any suggestion to the user; and the only relation that Chimarea considers is the subclass/superclass relation.

Another proposal for semantic matching is introduced in [21], where a lexical and a conceptual layer are used to find similarities. At the lexical level, the method uses a lexical function called lexical similarity measure (SM). At the conceptual level, concepts (classes and properties) are compared taking into account the taxonomies in which they appear. However, some types of properties are not considered by this method.

Another example is the work introduced in [14],which defines a method by using ontologies represented by a logical language to integrate data base schemata. A reasoning system is used to merge ontologies based on a set of inferred similarity relations. Source ontologies are built based on the elements of source schemas and taking into account a higher-level ontology (which is an ontology with general terms and minimum constraints). The results are formal ontologies written in description logic. As these source ontologies are based on a higher-level ontology (that is, they include this ontology in their definitions and add more detailed definitions for some other elements), the reasoning system only has to find similarity relations between them. The PowerLoom [20] reasoning system was used to evaluate DL definitions. In the ODGIS (Ontology-Driven Geographic Information Systems) approach [6] authors introduce a framework for the integration of geographic information. This framework has two main aspects, the knowledge generation in which the ontologies are specified and the knowledge use in which a group of components interact to answer a query (by using mechanisms to retrieve instances of instances of classes from ontologies). Particularly in the first one, ontologies of different level of detail

Finally, in [34] by using conceptual models and description logics, a method- ology for the integration of spatio-temporal conceptual schemas is defined. The sources to be integrated are represented by using the MADS conceptual data model (Modeling of Application Data with Spatio-temporal features [27]) with its multiple representation capabilities [26] in order to manipulate geographical information through multiple perspectives of the same information. The proposal is based on the specification and use of inter-schema knowledge, that is, they are not focused on the semantic matching activity but on a methodology to build an integrated system. An expert designer is responsible of finding the possible mappings between two MADS conceptual models. Description logic reasoning services are used to check the satisfiability of the set of inter-schema mappings. The model has a rich spatio-temporal semantics, but the mappings must be discovered manually.

Comparing our proposal with those in the literature, some points in common can be found with respect to the proposal described in [14]. For example, Description Logics is used as a tool to represent domain ontologies in order to take advantage of the inference mechanisms. But in [14], domain ontologies must commit to the same high-level ontology to allow the reasoning system to start the integration process. Thus, domain ontologies are not independent because different communities must agree with the high-level ontology. Another proposal with some similarities with respect to ours is the ODGIS approach [6]. The way semantic granularity is man- aged by this approach is applied to our methodology (looking for the first possible intersection going upward in the ontology trees); however we do not use ontologies of different levels of detail. As differences, this proposal needs human intervention (on the ontology creation and on the role definitions) and uses a reduced set of se- mantic relations (is-a, part-of, and whole-of). Besides, as in [14], domain ontologies are based on a high-level ontology.

Now, to instantiate our approach to deal with geographic information, source information is represented by local and autonomous geographic information systems as parts of the first layer. Formal ontologies are in the next layer representing information extracted from each source. Logic is used as a formalism for ontology representation by using for example Description Logic (DL) [2] and Frame-based Logic (FLogic) [17]. An exhaustive comparison between them can be found in [14]. Due to several advantages of DL with respect to FLogic, DL has been selected to represent our ontologies. Besides, a reasoning system has been used in order to perform inferences about semantics of data.

Logic tasks involve the Reasoning System aforementioned. Non-logic tasks involve the Syntactic Comparison, Structural Comparison and Thesaurus components. The Syntactic Comparison component analyzes concepts from different ontologies syn- tactically. That is, the name of concepts are compared. Following, the Structural Information component analyzes relationships and attributes of the elements of the ontologies. Besides, the Thesaurus component is used to extract semantic informa- tion in order to find synonym relationships. By using the syntactic and thesaurus results, and performing a structural matching, the Structural Comparison compo- nent generates a set of mappings relating source concepts.

After the non-logic tasks, the reasoning system is used to analyze possible sub- sumption relations in the global ontology. Remember that this ontology has been generated by using the mapping rules obtained by the non-logic process. Thus, the global ontology will also contain the inferred hierarchy.

Besides, the reasoning system is used to check the consistency of each model, the formal ontologies, and the resultant global ontology. Here, the validity of intentional definitions (in TBOX) is checked. If an inconsistency is found, an expert user is responsible of solving it.

By applying our method in this case study, we can see the set of mappings that are possible to be found taking into account all the elements of the ontologies. On- tologies are not only taxonomies but also properties denoting more semantics. These properties (used in all conceptual models) are compared in the non-logic process.

In this work an architecture and a process to integrate geographic sources have been described. In particular, we work with two geographic sources managed by two organizations of our region. Our method is aimed to assist part of the whole integration process giving solutions to the construction of the new system. The main advantage of our method is the combination of two processes, logic and non- logic, which complement each other. That is, mappings or implicit relations found in one process are taken into account by the other. In this way, more properties of the ontologies are represented and compared.

