To ensure the reliability of power supply, ultra-fast and reliable fault classification of the transmission line is the critical stage of the wide-area transmission network protection. As the distributed generation (DG) current in- jection to the transmission line, the amplitude characteristic of the break current protection reduces and the system reliability decreases. With the wide-area measurement generated to the power system, an online fault classification method with the global and local discriminant analysis (GLDA) is proposed to enhance the phase characteristic and decrease calculation load. In the single line to ground (SLG) fault process, the local current phase shift is analyzed to enhance the spatiotemporal characteristic. To fully measure the ordering degree of the spatiotemporal characteristic, the axiomatic definition for the characteristic entropy (CE) of the grid impedance in the individual bus in the wide-area transmission network is proposed according to the characteristic distri- bution. Based on the current spatiotemporal characteristic analysis, a multi-priority GLDA classifies the fault phase in a coordinating way using with the phasor measurement unit (PMU). The multi-priority GLDA-CE fault classification method reduces the computational load, ensures resilience against measurement noise and the transition resistance effect. Compared with the statistical entropy and neural network method, the classification accuracy and response speed of the GLDA-CE fault classification method are validated in the IEEE 39-bus system with 10 PMUs. Compared with the conventional statistical entropy and neural network methods, the GLDA-CE method is able to classify 226 entire power outages and 600 single phase outages within 1.621 s.

[6]. When a fault occurring in the wide-area transmission network, the fault branch isolated by the protection relay and the rest of the grid will be stressed. In the short circuit fault condition, the wide-area trans- mission network should classify the fault section and self-heal rapidly [7].

Considering a random fault distance in the circuit-analysis derived model, the relationship between the voltage phase angle shift at two arbitrary points of long-distance transmission line can be estimated. By phase analysis in the dynamic process, the phasor shift relation between voltage and current angles is used to characterize the synchronization signal sags in the fault position. The nonlinear characteristic model for the active power flow in a transmission branch is established by stages, which is described by the hyperbolic tangent function. Since the char- acteristic model is nonlinear and identified by the entropy index to measure the characteristic matrix consistency.

The distributed fault classification strategy contains two stages. First, in the wide area PMU monitor system, the potential fault section is estimated based on the detection criteria. Then, in the potential fault terminal, the voltage and current phase signals are predicted and the fault phase is identified based on the classification criteria.

1.893%. The fault current flow direction in the fault branch changes more significantly, which is measured by the characteristic signals of the phased angle. Based on phase angle analysis, the proposed characteristic model can extract the transient sag and represent the dynamic behavior of the high-resistance fault in the power line.

A novel fault classification method based on the spatiotemporal characteristic analysis for the wide-area transmission network is pro- posed in this paper. The transient spatiotemporal characteristic of the fault current is extracted in the dynamic progress. The fault classifica- tion criteria quantifies the order degree of the spatiotemporal charac- teristic. The characteristic enhancement and the coordinating identification framework confirm that the GLDA-CE fault classification method obtains the high generalization capability in the measurement noise and fault resistance effect. The hierarchical classification strategy reduces the fault search zone and decreases the respond time. Therefore, the GLDA-CE fault classification method obtains the classification ac- curacy 92.414% and the fast respond time 1.274 s compared with the WNN, RRBF and INNC method. The GLDA-CE fault classification method can monitor the power system synchronously and lays the foundation for the transmission system restoration.

This work is financially supported by Cultivation Foundation of Shenyang University of Technology (No. 200005848), China Post- doctoral Science Foundation (2021 M700093), Natural Science Foun- dation Project of Liaoning Province (No. 2023-BS-206), National Natural Foundation of China (No. 51775094) and Liaoning Province Applied Basic Research Program (No. 2023JH2/101300237).

