The Brane Calculus is a calculus intended to model the structure and the dynamics of biological membranes. In order to express properties of systems in this calculus, in previous work we have introduced a temporal- spatial logic called Brane Logic. A natural question of great practical importance is if model checking of this logic is decidable, that is, if it is possible to check automatically whether a given system satisfies a given formula. We have already shown that model checking is decidable for replication-free systems and guarantee-free formulas. In this paper, we show that admitting replication in systems, or any guarantee constructor in formulas (and quantifiers), leads model checking to be undecidable. Moreover, we give also a correspondence result between membranes and systems, showing that any system can be obtained by a canonical one where all information are contained on a membrane enclosing an empty compartment.

Now, a problem of great importance is whether model checking is decidable for this logic. In [10], we have presented a model checking algorithm for a guarantee-free fragment of the logic against replication-free systems. In this paper, first we show that model checking of guarantee-free formulas against systems with replication is undecidable. Then, we show that also admitting any guarantee constructor in formulas (and in presence of quantifiers), leads model checking to be undecidable. We give also a correspondence result between membranes and systems, showing that any system with arbitrarily nested compartments can be obtained by a canonical one composed by an empty compartment enclosed by a membrane carrying all the information.

Brane Logic has been introduced in [10] for expressing properties of systems in Brane Calculus. Notice that the actions take place on membranes, not only in systems. Thus, there are actually two spatial logics, interacting with each other: one for reasoning about membranes (called membrane logic) and one for reasoning about systems (the system logic).

Using the approach of [4] we show that if the processes have unbound replication either on the membranes or on the systems, model checking for the Brane Calculus against the Brane Logic is undecidable. In fact, the fragment of the logic needed for this result is very restricted: it contains only propositional connectives, tempo- ral and spatial modalities and the compartment connective. There is no need of quantifiers or adjoint connectives.

Notice that, since the strings are represented as a nested structure, if we want to concatenate two words we need to insert the fist string into the other. For this reason we include in the encoding the ability to attach actions on strings, therefore, a string could be programmed by a process to move into another string: this is the task of the membrane mateop  ....

The key idea of this encoding is to think the composition of Brane Calculus as a (multi-)set constructor. Then, the finite domain D, as well as the structure S are encoded in a straightforward way using simply action names d for elements of D and action names ri for relational symbols Ri in S. We now define the relation ~Sys between finite structures and brane processes without replication. For a system P and structure S whose domain is D, P ~Sys S if:

have shown the undecidability of model checking of the fragment of Brane Logic with quantifiers and adjoints, in absence of replication. This result has been obtained by reducing the existence of finite models for first-order formulas, to the model checking problem. Beside this, we have given a correspondence between membranes and systems, showing that any system can be obtained by a canonical one where all information are contained on a membrane enclosing an empty compartment. We think that these results can be readily transposed to other variants of the Brane Calculus (with enough expressive power), such as the Projective Branes [6].

At this point, we plan to look for some weaker logical connectives to be used in place of adjoints, but yielding a decidable logic. In this direction, the work about epistemic logics [9] seems very promising. Also the comparison with customary first order temporal logics can be fruitful. Actually, a quite natural attempt is to consider a first order temporal logic extended with indexed modalities for describing

