(iii) the lattice and adjoint operations in a negative non-involutive residuated lattice are continuous with respect to the uniform topology, which make the negative non-involutive residuated lattice to be topological negative non-involutive residuated lattice. Meanwhile, some necessary and sufficient conditions for the uniform topological spaces to be compact and discrete are obtained. The results of this paper have a positive role to reveal internal features of negative non-involutive residuated lattices at a topological level.

It is well-known that non-classical mathematical logic [1] has become a formal and useful tool for computer science to deal with fuzzy information and uncertain in- formation. Various logical algebras have been proposed as the semantical systems of non-classical mathematical logic systems. Among these logical algebras, resid- uated lattices introduced by Ward and Dilworth [2] are very basic and important algebraic structures. Some other logical algebras such as MTL-algebra, BL-algebra, MV-algebras [3] and NM-algebra, which is also called R0-algebra [4] are all able to be considered as particular classes of residuated lattices. Filter and ideal are two

important concepts for studying of logical algebraic structures. The related research work has attracted much attention from scholars [5,6]. It is noteworthy that in log- ical algebras with negative involutive (regular) properties, considering that filters and ideals are mutually dual, most people focus their attention on the problem of filters. However, when the negation operation in logical algebra loses its involution, the dual relationship between ideal and filter is also broken. Therefore, it will be a meaningful work to explore ideal and its application in the framework of negative non-involutive logic algebras. In view of this, the concepts of ideal and fuzzy ideal have been introduced in BL-algebra and negative non-involutive residuated lattices in [7,8,9], and some results with theoretical significance and application prospect have been obtained.

The concept of fuzzy sets, a remarkable idea in mathematics, was proposed by Zadeh [10] in 1965. At present, fuzzy sets have been extremely used to deal with the many problems in applied mathematics, control engineering, information sciences, expert systems and theory of automata etc. However, in traditional fuzzy sets, the membership degrees of elements are all restricted to the interval [0, 1], which leads to a great difficulty in expressing the difference of the irrelevant elements from the contrary elements in fuzzy sets. If a set representation could express this kind of difference, it would be more informative than the traditional fuzzy set representa- tion. Based on these observations, Lee [11] introduced the notion of bipolar-valued fuzzy sets, abbreviated as BF-sets, which is an extension of the traditional fuzzy sets. In the past few decades, more and more researchers have devoted themselves to applying BF-sets theory to various algebraic structures [12,13,14].

Recently, we introduced the concept of BF-ideals in negative non-involutive residuated lattices and discussed some related properties in [15] and [16]. As a continuation of the above work, in this paper, we consider a collection of BF-ideals and use congruence relation induced by BF-ideal to define a uniform topological space and investigate some of its properties. Some interesting results are obtained.

