We consider topological quantum memories for a general class of abelian anyon models defined on spin lattices. These are non-universal for quantum computation when restricting to topological operations alone, such as braiding and fusion. The effects of additional non-topological operations, such as spin measurements, are studied. These are shown to allow universal quantum computation, while still utilizing topological protection. Our work gives an insight into the relation between abelian models and their non-abelian counterparts.

Anyons are quasiparticles that can exist on two-dimensional systems [1,2]. Their non-local behaviour is an interesting topic for foundational research in quantum physics [3,4]. Importantly, one may employ anyons for fault-tolerant quantum com- putation [5,6,7]. The so-called non-abelian anyon models receive most attention, since they possess straightforward means to store, protect and manipulate quan- tum information. Even so, proposals have been made to realize universal quantum computation using an abelian model, the toric code [8,9,10]. We extend the latter scheme to a wider class of abelian models, proving universality and fault-tolerance. This provides fresh insight into the power of abelian anyons in relation to their non-abelian counterparts. Physical realizations of abelian anyons are simpler than those for non-abelian anyons, giving an experimental motivation for our work.

The stabilizers are not enforced on the vertices and plaquettes in which the qudits are stored. This opens so-called holes in the code [10], bringing the logical states into the stabilizer space. The Hamiltonian (5) must be modified accordingly, with the corresponding plaquette and vertex terms removed. When the anyon quasiparticles are moved, e.g. for braiding, the holes must move with them.

The logical operations implemented by braiding and fusion do not form a powerful gate set. Further logical operations may be achieved by measuring the spins of the lattice. This allows logical qudits stored on neighbouring plaquettes or vertices to be measured in the X basis. It also allows the preparation of a wide range of logical states. We demonstrate how these may be used as ancillae in protocols implementing various single qudit gates. When d is prime, we prove the universality of the resulting gate set.

These phase gates, along with the Fourier transform, are able to perform a large number of single qudit rotations. For the case that d is prime it is proven that arbitrary single qudit rotations are possible [14]. With the entangling gates, this provides universal quantum computation.

We consider two forms of error in the model: perturbations in the Hamiltonian and thermal errors. The former only affect the encoded information if they lift the degeneracy. Due to the non-local encoding of the qudits, such perturbations must consist of many body operations that either loop around the holes or stretch between them. These become increasingly unlikely as the distance between the holes is increased. Any other perturbations will not commute with the Hamiltonian, and so their effects are efficiently suppressed by the gap.

methods also have a straightforward generalisation to non-Abelian quantum double models. These are similarly realized on spin lattices, with stabilizers defined on each plaquette and vertex [5]. However, the flux and charge quasiparticles are not gauge invariant, so they may not be directly identified with the anyons of the models. Even so, it is known how the gauge invariant anyons may be formed from these [12]. As with the Abelian models, logical information may be stored by not enforcing stabilizers, and so creating holes. However, we also have the choice of expressing the encoding in terms of the anyons or the underlying flux and charge quasiparticles [18]. The separation between the holes provides fault-tolerance, with errors suppressed by distance. The usage of additional holes will also provide protection in some cases

For any quantum double model, projections onto lattice spins may be decom- posed into creation operators for quasiparticle pairs. Spin measurements may then be used to measure logical states stored on neighboring plaquettes and vertices, and to create ancilla states. These will then increase the computational power of the model from that possible by braiding and fusion alone. Note that, for non-abelian models, it may not be possible to measure v-type and p-type qudits separately, corresponding to the X measurements above. It is likely that only entangling mea- surements between a v- and a p-type qudit will be possible in general.

With anyonic codes, the separation of holes means that logical qudits can be given arbitrary protection. In the above example the protection is limited to single spin errors. This limitation is also found when information is stored in holes of other stabilizer codes, such as the Steane and Shor codes. Of course this is not surprising, since these codes were designed to have information stored in the stabilizer space, rather than in holes. It would be interesting to know whether topological codes are the only ones for which holes provide arbitrary protection, or whether others are possible.

The use of simple abelian models means that our work is in tune with current ex- perimental proposals, as well as actual experiments. One promising possibility is Josephson-junctions, for which the means to produce the Hamiltonians for D(Zd) models has been well studied [19,20], along with other models such as the non- abelian D(S3). Polar molecules have also been considered as a means to produce the Hamiltonians of quantum double models, with a complete toolbox of interactions proposed [21]. Topological states may also be produced without a Hamiltonian. Ex- periments with these have been performed, demonstrating anyonic braiding [22,23]. These systems, though small, could also be used to demonstrate the preparation of ancilla state described here.

We have studied a class of anyon models, realizable on spin lattice. These are abelian, and so not expected to possess any serious computational power. We show that the addition of single spin measurements increases the computational power significantly. This is because they may be expressed in terms of the logical states as measurements in entangled bases. This additional resource provably provides a universal gate set for many of these models, and likely for most others as well. We also comment on the fault-tolerance, naturally provided by the Hamiltonian and stabilizers of the topological models on which the schemes are based. This work also gives an insight into the relationship between abelian and non-abelian models. The repetition code used, for example, bears striking similarities to the encoding found in the non-abelian charges of the D(S3). Elaborations on these points may be found in further works by the authors [16,24].

