This paper examines the role of textual and unstructured data in the credit risk assessment of sovereigns. Specifically, in this paper, a novel approach to understand and predict sovereign ratings is proposed. For that purpose, information embedded in the annual country reports issued by the European Commission is used. The model employs a neural-network-based document embedding known as document to vector (Doc2Vec) to convert each country report into a numerical vector, which is then used as features into a logistic regression. The model is trained using information from 2011 to 2019 and it correctly predicts the 70.27% of country ratings in the test sample, improving slightly the results obtained using only macroe- conomic variables.

Concerns about the quality of ratings and their understanding have supposed an incentive to researches around the world since the last two decades. For example, it is considered as important to understand the determinants of ratings to assign a score to non- rated countries. The replication of credit ratings is mainly based on different econometric models trying to find a set of macroe- conomic variables which better explain them. The most common approaches are usually ordinary least squares regression or ordinal response models.

Proposed model firstly uses a shallow neural network to con- vert words contained in these reports in an n-dimensional space vector. Thus, each word in a document is converted in a vector such that words that share common contexts in the corpus are lo- cated in close proximity to one another in the space. In this case, not only words but the whole country reports are vectorized. It means that all the quantitative and qualitative information con- tained in each report will be summarized in a vector. As a final step, each country vector is used as the input of a logistic regres- sion trying to predict country ratings.

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews previ- ous research on credit rating models. Section 3 describes most common ways to deal with textual data: the embedding ap- proach. Section 4 details the data and main results obtained from the proposed model based on the European Country Reports. Section 5 compares the proposed model with two different mod- els, first with an ordered logistic regression using only macroeco- nomic information and then with other combing macroeconomic information and information extracted from country reports. Fi- nally, conclusions can be found in Section 6.

ent from the linear and ordered response models. Thus, Yim and Mitchell (2005) used different statistical techniques as neural net- works or self-organizing maps among others to predict coun- try ratings using a sample of 52 countries in 2002. They con- cluded that hybrid neural networks out-perform all other models including logit and probit models. Bennell, Crabbe, Thomas and Gwilym (2006) also compare the performance of ordered probit models and artificial neural networks (ANN). In this paper, ANN

In the following Section, the proposed framework is explained. The model will predict sovereign credit ratings using textual infor- mation from European country reports. The proposed model con- sists of two steps. The first step comprises an unsupervised algo- rithm (doc2vec model) for learning vector representations of sen- tences contained in each report. The second step performs the classification task using a logistic regression, using the previous ex- tracted vectors as input variables.

To train the model, the dataset is divided into 2 partitions: training and test samples. The training sample consist on the 172 country reports, the 70% of the total dataset. The test sample con- sist on 74 reports. The proportion of credit ratings categories is kept in both samples. The proposed model is a two-step model: first a doc2vec model is trained using the training set. With this first step, each report is transformed in a numeric vector.

In this Section, first, a new model based only in a set of macroeconomic variables is developed. This model, an ordered logit model, following the most common approach in the litera- ture. Then, a new model will be trained, but this time, combin- ing the macroeconomic information and previous vectors obtained from the doc2vec model. The former model serves as a benchmark of the model developed in previous section, while the later model tries to assess if the combination of quantitative variables and the subjective information extracted from reports result in a more pre- dictive model.

For both models, a set of 14 macroeconomic variables are se- lected to be included in the models for the same period, cov- ering from year 2011 to 2019. These variables are used by the credit rating agencies, especially by S&P, which is the rating agency of reference in this paper, and they have been relevant explana- tory variables of sovereign ratings in previous analogous research (Armstrong, De Kervenoael, Li & Read, 1998; Dreisbach, 2007; Manasse & Roubini, 2009; Yim & Mitchell, 2005). The following variables are used: consumer prices (% annual change), GDP (% an- nual change), international reserves, inward foreign direct invest- ment/GDP, terms of trade, budget balance (% of GDP), Public debt (% of GDP), GDP per head and a set of six governance indicators (control of corruption, government effectiveness, political stability and absence of violence/terrorism, regulatory quality, rule of law and voice and accountability indicators). Variables are extracted from the Worldbank databases.

France or Germany do not exceed a growth of 1.5% in the same year. Other variables such as terms of trade or inward foreign di- rect investment ratio do not display high differences among the European countries. The guidelines provided by credit rating agen- cies are commonly used to establish a rank ordering of countries around the world. As this model is developed on a specific eco- nomic area, it is not surprisingly that some variables are not very significant.

chi-square statistic, which indicates that the model gives a signif- icant improvement over the baseline intercept only model. In the case of logistic and ordinal regression models, it not possible to compute the same R squared statistic as in linear regression so ap- proximation should be computed instead. In this model, the Mc- Fadden pseudo R squared reaches the 60.06%. One of the assump- tions underlying ordered models is that the relationship between each pair of outcome groups is the same, which is tested using the test of parallel lines. Parallel line test was carried out finding no enough evidence to reject the main assumption of model spec- ification, therefore proportional odds assumption appears to have held for the model.

In terms of explanatory power, the model exactly predicts 71.51% of country ratings in the training set and a 67.57% of ratings in the test sample. There is not a high difference comparing the ac- curacy of this model with the proposed model, based on country reports. The proposed model improves this benchmark model in only two countries measured in the test sample. Results are quite interesting because in the country reports there are unstructured textual data and opinions provided by the European Commission.

Finally, a final model is trained combining both macroeconomic variables and the resulting vectors of the doc2vec model in order to check if a model with different information improves the pre- diction accuracy of individual models. Although it was initially ex- pected a better model, where macroeconomic variables are com- plemented with a more subjective information, results do not indi- cate a significant improvement. The accuracy reached in the train- ing sample reaches the 100%., but this value decreases in the test sample, reaching an accuracy of 71.62%, which only improves in only one country the accuracy obtained using only the coun- try reports. Results are mainly explained because information ob- tained in the country reports already collects all the information contained in the macroeconomic variables, being not so comple- ment as initially expected. Country reports in fact contains all the macroeconomic information with additional explanations and forward looking opinion about the current situation. Therefore, macroeconomic information does not add much more value in this case.

The proposed model firstly uses a shallow neural network to convert each report in an n-dimensional space vector. It means that all the quantitative and qualitative information contained in the reports will be summarized in a numerical vector. Once reports are transformed, they are used as an input of a logistic regression trying to predict country ratings.

This model slightly overcomes the accuracy of a model based only on a set of macroeconomic variables, the most common ap- proach in the literature. The accuracy of the proposed model in- crease when macroeconomic data and the information contained in the country reports is combined. This paper demonstrates the importance of qualitative information as a determinant of credit ratings and the potential of natural language processing to miti- gate credit risk. Finally, this paper opens new research lines to test the effect of using different embedding models in the accuracy of the model, or even the use of pre-trained models for predicting ratings, not exclusively for countries.

