In this paper, we present a new graphical interface for traditional library environments, which allows the user to elaborate easily and efficiently new strategies in search processes. This tool is based on two linked interactive Euler diagram representations. The first one is an interactive representation of the structures composing the documentary kernel of the library. The user may navigate and select items, making their own understanding of the database content, structure and access. The second one is a set based visualization of the results of a composed query. This allows the user to validate his search context and to elaborate strategies to go through the results. The association of both interfaces generates a tool that allows the user to elaborate the main search strategies through graphical manipulations.

In order to make archives more available for the general public, it is necessary to elaborate new navigation and search user interfaces. These interfaces must be well suited to future users who have a limited knowledge of the documen- tary techniques and associated tools. The documentary kernel is composed of large structures such as graphs, trees and lists. A query is composed of a list of terms extracted from the kernel, a boolean expression and a list of results. At this time, there is no unified interface to visualize such objects. This paper is an attempt to propose a unified interface in such a context.

Thesauri are the most complex objects of the traditional documentary kernel. A thesaurus is used in two processes. During the indexing process [7,8,15] of the documents, the thesaurus defines the terms that can be used to describe a document. It is also used during the tasks of document retrieval to perform more precise searches than can be achieved in full text mode.

Navigation is based on focus change and zoom [13,2]. The user can give the focus to any visible node by clicking on it. Then the view scales until it shows the focus node in detail. When the focus changes from a node A to a node B, an animation decomposes the minimal path from A to B: the view zooms out to the smallest common ancestor (if it exists) then zooms in towards B.

The DocumentSearcher is an interface which allows the user to visualize the results of n queries (n from 1 to 5) in parallel. Each of those queries is associated with a contour and will be called a contour query in the following. A contour query can be a term or a boolean query. Our goal is to provide the user a set based cartographic representation of the database content with respect to those contour queries.

A Venn diagram [14] will contain all possible intersection zones between the n sets, even if a zone does not contain any document. To make the representation more readable we draw only diagrams having an elliptic curve for each contour. In this case, the maximum drawable number of contour queries is 5, thanks to [14].

The user gets too many documents. He performs an iterative query while formulating a new query on the set of results. We observe that users do not usually use more than 5 queries in parallel and that iterative formulation is the most current strategy.

For many of those tasks, our graphic tool provides easy graphical manipula- tion. Indeed, extending or focusing the meaning of terms according to the documentary kernel can be done by selecting parent, sibling or children nodes in the Authority Explorer. The distribution of the results in the document searcher allows the user to identify and modify quickly an inappropriate term (an inappropriate term returns too many or not enough documents). Iterative strategies can be performed easily just by selecting zones of the diagram in the Document Searcher. The graphic attributes allow the user to analyze and perceive quickly the distribution of the documents relative to the documen- tary kernel or the current query. However, if terms must be extrapolated, the knowledge and strategy of the user stays the main factor of a quick success.

