Population growth is one of the greatest issues facing the Arab Republic of Egypt. The issue is that population growth rates are higher than economic growth rates. Among the problems faced by many developing countries is the problem of slums and their social and economic repercussions, as well as the population explosion. The 2012 report of the state of the population in Egypt affirmed that the most serious challenges facing Egypt are popula- tion growth and the spread of slum communities.

Another previous study [5] analysed longitudinal data to exam- ine changes in time-dependent public health and biomedical science variables. MSEMs were used to analyse quantitative and continuous data. The first level measured the overlapping time points of individuals to investigate the properties that changed over time, and the second level measured properties that did not vary over time. The proposed model used the fixed and non- linear common variables for the latent variables and the missing data. The maximum potential method was used to estimate the parameters of the model, and the results of the study indicate that the estimates were satisfactory.

Measuring the quality of reconciling MSEMs across all levels is subject to several problems, including the inability to determine the level responsible for the poor quality of conciliation, as well as the quality of the adjustment of the upper levels by the small size of the sample. Therefore, in this work, each level was studied separately to obtain the statistical tests for each level before esti- mating the MSEM and the MSEM with constants and a random slope. This study examined fertility determinants due to the high rate of reproduction at the level of the Arab Republic of Egypt of up to 3.5 children per woman compared with the total fertility rate (TFR) of 3 births per woman in 2008 (Demographic Health Survey- DHS, 2014). There is increasing evidence indicating the effect of slum communities on these rates; thus, three areas, rural, urban and random geographical areas, in Giza Governorate were consid- ered [8].

The third dimension is the poor distribution of the popula- tion, so that the population in Egypt does not spread over the whole of Egyptian geography but is congested in the capital and in the narrow strip around the Nile River. This is a terri- ble pressure on resources and infrastructure. The rest of Egypt is not exploited in development. What the government is trying to remedy now is a very expensive solution because of its delay.

In the two-level analysis, the variables at the first level are treated as a two-sided variable, while the same variable at the second level is a continuous variable that measures the avail- ability of services by clustering. Relationships of variable at the first level with other variables of fertility determinants rep- resent the difference in the fertility of families at the second level by group. Relationships at the second level are relation- ships between the groups and the cumulative level of fertility determinants.

The two-level model is estimated with random constants and a random slope using the maximum likelihood method with strong standard errors using numerical integration. The fw is measured by y1, y2, y3, and y4, and the factor scale is automatically deter- mined by determining the first load factor using a default value of 1. The residual variance is then estimated by the factor indica- tors, and the residues are not linked as a dummy number [12].

I would like to thank my teacher, mentor and big brother, (the late) Prof. Dr. Abdel-Hameed El-Abbasi, for providing great support and continuing to teach until the end of his life. In addition, I would like to thank Prof. Dr. Mona A. Khalifa for supporting me in my work on this subject.

