The motivation for this project stems from a larger project that aims to provide tool support for a real-time refinement calculus [4,9]. The real numbers are continuous and it is this property that makes them desirable (if not necessary) when dealing with real-time systems. For example, in a system involving a temperature sensor, to specify limits on the rate of change of temperature standard differential calculus (based on the reals) may be used. If the reals are not available, only weaker properties of a discrete model can be stated formally.

Mathematicians have developed a rich variety of algebraic structures such as monoids, groups, rings and fields. The algebraic structures were identified by mathematicians via the axioms defining them, and the theorems developed are properties shared amongst many mathematical structures. For instance, the reals share many properties with rational, integer and natural numbers. Once a model has been shown to maintain the axioms of an algebraic structure, the theorems of the algebraic structure can be used to reason about the model. For example, the integers form an abelian group with addition as the operator, zero as the identity and negation as the inverse. The benefits of introducing the more general algebraic structures include increased reuse of the theories and increased confidence in the validity of the system.

Dedekind cuts Dedekind [1] represents a real number by the set of all ra- tional numbers less than it. This set is referred to as a cut. Cuts must satisfy several properties. Namely, the cut may not be empty; it must not be the set of all rationals, Q; it must be downwards closed, that is, given

The definition of real multiplication does complicate proofs, however. Given that a cut contains all rationals less than the real it is represent- ing, some of those elements are negative. The resulting set, naively using the following incorrect definition of real multiplication, contains arbitrarily large positives as the product of two negative rationals is positive. Conse- quently, the resulting set is not a cut.

The traditional development of the real numbers has produced a well-defined hierarchy of algebraic structures. This hierarchy of monoids, fields, etc. is quite modular and provides opportunity for theory reuse. Ergo provides extensive support mechanisms for theory reuse via the following mechanisms:

Instantiation Theory instantiation is used for syntactic inclusion. When a theory is instantiated, it is as though the instantiation command is textually replaced by the theory being instantiated, except that the theory symbols are renamed. The theory properties are copied, under the renamings. Note that axioms from the theory being instantiated remain as axioms in the instantiated theory. For example, given a theory of semigroups, and a theory of identities, a theory of monoids could be created by instantiating them both into a new theory.

There are several approaches for building the axiomatisation of algebraic structures up to and including the ordered field theory. While theory inter- pretation/instantiation was advocated in Section 3, other alternatives need to be considered to ensure the best decision is made. The simplest method for axiomatising ordered fields is to create a single theory (with no subtheo- ries) containing all the ordered field axioms, definitions and theorems. The lack of modularity, lack of theorem traceability, and repetition of many sim- ilar theorems are concerns with this approach. A slightly more sophisticated approach is to create a theory for each algebraic structure and to produce a linear chain of inherited theories. This approach solves the problem of modu- larity but duplicates theories. The chosen alternative for axiomatising ordered fields involves the use of theory interpretation and instantiation. With theory interpretation, fifteen theories replace an estimated forty-eight theories (four- teen for field properties of ordered pairs to construct rationals, seventeen for ordered field properties of rationals and seventeen for ordered field proper- ties of the reals). The particular numbers are not important. Much theory development, however, has been avoided and using theory interpretation has increased the opportunities for theory and theorem reuse.

Finally, the reals are shown to form a complete ordered field. This is achieved by proving the ordered field axioms hold as well as the supremum property. The supremum property is that, for any non-empty subset, x , of the reals, if x has an upper bound (m) in R then it has a least upper bound in R.

The process of axiomatisation, provision of theorems and instantiation continues until the ordered field theory has been developed. At this stage, the rationals are modelled and the ordered field theory is interpreted into the rational theory to obtain the ordered field properties. All axioms of the ordered field theory must be proved within the context of the rational model before the theorems from the ordered field are valid for rationals.

The final argument copies the theories that have been interpreted into ofield into subtheories of rationalofield under the renamings provided. For example, ofield has an interpreted semigroup subtheory ofieldsg1. A new subtheory, rationalssg1, of rationalofield is created by copying ofieldsg1 and renaming its symbols as indicated by the first argument. As pointed out by an anonymous referee, this listing of subtheory renamings breaks down the modularity of the theories as the rationalsofield theory must have knowledge of the subtheories of ofield theory.

