Geophytes are plants with underground storage organs (bulbs, corms, tubers or rhizomes) that appeared as promising raw ma- terials for various economic uses [1]. The leaves of these plants die annually. No evergreen plants are considered to be geo- phytes [2]. These geophytes have high diversity in the Mediterranean-type ecosystems, where they are considered as most common in seasonal climates [3,4].

groups [7]. During relatively high rainfall periods; most of species are annuals that flourish during the rainy season. However, during the longer dry periods, the characteristic woody shrubs and perennial herbs constitute the scrub vegetation, scat- tered sparsely in parts and grouped in denser distinct patches [8,9]. On the other hand, the plant life in the Eastern Desert is much richer than that of the Western Desert. The flora of wadis and mountains of the north Eastern Desert has strong relations with that of the Sinai Peninsula [10].

[11] and constitute a specialized group of plants, particularly in relation to their generative structure [12]. Cyperus is a large genus with about 600 species, which are distributed through- out all continents in both tropical and temperate regions. Cyperus capitatus and Cyperus conglomeratus are distributed in the coastal region of Egypt. These species are able to survive extreme climatic conditions [13].

C. capitatus is a perennial creeping sedge that occurs in coastal sandy habitats and mobile dunes of southern Europe and the Mediterranean coast of Egypt [13,14]. This species pro- duces extensive rhizomes, and it is one of the earliest species to colonize newly deposited dunes contributing to the initial stabilization of sand dunes in arid and semiarid coastal areas [15]. C. conglomeratus is a creeping yellowish-green, drought- resistant perennial wild species with short and branched rhizomes that are covered with acute brown scales. It grows in widely distributed in arid regions from Senegal to Paki- stan. In Egypt, it is growing in the coastal and inland sand dune habitats [13].

180 km, and a width in a N-S direction for about 15 km from the coast. On the other hand, Cairo-Suez desert road is about 130 km in length, located in the northern section of the Eastern Desert of Egypt (The Galalah Desert), which extends east of the Nile Delta. It represents the natural xeric habitat mainly in- habited by xerophytic vegetation. The gravel habitat is one of the most characteristic features of this road [9].

A total of 119 species (65 perennials, 3 biennials and 51 annuals) constituted the floristic composition, belonging to 97 genera and 28 families (Appendix). The largest families were Asteraceae, Poaceae and Fabaceae (24, 18 and 11 species, respectively), Brassicaceae and Chenopodiaceae (8 species each), and Caryophyllaceae (7 species). They constituted 63.87% of the re- corded species, and represent most of the floristic structure in the study area, while the other 10 families shared 26.05% of the species and 12 families were monospecific.

The most common perennial species associated with the studied geophytes (C. capitatus, C. conglomeratus and E. farctus) in the costal desert were Atractylis carduus, Calligonum polygonoides, C. capitatus, Echinops spinosus, E. farctus, Launaea mucronata, Silene succulent and Stipagrostis lanata. On the other hand, the perennial species recorded in the inland desert which associated with studied geophytes (Lasiurus scindicus and P. turgidum) were Artemisia judiaca, Diplotaxis harra, Launaea nudicaulis, Haloxylon salicornicum, Ochradenus baccatus, Zilla spinosa and Zygophyllum coccineum. Each of these species attained a maximum importance value (IV).

In the upper right side of the CCA diagram, O. baccatus, which was dominant species in group A, codominated species (P. turgidum and Z. spinosa) in group B and common species (Z. spinosa, L. coronopifolia, Z. coccineum, L. nudicaulis and D. tortuosus) in group A and B collectively showed close rela- tionships with carbonate, bicarbonate, calcium carbonate and soil fractions (clay and silt). In the upper left side of the diagram,

as a dormant fleshy underground structure. The present field study indicated that geophytes were recorded along the Medi- terranean coast on sandy habitats (coastal dunes and sand flats). This agrees with Maswada and Elzaawely [39], who reported that the most distributed geophytes (C. capitatus, C. conglomeratus, E. farctus, Pancratium maritimum, Sporobolus pungens and S. lanata) were recorded in the Deltaic Mediterranean coast in stabi- lized, partially stabilized dunes and sand flats. Zahran and Willis [9] reported that L. scindicus and P. turgidum are found in the inland part of the Eastern Desert within the channel of wadis.

Since the early 1960s, vast areas in the Egyptian deserts (Western, Eastern and Sinai) were subjected to land reclama- tion due to population growth and increased congestion in the old lands in the Nile Valley and the Delta. Not surprisingly, 61% of the priority reclaimable land through the Nile waters is located on the borders of the Valley and Delta regions where soil is loamy in nature and cultivation can be relatively suc- cessful [43,54]. In the study area, urban and agricultural processes were practiced in the deltaic parts. The land recla- mation processes entail an almost complete change in the environmental factors. Therefore, the reclaimed areas of this study can be considered as transitional areas of the succes- sion process between the old cultivated lands and that of the desert [43,55].

Egypt is the meeting point of floristic elements belonging to at least four phytogeographical regions: the African Sudano- Zambesian, the Asiatic Irano-Turanian, the Afro-Asiatic Sahro- Sindian and the Euro-Afro-Asiatic Mediterranean [62]. The whole country lies within the Saharo-Arabian belt of the Holarctic floristic realm [63]. The chorological analysis of the present study indicated the abundance of the Saharo- Arabian chorotype (63.02% of the total recorded flora) and Mediterranean taxa (47.33% of the total recorded species) within the major growth forms. This may be attributed to the fact that plants of the Saharo-Arabian species are good indicators for harsh desert environmental conditions, while Mediterranean species signal to a more mesic environment [58,63,64]. The high percentages of Saharo-Sindian and Medi- terranean elements in the study area may be attributed to their capability to penetrate this region and to the influence of man in the study area.

The classification and ordination analyses revealed that the vegetation of the study area can be divided into six major veg- etation groups (plant communities). Each is linked to one or more of the studied geophyte plants. It can be noted that certain vegetation groups characterized one or more of the studied lo- calities: group (A) in northern part of the Eastern Desert (Cairo- Suez road and Wadi Hagul), group (B) was distributed in Wadi Hagul and Deltaic Mediterranean coastal strip, and groups (C1), (C2), (D1) and (D2) were restricted in the Deltaic Mediterra- nean coastal strip.

P. turgidum are found in the channel wadis of Cairo-Suez desert road associated with Anabasis articulata, Hammada elegans, Pituranthos tortuosus and D. harra. This group is consistent with studies indicating that the vegetation of Eastern Desert is domi- nated by many herbs, shrubs and some trees and, therefore, has high species richness and plant cover [45,63,65]. On the other hand, vegetation group B is less distinct because it is char- acterized by mixed communities of Wadi Hagul and Deltaic Mediterranean coastal strip. In Egyptian desert, Salama et al. [66], Salama et al. [67], El-Amier et al. [68], Abd El-Ghani et al.

Vegetationally, C. capitatus and E. farctus are codominant or indicator species in the study area whereas C. conglomeratus is not. This may be due to C. capitatus and E. farctus being Medi- terranean taxa, while C. conglomeratus is of Saharo-Sindian taxon.

The present study provides an analysis of vegetation struc- ture and soil characteristics of five common geophytes in Desert of Egypt to help in ecological management and conservation of these natural resources. Geophytes have high diversity in the desert ecosystems and are used as raw materials for various economic ornamental plants, medicine and food. Therefore, the conservation of natural habitats of this desert is of vital importance as well as the need for judicious utilization and sustainable development.

