In this paper we first study the difference between Weak Normalization (WN) and Strong Normal- ization (SN), in the framework of first order orthogonal rewriting systems. With the help of the Erasure Lemma we establish a Pumping Lemma, yielding information about exceptional terms, defined as terms that are WN but not SN. A corollary is that if an orthogonal TRS is WN, there are no cyclic reductions in finite reduction graphs. This is a stepping stone towards the insight that orthogonal TRSs with the property WN, do not admit cyclic reductions at all.

In particular, the reduction graph G(t) of t is a sub-TRS. Here the set of terms consists of t and all of its reducts. Another sub-TRS that we will use below is the family F(t) of t, where the set of terms consists of t and all subterms of reducts, i.e., the universe contains t and is not only closed off under reduction but also under taking subterms. It is important that sub-TRSs, including F(t) and G(t), are considered as TRSs in their own right, for which the usual notions and theorems apply, e.g., that orthogonal TRSs are confluent.

Proof We employ outermost-fair reductions (see Def. 4.9.15(ii) and especially Def. 9.3.1 in Terese [9]) and the theorem that outermost-fair reductions are normalizing (see Theorem 9.3.10 in Terese [9]). From this, the theorem follows immediately, since an infinite reduction with infinitely many head steps is

Proof Assume R is an orthogonal TRS, t a term in R, and G(t) has an infinite reduction but not an infinite expansion. Now suppose for a proof by contradiction, that t does not contain a term without normal form in its family. In other words, the sub-TRS F(t) has the property WN. F(t) is an orthogonal TRS, in which t is an exceptional term, because t has an infinite reduction and WN holds. So by Theorem 4.4(ii) t is starting point of an infinite ladder. Note that all the points in the ladder are in fact reducts of

Proof Let t be a cyclic term in R. Suppose t does not have a term without normal form in its family. That is, F(t) is an orthogonal TRS with property WN. Then by Theorem 5.1, F(t) is acyclic, contradiction.	 

