While vehicle detection on highways has been reported before, to the best of our knowledge, intelligent monitoring system that aims at detecting hydraulic excavators and dump trucks on state-owned land has not been explored thoroughly yet. In this paper, we present an automatic, video-based algorithm for detecting hydraulic excavators and dump trucks. Derived from lessons learned from video processing, we proposed methods for foreground detection based on an improved frame difference algorithm, and then detected hydraulic excavators and dump trucks in the respective region of interest. From our analysis, we proposed methods based on inverse valley feature of mechanical arm and spatial-temporal reasoning for hydraulic excavator detection. In addition, we explored dump truck detection strategies that combine structured component projection with the spatial relationship. Experiments on real-monitoring sites demonstrated the promising performance of our system.

Protection of state-owned land is an important duty for every local land and resources bureau as a result of the rapid urbanization in China. Even with such strict supervision, state- owned land is encroached upon regularly by developers and individuals. In 2010, 372 typical illegal occupation cases occurred in Shenzhen, the first special economic zone in China. The majority of these cases are illegal construction on state-owned land. To forewarn illegal construction in a timely manner, an intelligent monitoring system aimed at detecting construction vehicles on sites is introduced. A variety of en- gineering vehicles are used in heavy civil construction. Many of these vehicles are manufactured to carry out specific op- erations, while others, such as hydraulic excavators and dump

According to our research, studies or algorithms related to the detection of hydraulic excavators and dump trucks on state-owned land do not exist. Thus, resources that can be learned and used for reference is limited. Through our research and on-the-spot investigation, we gathered that a forewarning before illegal construction for more than two layers is necessary. On the basis of this analysis, forewarning information should be given before construction, that is, during the stage when foundations are being laid or con- struction activities have just started. This analysis coincides with our detection target because hydraulic excavators can be used in the foundation-laying stage, which in this case in- cludes excavation, loading, trimming, and moving materials, as well as in the construction stage. Furthermore, dump trucks can be used in the foundation-laying stage for muck transportation and in the construction stage for building material transportation.

To effectively protect state-owned land from encroaching, relevant functional departments adopt various methods for supervision. All the different kinds of method can be roughly divided into satellite remote sensing, vehicle video moni- toring, artificial patrolling, and video monitoring. Satellite remote-sensing method uses satellite remote sensing images to inspect the illegal use of state-owned land. Although this method is inexpensive, it has the disadvantages of lacking-

details, long-circuit-cycle and no real-time scenes. Vehicle video monitoring is proposed to overcome the disadvantage of lacking details and poor real-time performance. However, this method is not practical for monitoring vehicles in bumpy areas. Artificial patrolling and video monitoring have the best flexibilities, but they have problems of low efficiency and high cost of labor resource. Therefore, the best choice is to use an intelligent monitoring system based on videos.

In the following section, we first elaborate a foreground- detection algorithm based on the frame difference. We describe in detail the improved three frame difference algo- rithm for the ROI of dump truck detection and the normal frame difference algorithm for the ROI of hydraulic excavator detection. In Section 3, we describe hydraulic excavator detection based on inverse-V feature and spatia-temporal reasoning. We use structural information in Section 4 to develop a method for dump truck detection based on SCPSR. In Section 5, we present the experimental results in practical engineering projects. A conclusion finishes this contribution.

subtraction, optical flow, sports competition, motion template, and time entropy, among others. These varieties of methods have different advantages and applications. According to the application of our project, the frame-difference method is the best choice because it has good real-time performance and does not accumulate background. Foreground detection is different between hydraulic excavators and dump trucks because their moving speeds are different.

The process flow and idea of foreground detection for dump truck is similar to the flow for hydraulic excavator. Their biggest difference of them is that the speed of dump truck is faster than that of the hydraulic excavator. Thus, using the same method to judge whether a candidate foreground exists is unreasonable. Through our analysis, we put forward the improved three-frame difference algorithm for judgment. The detection process for dump trucks is specified in Algorithm 2.

Binary operation using the idea of segmentation: After the gray-scale image which indicates edge response is ob- tained, the next step is to perform threshold operation naturally. Global and partial thresholds are two main methods used for threshold operation. However, a robust method that can not only suppress local noise but also keep strong edges is needed to obtain the binary image. Inspired by image segmentation, gray-scale image can be divided into two classes, namely, strong edges and back- ground and noise. Therefore, the main problem is to segment the two classes. We can use the method mentioned in Section 2 to segment the image.

Contour filter: Through the above process, a binary image that represents edges is obtained. However, some annoying noises and pseudo edges may still exist. Morphological operations are typically used for further processing, but such operations are unlikely to fulfill this task because of background complexity. Considering that the mechanical arm contour is larger than the rest and that other scattered contours are relatively small, we use contour filter to pu- rify the binary image. In our project, we discard the con- tours whose binding rectangles are greater than 256*256 or less than 64*64, because it can not only remove small, annoying outlines but also wipe out large contours, which are caused by missing data.

Line detection: As stated in Chapter 2, the bins, in which the lines of boom and dipper belong to should be identi- fied. It is convenient to confirm line angles that represent the boom and dipper. Hough transformation is one of the classical methods to determine angles for specific shape detection. Any valid points in the image space can be

bins. Location filter means that lines in corresponding bins should satisfy the corresponding position relationship. In detail, the pair of lines that satisfy the inverse-V feature [2] should not be far away from each other, and their vertices should be close.

The detecting process can be described as the following flow chart. For a given video, foreground detection is per- formed first. If a foreground is detected, the next step is to detect the inverse-V feature of the mechanical arm. A specific combination of inverse-V feature is recorded when the me- chanical arm is detected.

In investigations and surveys, numerous scholars are devoted to vehicle detection, especially, vehicles on highway that present the front or rear-view. Literature which about dump trucks that present the side-view is limited. Given the practical application of our project, cameras are hung on buildings or in the corner. It is unlikely that the dump truck will drive toward the camera, so it generally shows its side- view. Owing to the complexity of natural scenes and the calculation efficiency of state-of-the-art methods considered, a new method that can detect dump truck rapidly is needed. Through our observation, side-view structure characteristics of

It is easy to determine the ROI of the cab according to the wheel position and size and structural relationship of dump trucks. An efficient method is needed to extract cab surface contour, which is a continuous entirety, except for the cab win- dow presented as black in the image because component pro- jection is used for judgment. A specific approach is scattering five seed points in ROI according to the proportion and location relationships. Then, the consistency of seed point scattering is judged. If points are inconsistent, special points are removed, and points are re-scattered until consistency is satisfied. Data points are clustered according to the scattered seed points to

generate cab surface contour [4]. Some image denoising and morphology operations are used to purify the image. The final step is to project the surface contour to the horizontal and vertical directions, respectively. Then, whether the surface contour sat- isfies the constraint condition according to projection curve is judged. The detection process is specified in Algorithm 3.

A system for solving practical problems with Chinese characteristics is introduced in this paper. The whole system is composed of two parts: foreground detection and construction vehicle detection. In construction vehicle detection, two of the most commonly used engineering vehicles, which are the hydraulic excavators and dump trucks, are studied. Inverse-V feature model of mechanical arm and spatial-temporal reasoning are introduced to detect hydraulic excavator. In addition, SCPSR is introduced for dump truck detection in this journal. This system not only shows promising results in recognizing hydraulic excavator and dump truck in online

C. El Amrani, G.L. Rochon, T. El-Ghazawi, G. Altay, T.-e. Rachidi, Development of a real-time urban remote sensing initiative in the medi- terranean region for early warning and mitigation of disasters, in: Geo- science and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS), 2012 IEEE International, IEEE, 2012, pp. 2782e2785.

ing from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. From 2007 to 2009, He was a Postdoctoral Fellow in Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University. Since 2013, He has been associate pro- fessor in Department of Electronic Engineering at Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University.

cessing and telecommunications from the University of Rennes 1, Rennes, France, in 1990 and 1994, respec- tively. Since 1995, he has been joining with Tsinghua university, Bei-jing, China. He became Professor in the Department of Electronic Engineering of Tsinghua University, in 2002. From 2001 to 2003, he served as the Invited Professor with a tri-year contract at the University

of Caen, France. Since 2010, he has been Director of the Division of Information Science and Technology in the Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua Univer- sity, Shenzhen, China. His research interests include image/video processing, transmission and analysis; biometrics; and their applications to teledetection, medicine, industry, and sports. He has published over 90 papers internationally.

