Virtual Learning Environments (VLEs), integrating several ICTs tools, are becoming common as they provide the option of distance learning (Al-Ajlan, 2012). With the use of web-conferencing services VLEs facili- tate real-time lectures between remotely located students and teachers, supporting real-time voice communication, using voice over IP, live web-camera feed streaming, and multimedia content sharing (Gegen- furtner et al., 2020). This kind of technological services increase student engagement, highlighting VLEs as the best alternative to in-person learning (Kiss, 2012; Zhang et al., 2004). With VLE infrastructure and widespread usage already in place, the diffusion of immersive technol- ogies, brought by the commercial re-invigoration of Virtual Reality (VR) as recently as seven years ago, is bound to provide its own niche for learning. Several studies are already reporting the positive impact that Virtual Reality Learning Environments (VRLEs) have on students' engagement and performance (Kavanagh et al., 2017).

experience provided in VRLEs (Peeters, 2019; Theonas et al., 2008). Considering the rapid development of VR's comprising technologies and interfaces, VRLEs' potential as a distance-learning tool is clear. The aim of such alternatives ought to be not only a seamless learning experience but also a meaningful one. For that reason, several aspects pertaining to user experience, environment design, and system usability are still under thorough investigation regarding both the concerns and potential of VRLEs.

The present study explores the impact high-fidelity NVCs have on the learning experience of VRLE students. For this purpose, a VRLE prototype was developed, facilitating a real lecture by an actual professor, repre- sented by an avatar. The professor's avatar featured several NVCs, spe- cifically body motion, hand and finger gestures, facial expressions, and gaze motion, which were captured in real-time using a variety of tech- nological solutions commonly used in Social Virtual Reality (SVR) plat- forms. The recorded data were applied to an avatar, which delivered a lecture to ninety-six (96) university students inside the VRLE prototype. Half of the students experienced the full spectrum of the professor's NVCs, while the other half experienced only his body motion and a subtle opening of the mouth when speaking. The students who took part in reviewing this virtual lecture completed a questionnaire providing valuable insights regarding the impact of the virtual professor's NVCs fidelity on their learning experience.

Professors use NVCs, such as facial expressions and body language, to convey important messages to students during real lectures, positively affecting their response and behavior (Feldman, 1986). Butt and Iqbal (2011) interviewed professors on the effectiveness of facial expressions during lectures. The study's results revealed professors consider facial expressions as an invaluable tool which helps maintain students' atten- tion, increasing the quality and effectiveness of the learning experience. However, according to professors, certain facial expressions (e.g., ex- pressions of anger) may hinder student attention. Neill (1989) examined students' response to slides depicting professors featuring different facial expressions and postures, demonstrating that smiling and frowning ex- pressions had a positive and negative effect on students' learning expe- rience, respectively. In contrast, the effect of professors' posture on students' learning experience was insignificant.

Previous studies also investigated the effects of NVCs on learning experiences delivered through conventional VLEs. Muilenburg and Berge (2005) reviewed the barriers of online learning to reveal that the lack of social cues during lectures delivered through VLEs led to communication uncertainties and feelings of isolation. Maimaiti et al. (2021) also observed the importance of NVCs in preventing student disengagement during lectures delivered through VLEs. Wang et al. (2019) compared student response on video lectures featuring different levels of professor expressiveness (heightened and conventional facial expressions). The study showed a positive impact of heightened facial expressions on the overall learning experience quality. Regarding knowledge acquisition, heightened facial expressions improved student's medium-term recall, but had no effect on student's short-term recall.

Theonas et al. (2008) developed and evaluated one of the earliest examples of a VRLE supporting NVCs. In this work, students attended pre-rendered virtual lectures, the virtual professor of which either featured or lacked facial expressions. The authors divided the virtual lectures based on text difficulty. The study's results show that students attending difficult-text lectures, the virtual professor of which featured facial expressions, performed 86% better in post-lecture tests than stu- dents attending the same lecture but with the virtual professor lacking facial expressions. The virtual professor's facial expressions did not have any effect on students' performance during easy-text lectures. Also, most of the students were more attentive during the lecture, the virtual pro- fessor of which featured facial expressions.

Another example of NVCs integration to VRLEs was introduced by Dharmawansa et al. (2015). Authors used a web camera to transfer stu- dents' eye blinking and head posture from the real world to an avatar inside a VRLE. According to the evaluation results of this study, both cues helped establish rich communication between students, enhancing the learning experience quality.

Another example of a VRLE incorporating NVCs is presented by Ripka et al. (2020), where preservice teachers were immersed in a shared vir- tual space which simulated an auditorium and supported synchronous intercommunication. Each student accessed the virtual space using an Oculus Rift S HMD and was assigned a simple avatar consisting only of a head, torso, and hands which were disconnected from the rest of the avatar's body. During testing, teachers had to collaborate for the completion of certain tasks, such as arranging each planet of our plane- tary system as per their correct order. Evaluation results report enhanced attention to the subject at hand and overall fewer distractions in the VRLE compared to the physical world. The study states that lack of social and behavioral cues made communication over the collaborative tasks more challenging, even though participants reported experiencing a strong sense of community during their time in the VRLE.

Although there are studies that highlight the positive impact of NVCs integration in VRLEs, those are scarce. The VRLE prototype investigated in this study differentiates from other examples by introducing a high- fidelity avatar representing a real professor who had been previously captured delivering an actual lecture. The professor's avatar features multiple NVCs such as facial expressions, gaze, and full body motion, including finger motion, allowing for detailed hand gestures. This setup captures NVCs of higher fidelity compared to the examples found in the relating body of work. The aim of this study is a thorough investigation of NVCs effect on the learning experience to determine necessity for incorporating them, and to what extent, in similar commercial VRLEs developed in the future. Specifically, our setup takes under consideration the main drawbacks of the VRLEs described above and thus designs the VRLE presented here to evaluate, in correlation to the virtual professor's NVCs fidelity impact on the learning process, its overall usability, real- ism, usefulness, social presence, task load and knowledge acquisition. The hypotheses of this study are that students who experience a virtual professor featuring high-fidelity NVCs will (a) perceive the VRLE expe- rience as more realistic, (b) will score higher the VRLE overall usefulness and its ability to draw their focus on the lecture, (c) and will experience higher levels of social presence.

The core of the system comprises a VR Ready PC, a VIVE Pro Eye HMD, and two (2) base stations used to track its location in the real world. Five (5) VIVE Trackers were used to track the motion of the pelvis, hands, and feet of a real professor. Combining the VIVE Pro HMD and the VIVE Trackers with the Inverse Kinematics solution Final IK, allowed us to capture and transfer the full body motion of the real professor to his avatar in real-time. The overall development of the system was completed using Unity and SteamVR Software Development Kit (SDK), while the avatar representing the real professor in the virtual world was designed using the Reallusion Character Creator.

social presence, task load, and knowledge acquisition. Questions regarding usability, realism and usefulness were custom to the aim and objectives of this study. Questions regarding social presence were largely based on Koskela et al. (2018), while those regarding task-load assess- ment were based on the Nasa Task Load Index (Hart, 2006).

The evaluation results of the study confirmed the proposed system's usability as no technical or other issues arose and students of both groups were able to smoothly observe the virtual lecture and its content, and clearly see and evaluate the NVCs presented to them. Despite the setup's overall successful function, the between-groups study refutes all three hypotheses according to which Group A evaluation would score higher across all factors examined as those are listed above. Statistical analysis shows no significant difference between the two groups and no differ- ences in knowledge acquisition. All statistical tests ran indicate that, in this particular experimental setup, NVCs as the differentiating variable had no significant effect compared to the version of the setup that lacked them. These results do not necessarily discredit previous studies that document the effect of NVCs on participant experience, as there are several additional points to consider.

(Ripka et al., 2020). Therefore, whether a VRLE application opts for high-fidelity representation is more a matter of how developmentally challenging and sustainable such additions are, rather than how neces- sary they might be to ensure the quality of the learning experience.

Regarding knowledge acquisition, there is a key factor which may have led to similar student performance in both groups. The multiple- choice test examined the short-term recall of students. As observed in another study conducted using video lectures, the short-term recall of students was not affected by the professor's facial expressions and body language fidelity (Wang et al., 2019). This is a rather interesting result as that study, which video lectures features similar duration as ours, showed similar students' short-term recall scores in both heightened and con- ventional professor expressivity, as observed in our work too, thus showing that students short-term recall may not be affected by professors' NVCs in both VLEs and VRLEs, when those provide short learning experiences.

