The following lemma states that Definition 2.3 can also have an additional second transformation defined upon it. The proof is straightforward: one can either follow the proof of the previous theorem and translate the second transformation defined in the proof of Lemma 2.2, or one can directly follow the proof of Lemma 2.2 and

In this section we examine the relationship between Arrows and Freyd categories. We first recall the definition of a (closed) Freyd category and the relationship with strong monads. We then investigate how the definition of Arrow in a CCC (Defini- tion 2.1) can be seen to be a Freyd category, where we arrive at a natural definition of an enriched Freyd category. In the next section we will show that enriched Freyd categories and Freyd categories are not the same thing.

We now start from an Arrow in a category with finite products (Definition 2.3) and examine how it can been seen to be analogous to the structure of a Freyd category. The structure that we finish up with, which we call indexed Freyd categories, will be more general than that of Arrows. We then investigate the relationship between in- dexed Freyd categories and Freyd categories and give an extra condition on indexed Freyd categories that makes them isomorphic to Freyd categories.

The previous proposition states that we have two well-defined translations: one from Arrows to closed indexed Freyd categories, and one in the opposite direction. We now show that these two translations are mutually inverse, up to isomorphism. To state exactly what we mean by isomorphisms here, we define morphisms between Arrows on a base category and morphisms between indexed Freyd categories on a base category.

Given the above counterexample to the counit of the adjunction being an iso- morphism, we can see the essential difference between Freyd categories and indexed Freyd categories. In a Freyd category, computations, represented by members of K(x, y) have one input, which may or may not be structured: in the case of a Freyd category built from a comonad (K(x, y)= C(Wx, y)), it is structured; in the case of a Freyd category built from a monad (K(x, y) = C(x, Ty)) it is unstruc- tured. Indexed Freyd categories on the other hand have two inputs: computations in Hw(x, y) have access to an input of type w and an input of type x, either of which may be structured. In the case of closed indexed Freyd categories, the w input must be unstructured.

